The DESIGN of the FRONTISPICE.
Lo, DEATH invested in a Roabe of Ermi^^
Triumphant sits, embellished with Vermin^
Upon a Pile of dead-men's Skulls, her Throne,
Pell-mell subduing all, and sparing none.
A scrutinous judgment will the Type ressent,
You may imagine, It Is DEATH's Parliament.
Upon the World it is powerful Foot does tread,
For, all the world or is, or shall be dead.
One hand the Scepter, to other holds our MIRROVR,
In courtesy to show poor flesh its error:
If men forget themselves, It tells 'em home,
They Are Dust and Ashes, All to this must come.
To view their fate herein, some will forbear,
Who wave all thought of Death as too severe:
But know, Death is ('though it be unknown how nie)
A Point, on which depends ETERNITY,
Either to live Crowned with perpetual Bliss,
Or howl tormented in Hell's dark Abyss.
With winged haste our brittle lives do pass,
As runs the gliding Sand in the Houre-Glasse.
If more you would, continue on your Look
No more upon the Title, but the Book.
THE MIRROVR which Flatters not.
O that they were Wise, that they understood This, that they would Consider
their latter End!

Deuteronomy: 32.29. -- MORS sola fatotur Quantula sint hominum, corpuscula.

Iuvenal:

THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT. Dedicated to their MAJESTY'S of GREAT
BRITAIN, By Le Sieur de la SERRE, Historiographer of FRANCE. Enriched with
fair Figures.

Transcribed ENGLISH from the FRENCH, by T. C. And devoted to the well-disposed
READERS.

HORAT. OMNEM creed DIEM tibi diluxisse SUPREMUM.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for R. Thrale, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Crosse-Keyes, at Paul's Gate. 1639.

TO THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN.
SIR,
IF the Greatness of Kings derive its value and luster from the number of
Virtues which they possess; I render you now the homage of my observance, and
submissions, as to one of the greatest Monarchs of the World, since you are the
Majesty of all Virtues together. What an agreeable compulsion is this, to see
a man's self powerfully forced to become the subject of a foraine Prince, by
the sovereign authority of his merit? To this point am I reduced, SIR, your
all-royall perfections impose upon me so absolutely such sweet laws of
servitude, that I have no more liberty, but to accept its yoke. And in this,
my inclination and duty make a fresh injunction over me, which dispute
pre-eminence with all the rest: for who can keep himself from rendering homage
to your Majesty, the only fame of whose Renown captivates through all the
Universe, instructing us, that you are as absolute over your Passions, as over
your Subjects; and that you reign as Sovereign in the esteem of men, as in
your Royal Estates: And the Truths of this set your glory at so high a worth,
that the felicity on it may perhaps be envied you, but the like Merit not to be
reached by others, because Nature is very sparing of the like gifts, and Heaven
does not every day such miracles. For me, I am but one of the Admirers, not of
the greatness of your Dominion (although only the vast extent of the Ocean
marks out its limits) but of all the divine qualities which you only possess
in proper as a Good, which Time, Fate, nor Death can take from you. Nor is this
the all in all, to be Wise, Valiant, and Generous, in the height of Native
deduction; All these Titles of Honor have degrees of eminence, which mark out
to us the gradations of their several perfections, and whereof your Majesty
shows us now the only pattern, having in possession all admirable Virtues,
with so much purity and luster, as dazles its very envyers, and forces them to
adore that in your Majesty, which elsewhere they admire not. And it is my
belief, that you stand thus unparalled even amongst your semblables, since
besides the Crowns of your Cradle, you carry above them others, and such as
shall exempt you from the Grave. I avow, that I have studied long time to
speak condignely of your Majesty; but although my pains and watchings are
equally unprofitable, my defect yet is still glorious howsomever, that it is a
shadow from your Light. It suffices me to have taken Pen in hand, to publish
only, that I am

SIR, Your MAJESTY'S Most humble, and most obeysant Servant, P. De la SERRE.

TO THE QUEEN OF GREAT BRITAIN.
MADAME,
I Could not approach, but with a MIRROVR in my hand, before your Majesty, the
splendor of whose magnificence dazles so powerfully all the world, that I am
not able to behold the immediate presence on it, but by the reflection of its
Rays. Without fiction, MADAME, your Glory is arrived to the point of rendering
your perfections so unknown, as being so above the commune; that I believe
most men honor you now by observance and example only, as not able otherwise
to reach the depth of the just reasons they might have for it. Nor is this All,
to say that you are solely fair, and perfectly chaste; but it is necessary,
beyond all this, to intimate secretly, in the Language of Thought, all the
divine qualities which you possess of Super-eminence in all things, since
their purity cannot descend to the capacity of our discourse, without
suffering a kind of profanation. From hence is it, that if I should call you,
THE COMPLEATLY-PERFECT, I might well say in effect that which you are; but
never thus should I represent the greatness of your merits, since every of
them in it self has such particular perfections, as might challenge Altars
from us, if your humility could permit it. These are such Truths (MADAME) as
hinder me from praising your Majesty, not knowing how to express my self
condignely. Well might I perhaps suggest it to remembrance, that your
particular inclinations are the public Virtues which we adore, and that of the
same temperament of humor, Nature composed heretofore the Sages of the World:
But of all these discourses notwithstanding, I cannot frame one only praise
sufficiently adaequate to your worth, seeing it is elevated beyond all
Eulogiums. Insomuch, that if Admiration it self teach not a new Language to
posterity, wherein to proclaim aloud the favors and graces wherewith Heaven
has accomplished you; it must content it self, to reverence your Name, and
adore your Memory, without presumption of speech of your actions, as being
ever above all valuation, as well as imitation. To instance the immortality of
your AuGUSTICK Race, although it be a pure Source of Honor, which can never be
dried up; yet all these Titles of a Kings Daughter, Sister, and Wife, can never
add to your Renown, which derives its value rather from the admirabilities of
your Life, then the greatness of your Birth. Insomuch (MADAME) that the
Scepters and Crowns of your Royalties, are the meanest Ornaments wherewith
your Majesty can deck it self; since the least glympse of the least of your
Actions, duskes the luster of all the other magnificences, which environ you.
And I believe, had those Wonders of the World been of such a worth, as every
day you descry, they had powerfully resisted against the assaults of Ages: but
as they had nothing admirable in them, but the Name, Memorials have preserved
that, and let them perish. But yours (MADAME) which are too perfect for a
suitable Name, shall not cease to survive the revolutions of Times, as being
enlivened by Virtue, which alone can exempt from Death. Let it not seem
strange then, if I hazard the perils of the Sea, to render Homage to a QUEEN,
whose Greatness perforce humbles the most arrogant spirits, being not able, so
much as in thought, to reach to the first degree of her Glory. The GRACES
themselves are hers, and the VIRTUES have allianced their own and her Name;
and all the adorable qualities which are found here below, are admirable in her
alone, as in their Source. I am constrained to be silent (MADAME) being
overcharged with too much subject of speech. The number of your Perfections
astonishes me, the greatness of your Merit ravishes me, the splendor of your
Virtue dazles me: And in this dazzle, this transport, this excess of
admiration, wherein my senses and spirits are all alike engaged, I am compelled
to cast my self at the feet of your Majesty, and demand pardon of the
boldness which I assume only to enjoy the style of

MADAME, Your MAJESTY'S Most humble, and most obeysant Servant, P. De la SERRE.

TO THE QVEENE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Upon the Mirror which flatters not, of Le Sieur de la SERRE: SONNET.
PRINCESS, this perverse Ages glorious gemme,
Whose least of Virtues seems a prodigy;
^^ustrious Sien, of the fairest Stem,
^^at Heaven e're showed this Vniverse's eye;
^^ough Fate with thousand hind'rances averse,
^^rres me the place, to which my duty's bent:
cannot cheer my soul from selfe-torment,
^^it by design to pourtray you in Verse.
But since that SERRES shows in this true Mirror
The Virtues of your Mind's eternal splendor,
As lively as your Body's beauteous measure,
My heed to view you here, lets others pass;
So well I here agnize all your rare treasure,
That I never saw a better Crystall-Glasse.
Par le Sr C. To the AUTHOR, upon the same subject.
STANCES.
DIvine Spirit, knowing Soul,
Which with lovely sweet control
Rank'st our souls those good rules under,
Which thy Pen lays down with wonder,
Whilst the sweetness of thy Voice
Breathes oracular sacred noise.
All thy Works so well esteemed
Thorough EUROPE, proofs are deemed
Of thy Gifts, which all admire,
Which such Trophies thee acquire.
And with these thy Muse invested,
ORPHEUS is by thee out-crested.
Also since blind Ignorance
Makes no more abode in FRANCAE,
Seldom can we meet with such,
As the works of thy sweet t'uch:
Such immortal strains of spirit,
As do thousand Laurels merit.
But although thy active Muse
Wonders did before produce,
As we seldom see the like;
This does with amazement strike:
It Is a MIRROR, that does shine
More with Fire, then Crystaline.
It Is a MIRROVR never flatters,
On my eyes such rays it scatters,
That therewith I daz'led am,
Searching for thee in the same,
By some charm, or stranger case,
I see thy spirit, not thy face.
This strange fashion does amaze me,
When I (never so little) gaze me,
I am straight all on a fire,
The more I look, more I admire:
It Is a MIRROVR sure of flame,
Sparkling, more we mark the same.
Yet not every prying eye
Shall it-selfe herein epsy;
It Is not for so commune use,
Free from flattering abuse:
None so clearly here are seen,
As King CHARLES, and his fair Queen.
Therefore thus the AUTHOR meant,
To the World it to present;
Since it is a thing so rare,
And unparalelled fair;
That it should a Tablet be
For the fairest he could see.
SERRES, this thy worke-man-ship
Does my spirit over-strip,
With such judgment, and such grace,
Thou do show in little space
Three strange Wonders, without error,
Two bright Suns in one clear MIRROVR.
And by this thy rare composure,
Shall thy Name, beyond enclosure
Of this present Age, obtain
Eternal honor for thy pain:
Writing to these Princes Graces,
Thou art praised in thousand places.
Par le mesme. Upon the BOOK.
SONNET.
HEre, undisguis'd, is seen in this true Mirror
The glory, or the shame of mortal story,
As Reason, or the misse-led Senses error
Do win the day, or yield the Victory:
SERRES does here lively delineate
Our every-dayes vain wretched passages,
And what is destined after Funeral state,
To innocent pureness, or black wickedness.
Such diverse subjects in this one enclosed,
Such various objects to the view exposed.
Thou little Monarch, MAN, small Universe,
Thy Soul it lessons thus, and thee informs,
As thou art Soul, with heavenly fires converse,
As thou art Flesh, thou art a Bait for worms.
To the READER.
IT may, perhaps, seem strange, that I treat so often in my Works of the same
matter, as of the contempt of the World, and meditations of Death: But if the
importance of the subject be considered, and the profit to be derived thence, a
Man will never be weary of seeing such fair truths under different
presentations. Besides, the conceptions of spirit upon the same matter, are
like the productions of Nature in the Species's of Tulips: Every year she
gives a Change, both to their Color, and Array. And though they be still
Tulips, she renders them so different from their first resemblance, that they
can hardly otherwise be known, but by name. The Mind does the same, upon the
same subject; its Fancies, which are its ornature, and embellishment, render it
by their diversity so different from it self, that it is hardly known, but by
the Titles, which it bears, to particularize each Conceit. So that if once
again I represent unto thee the pourtrait of Vanity, and the Image of Death;
my spirit, which has steaded me for Pencill, and coloring in this Work, has
rendered it so rare in its Noveltie, and so excellent in difference from those
which have preceded, that thou shall find nothing in it commune with them, but
my name. Thou mavest consider moreover, that I dedicate Books to KINGS and
QUEENS ^ot every day, and that these objects of such eminent magnificence do
so nobly (...) the faculties of my Soul, that I could not have petty thoughts
for such high Personages. It Is that, which without ostentation, makes me
believe, that if thou buy once again this Book, and take the pains to
read it, thou will regreet neither the Time, nor Money, which thou shall
employ therein. ADIEU.

If thou be of so good an humor, to pardon the Faults, excuse those of the
Impression.

APPROBATIO LUTETIAE PARISIORUM.
QVi moribundam vitam, qui edacem vitae mortem in hoc Speculo Liber exprimit;
te Lector tibi objicit tam felici very specie, tam clara sublimis styli Luce,
ut temet fugere nequeas. Frequens contuere, ne tetra haec tua species aeternum
tua sit. Ita apprecor.

MART. LUENKENS, Sanctae Theol. Lic. and Prof. Ordin. Apost. and Regius, L. C.

The APPROBATION, when Printed at PARIS.
THis Book, which expresses to thee in a Mirror a dying life, and
life-devouring Death, lays thee open to thy self, Reader, in such a happy
shape of truth, and so clear a light of a sublime style, that thou can not
escape thy self. Gaze hereon often, that this ill presence of thine, as now it
is, may not be so thine eternally. Thus I wish.

MART. LUENKENS, Licentiate of sacred Theolog. and Prof. Ordin. Apostolic and
Regal, L. C.

The SCOPE addressed to the SERIOUS.
LEt merrier Spleenes read Lazarill, or laugh
At Sancho Pancho, or the Grapes-blood quaffe;
And tickle up their Lungs with interlace
Of Tales, and Toys, that furrow up the face
With wrinckling Smiles: But if they abusive be
To slight these hints of their Mortality,
Urged by our Author; it is a foolish way,
And weakly does become corruptive Clay.
If they do merely carpe, and lie of the catch,
Harm be to them, that only for harm watch.
Solomon said it, the deriding scorns
Of fools are but cracklings of flaming thorns.
Let them, that will our sober sadness shun,
Go to the merry Devil of Edmonton,
Or some such Plot, whose Author's drift has bin
To set the people on the merry pin.
Here is no Scope for such as love to jeere,
Nor have we Theme for Panto-Mimicks here.
They that are ravished with each jygging Toy,
Let 'em laugh on, and jolly mirth enjoy.
Fairly be this a warning, here is no sport,
And it is all one, if they be sorry for it,
Or if they care not. Sit they merry then,
Here Is for the Genius of more solid men.
SERRES salutes the serious; who are such,
Their better-moulded intrals he does twich
With stirring truths, and weigh 'em to the poize
Of equal judgment, without gigling noise.
Sad Meditations here compose the Look
Socratick-like, with no flash-humour shook;
Dust, Earth, and Ashes are the Epithites
Here propriate to the best, and all the Sights
Exposed in this True MIRROVR to the Eye,
Are Death, the Grave, and the World's Vanity,
The frailty of mankind; and some have try'de,
Such pensive thoughts will lay the dust of Pride.
THE PARAGRAPHS, (so comprised in the Emblemes) giving subject to the Author's
Discourses following.
I.
PHILIP, the King of Macedon,
Daily was rowz'd, and called upon
By a shrill Page, whose Bon-jour ran,
Remember, SIR, you are a Man.
II.
A Shirt is all remains in fine,
To victorious SALADINE;
At Death, a piece of Linen is
All, that Great Monarch could call his.
III.
ADRIAN slights Triumphall glory,
In the Grave founds his prime story,
Before all pomp he does prefer
His Mausolaean Sepulcher.
IV.
DIOGENES, in Cynicke guise,
Puts ALEXANDER to surmise,
In The Miscellanie of the Dead,
Which is a King's, or Common's Head.
A Morallize on these, Sieur SERRES writes,
Nor Comic Jeasts, nor amorous toy's endites,
Their Paphian Dames whilst others loosely sing,
The Knell of Death his solemn style does ring:
Those subjects, which whole herds of Poets use
Threadbare, his nobler Soul disdaines to choose:
While richly such a Reader These will fit,
Whose judgment prizeth wisdom above wit.
A PROLVSION upon the EMBLEM of the first Chapter, or Tract.
RISE, for a serene Morn brings on the Day,
The Sun is mounted onward of his way,
The Anthymne's high among the feathered Quires,
A lively breath the agile Air inspires.
Draw-ope the Curtains, do not close the Eye
From the fresh beauties of the Azure-Skie.
Mark what a smart Bon-jour his Page did bring
Each Morn to PHILIP, Macedonia's King,
REMEMBER (Royal Sir) You ARE A MAN,
The hours are winged, the length of life's a span.
This powerful hint stirred up the King to rise,
Whose name Heroic deeds immortalize.
Grosse-vapour'd, heavie-headed sleepers wake,
In the bright Morn no more soft slumbers take:
For Action Man was made Our Life's a Race
He that would win the Prize, must run apace.
Be not enchanted with the lulling Down.
That charms the senses in Lethargick swowne;
Leave the enclosure of Bed-Canopie,
And give the view more spacious liberty:
Forsake the grave-type Couch, where Deaeth does keep
His nightly Sessions, imaged by Sleep.
He that is a Dormouse for the time is dead,
And is entomb d already in his Bed.
Who knows how soon that sheet, whereon he lies,
May single serve to enwrap him, when he dies?
How soon these lazy feather-bedded bones
May Coverletted be with Marble-stones?
Where no joynt-suppling-warmth shall give refresh
To high-fed veins, or ease-improved flesh;
Where those puff^ grossures, which o're-curious cost
Has surfet-swolne are putrified, and lost.
Who would be Epicurian, since it is thus,
We that eat all things else, worms will eat Us?
Or who would be o're-haughtie, since to Earth
He must return, as thence he had his Birth?
Mean while, 'though life's quick-sand does hourly pass,
A sluggard sleeps our more then half his Glass.
Be Active while you may, for Time's post-haste
Spurs on each forward Minute to the last.
Such Thoughts as these best fit the Morning's prime,
To Rouse Men's Spirits to Redeem the Time.
Let such our Mattens be, ere Death's sad Knell
Summon our wandering Souls to Heaven or Hell,
Sir Remember that you are a Man

PHILIP King of MACEDON commanded one of his Pages to Awake him every Morning,
and Call aloud to him SIR Remember that You are a MAN.



THE MIRROVR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. I.
Homo ab humo.
MAN, remember thou art Man, never forget thy name, if thou will not forget thy
safety: Thou art called Earth, thou art made but of Earth, Man is a thing of
nothing, only in appearance son. what.
but the Earth subsists, and thou vanishest; but the earth remains firm, and
thy dust flies away. Study thy miseries, meditate thy disasters: thou art
nothing in effect, but if thou be any thing imaginable, I dare not so much as
compare thee unto a dream, because the frailty of thy nature has something
both more feeble, and less constant* an Apparition has above thee the
simplicity of the Elements whereof it is composed, a shadow implies yet the
advantage of the Nobleness of its beginning, since the light produces it. Nay
lastly, a very straw, o^ an Atome, dispute against thee also with reason, for
the purity of substance, since they are corruptible, without infection but thy
heap of filth gives horror to thy own thoughts; One cannot give he
description of Man, but by misery, nor of misery but by Man.
insomuch that I an^ constrained to match thee to thy self for to suggest thee
the truth of thy slightness?

What a goodly School is the world and our condition a fair book: and all
the sad accidents, to which Nature subjects it, as so many gracious Lessons?

May not a man justly say that the earth is a College, wherein the diversity
o^ Times and Ages, sign out the diversit of Classes, in which we may equal
make the course both of our studies an^ days, under the sway of those miseries
which accompany us without cease: Mishaps and pains, are the fruits of the
garden of our life.
the poorness of our way of birth, may stead us as a rudiment in the first
Class: the cries and tears of the cradle, are our Grammar, the creeping
weakness, and pitiful infirmities of Boy-age like so much Rhetoric, and
now can there be a more subtle Philosophy, then that of ^he consideration of
the calamities which are destined to youth? Is it not ^asie to become a great
Naturallist by virtue of meditating the fruitfulness of our nature in the
production both of ils, and pains which continually afflict us? and what
better Metaphysics, He which goes out Doctor in the knowledge of himself, is
ignorant of nothing.
then contemplations of our Being, ever rolling to ^ts ruin? Let us draw then
the conclusion of this Argument, and join with as much reason as interest to
these two Vo^umes so renowned, the Bible, and the ^ace of Heaven, where al
sorts of Scien^es are in their source. Death and immortality are only
separated, bu^ with the length of an instant.
This also of our ^ortall and decaying nature, since it intructs us the Art to
pry our selves in our Corruptions, that we may recover our ^elves in
immortality.

When I consider that the Earth was ^eated of nothing, Man of nothing.
and Man made of this nothing, and the greatnesses which environs him, are
nothing at all, and all the pleasures which he idolatrizeth are also of the
same stuff: The world subsists not, but upon the foundation of its continual
revolution.
I remain^ all confused with astonishment, nor e^ver able to conceive the
subject of his vanity, nor the reason of his arrogance poor corrupted Vapor
with advancing it self, A vapor. Man elevating himself too high measures the
depth of the Abysses of his Precipice.
is soon transformed into a Cloud, to conceal its noysomnesse but yet by way
of this elevation, i^ resolved into Lightnings and Thunder and afterward
retumbles into the ditche^ from whence first it had its beginning. A Puff of
wind which tumbles in its own^ violence, A B last.
angry perhaps that it cannot subsist, but in flying, and that the action of
its continual flight, is the beginning of its ruin. Smoke.
A smoke, which with (...) vain assault will needs scale the Heavens, and
yet hardly can one well distinguish the intervall between its first being and
extinction: Worm. We are all already, but rottenness, fince already worms
begin to devour us. A stream^.
a poor glistering Worm which dazles none but purblin^ spirits, and gives
light to those worms which devour it in private, a stream always murmuring,
always trilling away And now why shall all these goodly nu^litie and all these
pleasant Chimeraes insinuate to us the vanity which they are of? shall these
cozening appearances bestablish'd here below with Sovereignty? be it then
only in desire, or in dream, Every thing corrupts, the very eye which now
reads these truths shall not be exempt.
for with what gilded rine so ere they be out-sided, Corruption is their
Form, and Dust their Matter.

I am astonished that Man should be capable to mistake himself, even to the
point of forgetting what he was, then, when he yet was not: what he is now,
whilst he enjoyes the beauty of the day, and what he must one day be at the
Sunset of his life: Assuredly yes, I am astonished at it, Nature exhibites us
so many Mirrours of Jnconstancy, as she has produced objects.
since all created things may serve him for a Mirror to contemplate therein,
apparently the verity of his miseries.

The Heavens, though whirling about with a Motion, always equal in the same
spaces of their carreere, Since that Nature it self is mortal, this second
cause ceasing, the ruin of these effects is infallible.
do not cease to wax old, and even their age represents to us naturally our
decay. Though the Stars shine with a sparkeling Iuster, as clear as at the
first Day of their creation, yet as they are attached within those circles of
Ages, whose continual motion is limited, they approach by little and little to
their last West, where their light must be extinct, and the pace of their
course shows us the way of our life, since time conducts us all together,
though diversely to our end. The Fire so greedy, that it devours it self, when
finding no more fuel to nourish it, is it not a Mirror of the Lamp of our
life, whose kindled week goes out, when the Oil of the Radical moisture
fails it? The Air, which corrupts continually, is it not an Image of our
corruption? and without doubt the Waters transparent body, represents us the
fragility of ours, and its liquid crystalline, always rolling away makes us
see in its gliding, Every thing flees away from us, and in running after them
we run to Death
our flitting nature. The earth could not have figured us better then she
does, since we are to day of the same matter, and to morrow of the like form.
What fairer Mirror then that of Flowers, where we may see in one day the whole
course of our life, for at Sunrise the buds resemble our Infancy, at noone the
same now full blown, our youth, The world is a Nose-gay of flowers, which by
little and little wither all together.
and at Dayes-end, themselves now quite withered, our last age. I will not
speak of all the other Species of creatures animate, how every one in its
self, though living, is an Image of death. It suffices me to cherish this
remembrance, and leave to you thereof the meditation.

What shall I tell ye of Fortune, of honors, riches, Fortune has nothing
more her own, then her Inconstancy.
and all these glorious qualities of valor, Beauty and a thousand other
besides, which vanish away with us? This blind Goddess has a Mirror under
her feet, whose round figure shows us at once, both her instability, and our
inconstancy, as for greatness and riches, the ashes of those which have
possessed them, are as so many fresh Crystalls of a Mirror, which flatters not,
wherein we may see the vanity both of their enjoyment, and of their possessors.
Those other qualities of fair and valiant, are of the same nature, as those
sensitive and vegetable souls, There is nothing immortal in man but virtue.
which dye together with the subject which they animate, without leaving
ordinarily so much as one small memorial, for mark that they have had a being
otherwise: and in sequel to these truths, can you find a truer Mirror, Man is
the Mirror of Man, so that by due contemplation of one part, he may save the
whole.
then this of our selves, since every part, (nay what say I?) every action, and
every sigh is an animate pourtrait of Death; Insomuch that we draw the breath
of so many continuate Gaspes, without ability of dispose of one only instant,
to give internal to this exercise.

How is it then possible that Man should mis-know himself, having such
faithful Mirrours before his eyes, where at all times he may see apparently
the Truth of his Nature kneaded in Corruption, formed by it, and destroyed also
by the same; Strange thing! he can see nothing in the World, All the objects of
the world bid us Adten, while we but regard 'em since they are always fleeing
away.
but Images of inconstancy, and yet will not apprehend his own change:
whatsoever shall smite upon his ear, will resound nothing but the bruit of his
flight, and yet he will not think upon his retreat.

Lastly his other Senses, and his fancy, shall have no other object but this of
the continual vicissitude of all things, and yet he will remain firm and
stable in his vanity, To muse always of Death, i^ the way of Immortality.
till death ruin its foundation. Thus in the deceitful opinion, wherein he
is, of possessing all things, he loses the possession of himself, and
having too much dreamed on his pleasures, his Life is past as a Dream without
return. I must tell you one of my meditations.

I shall never be able to comprehend the meaning of those, who moan themselves
against Fortune, A man may well complain against Fortune, these vain
regreetes, exempt him not from the pain.
the World and all the pleasures of this life. One forsooth will upbraid to
this foolish Deity, her deceipts, without considering that he deceived himself
in giving Trust to a Goddess, that nere had any. He yet will accuse her to
have conducted him still through craggy ways, and overspread with thorns, as
if in following one that is blind, a man should not hazard to run this danger.

Another will make yet fresh complaints against the Worlds detesting it is
Sweetes, The world may well be the instrument of our destruction, not the
cause.
cursing it is charms and calling it a Thousand times deceiptfull. but why? one
would say to hear these plaints, that the world began but now to receive its
birth, I mean were but now newly created, that no man knows it yet, and that
its first couzenages began, but now to be discovered? What folly! is not this
to cheat ones self, to have commerce with a cheater? the world never yet bore
any other name or title, why then aim we to nourish our selves with its
delights, whose after-bitternesse empoysons sensibly our souls? But if its
charms be powerful enough to tempt reason, The number of those whom the world
has deceived, is so great, that they that still trust it, are now no more
excusable.
they are yet too feeble to vanquish it, provided that the will consent not so,
that a man remain convict of all the crimes, whereof he may be accused.

What seeming ground then have we to be enraged against those pleasures which
we have received; The will is so free that it cannot suffer violence, but from
it self.
if our selves only give them both being and form? the Fancies conceive these
delights, and the will gives them birth, they are the works whereof our
imaginations form the Species, and our desires make the Metamorphosis, changing
them into objects palpable, and sensible, which are marks of the seal of our
depravednesse.

Let a man then abhor pleasures instead of accusing them, Pleasures are the
greatest enemies of life, for in casting flowers upon our heads, they fill our
hearts with thrones.
detest their vanity in lieu of complaining of their dedeitfulnesse. But if
they be criminal, they only bear the stain of their Fathers, and if they be
accomplices of our destruction, it is we give them Birth, to give us death.

Let men cease to lament of Fortune, since the Mirror of its flying scarf,
Fortune is still her self, he which trusts her, takes delight to be cheated.
and wings express to the life its lightness, and our folly.

Let none Argue any more that the world is cause of our ruin, since we cannot
choose but tread every hour over the dust and ashes of those, who have too late
repented to have followed it. As for voluptuousness, it is a vain Idea, to
which our passions give a body, to make it serve as a sensible object of their
brutality, insomuch that it can do nothing, but by our first motions, taking
its vigor from our force, and its power from our Soveraigntie, and this
renders us doubly culpable, palleating our faults, instead of acknowledging
them, Pleasure still takes its force from our voluntary weakness.
since laments, rather than excuses, might absolve us them.

Is it not that St. John Chrysostom touched with compassion of our miseries
cries out in astonishment of our weakness: 'Oh World how many have thou
deceived! It Is more then folly, when the folly of others, serves us not for
example,
but this is its trade and profession. O Fortune how many have thou made to
fall! but even yet still, while I am speaking, she gives employment to her
treason, and exercise to her Tyranny. O Pleasures comfitted in Sweetes, and
steeped in bitterness, how many have ye poisoned! but yet their venom is so
common, that the whole earth is infected with it. What remedy then to all these
ils? No other then this, to pry into ones self, in the MIRROVR of his own
Ashes, We can no better contemplate any thing, then in the Mirror of our
Nothing.
a MIRROVR always hanging at the Girdle, and which flatters not. A MIRROVR
whose glass, though more brittle, then one of Crystal, makes us yet to see
that all the objects of the World are false, but that of our Corruption, a
Mirror, which represents us more lively in our pourtraict, then in our selves,
A Mirror whose kind of shadow and Chimera makes us see in effect that which we
are in appearance.

A Mirror all miraculous, which preserves certain Species's of nothing to
render them sensible to our knowledge. A Mirror all divine, which
metamorphosing our bodies into shadows, yet expresses us so naturally, that the
most arrogant cannot mistake themselves. A Mirror lastly, which Nature has
charmed with it is own proper spells, All the Mirrours of the World flatter,
except this of our miseries.
to the end, that vewing himself herein, a Man may be able to resist the
charms of the World's allurements.

I am greatly astonished at those that preach us the Knowledge of our selves, to
be so troublesome, and difficult, since that at all times, and in all places,
of all sides and all sorts of fashions, we are Nothing at all, or if by an
excess of flattery and vanity, If a man would still study himself he would
become the wisest of the World.
I borrow some names to express truly what we are, it can be no other then
those of dirt and mire, whose noysomnesse takes away all doubt on it, from the
most incredulous.

In what then consists this trouble of studying to know one's-selfe, since the
most ignorant may in this, go out Doctors in the school of our miseries:
Selfe-knowledge only diffi^ile to the proud.
where lies the difficulty to arrive to this knowledge? when the very wind of
our sighs carries away, every moment, some of that polluted dust, whereof we
be made. Where is this pain, say I yet, since our senses and spirits can have
no other object, then this of Inconstancy, as unseparable to their nature, as
it is proper to our condition. And what can be this difficulty, when we are
capable of no action more, then to destroy our selves? We must break this
rind farther.

Humility is a skillful Schoolmaster, to teach us to know our selves
I will believe that every one knows from whence he comes and whither he goes,
that his body is but a work of rottenness, and that the worms attend thereof
the prey, as a nourishment which to them is destinated: but it is important to
consider that these truths, though sensible, are oftenest put in oblivion, and
this default of memory denotes that of knowledge. He which museth upon his
slightness, undervalueth (except God) all things, A man knows no more then
he remembers.
and vanity would never be able to surprise us, during the interim of this
meditation. Man knows very well that he is Mortal, The remembrance of Death
makes us forget the vanities of Life.
but whilst he never thinks seriously of the necessity of dying, this
knowledge is forgot, though he dye without cease, and in loosing the
remembrance of his condition, looses the knowledge thereof.

The way to pass our days contentedly, is to think every hour of the last.
Remember that you are a Man said his page every morning to Philip of Macedon.
This great Monarch made himself to be rouzed every day from sleep, with the
News of Death, fearing to be charmed with the sweetes of Life. Greatnesses
environ him on all parts, to make him forget his humility, but understand you
not the delicate Air, which he causes to be sung to the tune of his miseries:
The remembrance of the poorness of Death, is a potent charm to resist the
memory of greatness of Birth.
the pomp and Magnificance of his riches dazzle his eyes with their luster,
that he might never consider the wretchedness which is proper to him. But you
see how he makes himself to be awaked with the noise of this truth, ever to
cherish its remembrance: Sir remember that you are a Man; oh how many Mysteries
are comprised in these words! behold the Allegory on it.

Great Kings remember you are subject to many more Miseries, then you have
subjects in your Empire. If we be different in manner of life, we are
all'equall in necessity of dying.
Great Monarchs remember that of all the great extention of your Territories
there shall not remain you one only foot; So jealous are the worms of your
glory. Great Princes remember that your Scepters and your Crowns, are such
feeble marks of greatness, that fortune sports with them, Time mocks at them,
and the Wind shall sweep away their Dust: Sovereign Judges of the Life of Men,
remember that although you are above the Laws, this of Dying is inviolable.

The Fable is pretty, of the resolution, which the flowers and plants took to
elect a King and Queen, Cares and an^ieties surpass in number the pleasure
of, Kings.
and as the number of Voices gave the election, the Marigold was declared to
be the King of the Flowers, and the Bryar Queen of Plants, and under this toy
lies hid serious verities.

Is there any thing fairer in all the borders of the Garden of Nature, then the
flower of the Marigold? Its golden Tincture of the color of the Sun, at first
view dazeleth so delightfully; that the Eye amazedly gazing with admitation of
its fresh-displayed beauty, can hardly retire its regards from an object so
agreeable. But gather it, and dight it on you, and its sentproduces a thousand
disliks in the Mind, for that one only, which you hold in your hand, for hence
of a sudden the humors become dull, and melancholy having been annoyed with
so fair a fulsomnesse.

Royalty is absolutely the same: The Scepters are as fresh flowers of Marigold,
If Crowns and Scepters were to be sold, wise men would never buy them.
whose luster and beauty equally ravishing, attract at first glance to their
admiration the Soul by the eyes; but if a Man take them into his graspe, or
deck his head with them, he shall find himself filled with anxious cares by
this cover^ure. If you doubt of this, ask Seleu^us, he will answer, That the
first ^oment of his Reign, was the last of ^is Quietness.

The Sweet-bryar also bore away ^he Royalty; for who would not love (...) with
its Rose? O how both together have powerful attractives, to ^^mpt equally,
both the heart to desire them, and the hand to pluck them? And it is in vain
that Nature has given arms to the jealousy of its prickles, Thorns are the
Roses of Kings gardens.
to serve for the defense of its flowers; since these sharpes are as so many
baits, which irritate us rather with Desire then Fear. All the world insert it
in their nose-gayes; but the prickles remain, the Rose withers.

Say we then also, that Royalty is a fair Sweet-bryar, accompanied with its
Roses; I mean many contentments of the same nature. Both together have great
charms to affect us both with love and desire, but the Briars of the Crown
remain, Great miseries are destinated to great fortunes.
the Rose of delights withers. O how ponderous is the load of this greatness*
And if you believe not me, enquir^ hereof of the puissant King Mithridates, The
felicity of Kings has much more luster, then Reality.
he will often reiterate to you That he never sighed, but for the ponderou^
burden of his Crowns.

SIR, REMEMBER YOU AR^ A MAN.

But what is there here to pride in (...) May it be of the greatness of his
D^minions? This is but an alien good, which admits not to be possessed but by
vanity, Kings may trouble themselves to conquer the earth, it still triumphs
over them.
since its honors and pleasures have nothing else more in propriety. To be an
amply landed-man, is to have miry soil to sell, and small profit to make
thence.

Sir remember you are a Man. What may be his ambition? may it be to conquer the
whole world, what will he do with it after conquest, since it is a Ball of
snow, which Time melts by little and little, tumbling it without cessation.

Sir remember you are a Man. What might be his designs? Should he pretend to
Altars, and Temples, what oblations can be made to a Victime, He which makes
himself to be adored, is rather fi. to be Deaths Victime then to be
idolatrized.
whom Death holds conrinually at a ^ay? can Incense be offered to a ^ung hill,
or an Idol made of a Sink? ^e very thought shockes common ^nse.

Sir, remember that you are a Man. What can he do with his absolute ^ower?
Man is so miserable, that I am amiz'd ^ee p^ti^s not himself.
A little stone makes him ^umble; a straw can blind him; a ^adow, an Atome, a
thing of nothing are capable to reduce him to nothing at all. And is not this
an object of pity, rather then of envy? Great Kings, these are truths too
important for you, to loose their remembrance.

Well may you out-brave the heavens with a bristling eye-brow; the only
imagination of its Thunderclaps, holds you already in alarm. Boldly may you
tread upon the Earth with a disdainefull foot; the Same whereof you are made,
shall shortly be so trodden, when the worms are glutted with it. I have said to
corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my mother and
mysister. Job. 17.14.
Remember that you art Men, and that all the objects of riches and honors
which environ you, are of the same Nature as you are. You are dying every
moment and every thing falls away without cease.

When I represent to mind you heads, The head that wears the crown, wears
away with it.
diadem'd with a rich Crown I conceive it a little point infirm'^ and closed
in a circumference, whos^ lines abut at the center of corrupt^^ on, lines of
magnificence, which te^minate at the point of wretchedness.

If I consider you with Scepter in hand, Scepters and the hands which hold
them, are equally perishable.
me thinks I see a simple shrub, planted upon worser earth, the shrub dries up,
and is reduced to dust, the ground remains that it was before.

Let me contemplate you seated upon your Thrones, decked with your richest
ornaments, my imagination shows me a Jupiter in picture, holding the Thunder
in his hand; for you are so weak for all your absolute power, that if you
presume hardily to raise your head, A strange thing that the clarity should
blind us, though it be the principal of the view.
but to look upon the Sun, your eyes will water at the same time, to expiate
with your tears, the crime of your arrogance.

Great Kings, Remember then, that you are not Great, but in miseries.
Sovereign Monarchs, Remember, that your Empiredome is but a servitude, since
you are subject to all the disasters of your subjects. Powerful Princes, one
gust of wind defies to the struggle your absolute power. Sacred Majesty's, All
the attributes of worldly glory accompany us but to the grave.
I salute you to day by this name: but to morrow I will change terms, and call
you Skelitons and carcasses, to the end that in speaking this truth, all the
world may know you, I will change my tone.

How ingenious are the Poets in their fancies? They recount us, how that
Inconstancy being banished from heaven, descended upon earth, with design to
have her picture drawn, and upon the refuse, that Painters made of it, she
addressed herself to Time, Man serves for sha^le-cocke to all things, since all
things concur to his ruin.
who after he had considered her in all her diversities, made use at last of
the visage of Man for the finishing cloth, wherein having represented her to
the life, all the world took her for Man himself, since in effect it is but
one and the same thing. O fair truth discovered by a fable.

Man is Inconsla^^vit self, ^ather then us pour^^^ct.
He then that now would see the Image of Inconstancy, let him consider the
Lise-touches and lineaments of it, upon his own visage. Our forehead which
wrinkles every moment, is it not the very same as hers? Our Eyes, which by
continual use every hour, do already require spectacles, are they not as
hers? Our cheeks which now chap-fall are in nothing different from hers. In
fine our visages are the only MIRROVRS WHICH FLATTER NOT.

But what shall we answer notwithstanding to the objection of this truth, that,
that which we see of MAN, Though a Man hides himself under the veil of
hypocrisy, his defects always break through.
is not the MAN. If his visage like a false Horologe index false, this our
pourtraict of Inconstancy is merely imaginary:

But is there any thing more inconstant then the spirit of Man? it is a
weather-cocke for all winds, behold again the first draughts of the visage of
Inconstancy; must we not of necessity compare his changing humor to hers, The
spirit of Man is much more changing, then his body, for this changes only in
growing old, but that grows o^d only in changing.
if a man would exhibit thereof but one example; and these are yet new
lineaments, which represent us this levity. In fine, his thoughts, his desires,
and all the passions of his mind, are but objects of vicissitude, capable of
all sorts of impressions: so that in the perfection of the portraicture of Man,
Inconstancy is found perfectly depainted. Let us proceed.

The fictions of Poets are yet serious enough, to serve us often for sufficient
entertain of the time. Virtue only can render us invulnerable. A virtuous Man
fears nothing.
It Is they which tell us of one Achilles, immortal in all the parts of his
body, save only his heel.

Great Kings, I will, if you please, take you for Achilles's, and will give out
you are like him, invulnerable, but only in the heel. But of what temper
soever your Arms be, to what purpose serve they you with this defect? This
only blot duskes the luster of your glory. Nature has done surely well, Every
Man would be immortal, but none takes pain to acquire immortality.
to prodigallize upon you thus, both her graces and favors; she has
immortalized you but by halfes. All your apparences are divine, but something
within spoils all, each particular is a heel, by which Death may surprise you.

Shall I say then that you are Achilles's, who will believe mei, since your
heads serve but as Buts to the shafts of Fortune? It Is only the consc^ence of
a just Man is of proof, against the stroke of Time and Fortune.
To preach you invulnerable, a small scratch may thereon give me the lie. Truth
more powerful then flattery constraines me to call you by your name, for in
remembrancing you that you are but Men* I suggest you to the life all the
disasters, which accompany your Life.

Man is so poor a thing, that one cannot give him a name but is advantageous
to him.
Thou have much to do, to make Panegyricks in praise of Man, O Mercury
Trimegistus, and to maintain so confidently, that he is a great Miracle, it
must be then a Miracle of misery, since Nature produces nothing so miserable
as he is.

And thou Pythagoras, which have had the forehead to persuade us, that Man was
a mortal God, if thou had made Anatomy of his carcass, the stench of his
filth, had soon made thee change this language. Plato thou reason'st well upon
this subject, yet without sound consideration, then when with an enforcement of
spirit and eloquence, thou would oblige us to believe, There is no Tongue in
Nature which can-furnish us with terms strong enough to express the miseries
of Man.
that Man is of the race of the Gods: yes surely, since thy Gods are Gods of
earth, the cause is matched to the effect, for Man is of the same matter.
Plotinus, thou also did not miss it, when in favor of Man, thou said he
was an abridgement of the wonders of the world, for since all it is wonders
heretofore so famous are no more but dust and ashes, Man may hereof be the
example with good reason.

O how much more is expert David in the knowledge of our condition, when he
compares Man, not only to the Dust, but to the Dust which flies away, to show
us, that, that little which he is still, flies away till it be nothing in the
end.

But how glad am I O Lord, that I am but Dust, to the end that I may fly
toward heaven, Memento homo quod nihil es, and in nihilum reverteris.
for the earth I undervalew. How I am satisfied that I am but Ashes, that I may
but be able to keep in my soul some little sparkle of thy love. What glory,
and what contentment too, is it to be devoured by worms, since thou call
thy self a Worm? gnaw O Lord, gnaw both my heart and intrals. Ego sum vermis
and non homo. Psalm. 22.6.
I offer thee them in prey, and regive me new ones, that may offend thee no
more. I know well that my life flits away by little and little, but how
agreeable is this flight unto me, since thou art its object. I see well that my
Days slide away, and pass in continual course. But O what consolation is it
to be sensible of dying at all hours, for to live eternally? O Verities,
again, what ravishments have you to consolate the souls of the most
afflicted? I return to my subject.

Humility is ever honored by all the world.
We read of the Priests of the Gentiles, that they writ letters every year to
their Gods, upon the Ashes of the Sacrifices, which they made upon the top of
Mount Olympus, and I believe that this was upon design, that they might thus
be better received, being written upon this paper of humility. Let us fetch now
some truth from this fancy. All the parts of the body are as so many Characters
of dust, wherein may be read the truth of our nothingnesse.
Let us write every day to heaven, upon the paper of our Ashes, confessing that
we are nothing else, and let us make our sighs the faithful messengers of
these letters, as the only witnesses of our hearts. I will hide my self under
the Ashes, O Lord, to the end that thy Justice may not see me, said David. What
Curtaine's this? This Sovereign Justice which makes it bright day in hell,
cannot pierce the Ashes to find underneath a Sinner. No, See thou how Ahab
humbles himself. I will not bring the evil in his days 1 Kings 21.29.
no, for this veil has the virtue to reflect the beams of this revenging
light within the source, which produced them.

Remember that I am nothing, O Lord, and that thou have made me of nothing,
Recordare quae so, quod sieut argillam feeisti me and in pulveremreduces me.
Job 10.9.
and every moment can reduce me to something less then nothing; cries out
Job, in his miseries. He finds no other invention to appease the mild choler
of his God, then putting him in mind of his infinite greatness, and at the
same time of the pitiful estate, whereunto he is reduced. Why should you take
Arms against me, O Lord, (pursues he) when the breath of your word is able to
undo the same, which it has made me, Humility triumphs over all things.
Remember, O Remember, that I am but what the benign influence of your divine
regards permits me to be, for on the instant that you shall cease to regard me,
I shall cease to live.

Man remember thy beginning, for thou art not made of Fire like the Stars,
nor of Air like the winds, but of mire, from whence it is thou soyl'st all the
would.
Deck we then with Ashes our Body of Dust, and let us cover with a new earth
our own, to make Rampires of proof against the thunders of heaven. See you
not how its all-powerfull Justice, finds limitation in the confession of our
being nothing. We need fear nothing, acknowledging that we are nothing. Well
may the thunder make a horrid rumbling, yet the Hyssope out-braves it in its
lowliness. He which can overcome himself shall never be vanquished by a
greater Captain.
Fear and Humility ever abandon each others company. The only means to
triumph over all things, is to vanquish Ambition.

O Lord, I durst scarce believe, that I am, if thy providence alone were not
the Prop of my Being. But since thy goodness has drawn me from the Abyss of
Nothing; let thy grace cause me always to keep the remembrance of my
original. Before Time was, I was Nothing; now Time is, I am yet Nothing. But
what happiness is it to be Nothing at all, since thou art All-things? for if I
search my self in vain in my self, is it not sufficient that I am found in
thee? I will then forget even mine own name, and muse of nothing, but of the
Chimera of my being, since as a Chimera, it passes away and vanishes. The
only consolation, What a joy is it to pass away continually with all things,
toward him that has created all things?
that remains me in my passage, is that thou alone remainest firm and stable,
so that without end thou art the end of my carreere, and without bounds
limitest the extent of my course, as the only object, both of my rest and
felieity. See me now upon return.

With what and over to be adored luster, appears the love of God in his day,
Heaven changes the sighs of the Earth into tears, I mean its vapors into dew.
in the work of Man? Would not one say, that it seems he made him of earth,
that he might strew thereon, the seeds both of his blessings and graces! O
fortunate Earth, which being diligently cultured, may bring forth the fruits of
eternal happiness!

Boast thy self O Man, to be Nothing but Earth, Since we are of Earth, let us
suffer this divine Sun of Love, to exhale the vapors of our si^hs, for to
me^amorphose them into the tears of Repentance.
since the heaven bedewes the Earth continually. But if with a provoked eye, it
lancheth out, sometimes its thunders upon it, her self does afford hereof the
matter. Live always Innocent, and thou shall not know what it is to fear.
Employ thy self without cease, to measure the depth of the Abyss of thy
nothingnesse; and though thou never pierce to the bottom hereof, thy pains
shall not be unprofitable, because seeking thy self in thy baseness, thou
shall always recover thy self again much greater then thou art.

The Sun, this fair Planet of the Day, which with a continual aspect, We
are all amourous of our selves, not knowing for what, for our defects are
objects rather of hate then Love.
contemplates all created things, cannot make reflection of his beams to see
himself, as if his mother Nature had apprehended in making him so glorious;
that the Mirror of his light, might not be metamorphosed into a fire of love,
to render him amorous of his own proper luster.

But the Intellect, this Sun of our Souls, has a faculty with which it can
both contemplate out of it self all things, A Man cannot stumble ordinarily,
but through perve^snesse, since Reason enlightens him in the very worst ways.
and repeal again the same power to consider it self, which makes a Man
capable, not only of the Meditation of the miseries of the World, but also of
that of the afflictions and troubles, which inseparably keeps him company to
the grave.

We read of Moses, that God commanded him to frame the The Laver which was
before the Tabernacle. Exodus 38.8.
forefront of the Tabernacle all of Mirrours, to the end, that those that
should present themselves before his Altar, might view themselves, in this
posture of Prayer. O this excellent Mystery! Mortals, it behooves you to view
your selves in the Mirror of your Ashes, if you would have your vows heard.

God has taught us an excellent way of Prayer, Give us this day our daily
bread. But why O Lord, teach thou us not to ask thee our bread for to
Morrow, There is nothing assured in Life, but its continual Death.
as well as for to day? O how good a reason is there hereof! This is because
that life has no assurance of tom-orrow; besides that it is an excess of
grace, that we may be bold to crave of him, the bread of our nourishment for
all a whole day, since every moment may be That of our Death. Reader, let this
verity serve thee yet as a Mirror, It Is not sufficient to muse of the
necessity of dying, but to consider also that every hour may be our Lost.
if thou would have thy prayers to pierce the heavens. This is not all, to
know thy body is a Colosse of filth, which is traild along from one place to
another, as it were by the last struggle of a Life always languishing. It
behooves thee also to call to mind, that every instant may terminate the course
of thy troublesome carriere; and that this sudden retreat, constraines thee
to bid Adieu for ever to all the things of the world, which thou cherishedst
most. Thoughts only worthy of a noble spirit!

I have eaten Ashes as bread, Psalm. 102. 9. Cinerem tan quam panem manducabam.
says the Royal Prophet; but how is it possible? I conceive his thought. He
entertained his soul with the remembrance of the Ashes of his body, and this
truth alone served as object to his imagination, for to satisfy the appetite
of his Soul. Lord give me both the same relish and desire, to repast my self
still thus, of Dust and Ashes, in remembrancing my self always, that I am
nothing else. A man to abase himself below that which he is, being so poor a
thing of nothing
O sweet remembrance of my rottenness, since it steads me for eternal
nourishment of my Soul! O precious memory of my Nothingnesse, since able to
satisfy the appetite of my heart! Let this be the daily bread, O Lord, which
thou have taught me to ask thee, to the end, that all my desires together
nourishment. I recollect my self in this digression.

Having diverse times mused of the imbecility and weakness of Man, Si vitrei
essemus, minus casus timeremus. S. Aug.
I am constrained to cry out with St. Augustine, What is there that can be more
frail in Nature? If we were of Glass (pursues he) our condition might
therein be better, There is nothing more brittle than glass, yet man is more.
for a Glass carefully preserved, may last long time, and yet what pain
somever Man takes to preserve himself, and under what shelter somever, he
shrowds himself, for covert to the storm, he breaks and is shattered of
himself.

What reply you to these verities, Great Princes? Well may you now be arrogant:
The fragilitie of Glass cannot admit of comparison, with this of your nature;
what seat will you give to your greatness? and what foundation to your vanity?
Man is fully miserable, since his life is the source of his miseries.
when the wind alone of your sighs, may shipwreck you upon the Sea of your
own proper tears? what surnames will you take upon you, for to make you be
mis-taken? That of Immortal would become you ill, since every part of your
body, serves but as a But to the shaftes of Death. Invincible, A man may do
every thing with virtue, without it nothing
would also be no way proper, since upon the least touch of mishap, you are
more worthy of pity, then capable of defense. Would you be called Gods? your
Idolaters would immolate you to their own laughter. Tread under foot your
Crowns, if rightly you will be crowned with them, you only thus render your
selves worthy of those honors, which you misprize: for Glory consists not in
the possessing it, Heaven cannot be acqu^red, but by the misprize of earth.
but in the meriting; and the only means to obtain it, is to pretend nothing
at all to it.

How remarkable is the custom of the Locrians at the Coronation of their
Kings: They burnt before them a handful of Tow, to represent unto them the
instability of their grandeurs, and the greediness of Time to destroy them. In
effect, all the greatnesses of the Earth, are but as a bundlet of Tow; All the
grandour of Kings is but as the blaze of flaming tow.
and then when Darius would make of them his treasure, Mis-hap set fire on
them, and reduced 'em into Cinders, and when he had yet in his heart a desire
to immortalize them, a new fire seaz'd his intrals, by the heat of thirst,
which burned him to the end to consume at once, both the cause, and the effect.
So true it is, that the Glory of the world vanishes away like Smoke. Great
Kings, if you build a Throne of Majesty to the proof, both against Time and
Fortune, lay its foundation upon that of your miseries. He which esteems
himself the least of all, is the greatest.
Humility takes her rise in low linesse, from the lowest footing, when she
makes her flight into the heavens.

O how admirable is the Humility of Saint John Baptist! They would give him
titles of Sovereignty, in taking him for the Messiah: but call to you Memory,
how with an ejaculation o^ Love and reverence, he precipitate^ himself both
with heart and though^ into the Abyss of his own Nothingnesse, there to
admire in all humility, both Greatness and Majesty in his Throne. I am but a
voice, Vox clamantis in deserto John 1.23.
says he, which beat at the ears to enter into your hearts.

A Voice, which rustles in a moment, and passes away at the same instant; What
Humility! Is there any thing which is less any thing then a Voice? It Is a
puff of wind, which a fresh one carries I know not where, since both lose
themselves in the air, after its never solittle agitation, with their gentle
violence. It Is nothing in effect, yet notwithstanding, the proper name of this
great Prophet. Christus verbum, Johannes vox.
They would elevate him, and he abaseth himself so low, that he would render
himself invisible as a Voice, so much he fears to be taken for him, whose
shooe-latchet, he judges himself unworthy to unloose.

Lord, what are we also, but a little Wind enclosed in a handful of Earth? to
what can one compare us, John 1.27. A man is to be estimated in proportion to
the undervalue be makes of himself
without attributing us too much vanity. True it is, that we are the works of
thy hands, but all other created things bear the same Title, but if thy bounty
has been willing to advantage our nature with many graces, proper and
ordinated to it alone, these are so many witnesses, which convince us, not to
have deserved them, since our very Ingratitude is yet a Recognizing of this
Truth. Insomuch that as our Life is nothing but sin, and sin is a mere
privation, it may be maintained that we are nothing else, and consequently
nothing at all. The most just man sins seven times a day.


But how Proud am I, O Lord, every time I think thou have created me of Earth,
for this is a Principal, which draws me always to it self, by a right of
propriety; from whence I cannot defend my self. All things seek their repose
in their element. What is (...) for a man to trumph here of the no^^d? the
earth expects his spoil.
O how happy am I, to search mine in that of Dust and Ashes, whereof thou have
formed me? The Earth demands my Earth, and my body as a little Gullet,
separated from its source, speeds by little and little, to the same source,
from whence it had its beginning. And this is that which impeaches me from
gathering up my self, to take a higher flight. I should do bravely, to hoyse
my self above my Center, Pride hoyses up, only to give a fall.
when the assay of my Vanity, and the violence of my fall, are but the same
thing. I give still downwards upon the side of my weaknesses, and the weight
of my miseries, overbeares upon the arrogance of my Ambition. O happy deffect,
A man no doubt may misknow himself, yet the least hit of mishap tears the
veil of his hoodwink'tnesse.
and yet more happy the condition, which holds me always enchained to the
dunghill of my Original, since the links of this easy servitude, are so many
Mirrours which represent me that I am nothing, whenever I imagine my self to
be something. Let us change our Tone, without changing subject.

Ladies, Remember that you dye every hour, behold, here a MIRROVR WHICH
FLATTERS NOT. It shows you both what you are, and such as you shall be. But if
notwithstanding, you still admire your selves under an other visage, full of
allurements, and sweets. A strange thing that death is still as near us, as
life, and yet we never think on it.
This is but Death himself, who hides him under these fair apparences, to the
end you may not discern him. It is true, you have graceful Tresses of hair
which cover your heads, and his is all Bald, but do not you heed, how he
pulls them off from yours by little every day, and makes those which he leaves
you, to turn White, to the end you may pull them out your selves?

It is true, your Eyes have a sparkling luster, and beauty; but of his is seen
only the hideous place, where Nature had seated them: But do you not
consider, how with continual action, he Dusks the glory of this beauty; and
in conclusion, puts to Eclipse these imaginary Pety-Suns.

It is true, your hue is of Lillyes, and your mouth of Roses, upon his face is
seen only the stubs of these flowers: but call to mind, that he blasts this
Lilly-teint, Ci me and Death are the only inexorables.
as well as Lillyes themselves; and that the vermillion of this Rosie-mouth
lasts but as Roses; and if yet you differ to day from him in some thing, you
may resemble him tomorrow in all. I leave you to meditate of these Truths.

Man is a true Mirror, which represents to the natural all things, which are
opposed unto it. If you turn it downward to the Earth, Man is as one picture
with two faces, and often the most natural is falsest.
we can see within nothing but objects of Dust and Ashes: but if you turn him
to the Heavens-ward, there is to be admired in it beauties, and graces purely
celestial. In effect, if we consider Man in his mortal and perishable
condition, hardly can one find any stay in this consideration, since he is
nothing else but a Chimera, whose form every Moment, by little and little
destroys, to reduce it to its first nothing. And indeed, not to lie to ye,
Man, is but a Puff of Wind, since he lives by nothing else, Man is nothing in
himself, yet comprehends all things.
is filled with nothing else, and dies only by Privation of it. But if you
turn the Medall (I would say) the Mirror of his Soul toward his Creator,
there are seen nothing but Gifts of Immortality, but graces of a Sovereign
bounty, but favors of an absolute Will. The heavens and the Stars appear in
this Crystalline Mirror, What though man be made of earth; he is more divine
than mortal.
not by reflection of the object, but by a divine virtue proceeding from the
Nature of his Cause. Let us to the End.

The slumber of vanities is a mortal malady to the soul.
Me thinks This Page returns again to day within the Chamber of Phil^^^ of
Macedon, and drawing the C^^^taine, cries out according to his ^^^dinary.

Sir, Awake, and Remember that you are a Man: but why rouzes he him to think
of Death, since sleep is its image Alexander knew himself mortal by his
sleeping; and in effect those which have said, that sleep was the Brother of
Death, have drawn their reason of it, from their reciprocal resemblance.
Awake then Great Kings; Not to ponder that you are mortal, your sleep is a
trance of this, but rather that you are created for immortality. Remember you
are Men. I will not say, A man should not forget his heavenly beginning, having
heaven for a daily object.
subject to all the miseries of the Earth; but rather capable of all the
felicities of heaven. Remember that you are Men. I will not say the
shittlecocke of Time, and the But to all the shafts of Fortune, but rather
victors over ages, and all sorts of miseries. Remember that you are Men; I will
not say any more Conceived in Corruption, brought forth by it, and also
destroyed by it: But rather, I say, born for the glory of God, If a man should
consider his worth by that which he cost, he would love himself perfectly.
Living for to acquire it, and Dying for to possess it. Remember that you are
Men, I will say no more slaves of Sin, the Flesh, and the World: but rather
free for resistance to the first, A man may do every good thing which he
desires, since in his impuissance his will is taken for the deed.
strong enough to vanquish the next, and more powerful yet to give a Law to
the third: Remember that you are men, I will no more say the pourtract of
Inconstancy, the object of every sort of ill, and the pasture of Worms: But
rather the Image of God, the subject of every sort of good, and the sole
aliment of eternity, as created for it alone. Remember that you are men, I will
not say made of clay, animated with mis-hap, Man is sure a thing something
divine, which is not seen even to it self.
and metamorphosed a'new into rottenness; but rather made by the proper hand
of God, animated by his bounty, and redeemed by his Grace.

I wonder at this, that they should call man a little world, since the least of
his thoughts is able to sign out it is expansion beyond a thousand worlds. True
it is that he was made of Earth, Though he be made of clay, the workmanship
is yet all divine.
but the Master which has made him, having also drawn himself in the middle
of his work (as did Phidias) renders him, more admirable than the Heavens. One
might also judge at first view, that the greatest part of the creatures have
many more Prerogatives then he. But contrarily the heavens, the Stars, and all
that nature has most precious, have in no sort correspondence or equivalence
to his grandeurs: let us see the proof on it.

I grant that the Sea may make us admire equally both it is vastness of Empire,
and efficacy of power, the least tear of repentance which a Man sheds is a
thousand times more admirable, since it remounts even to the source of that
grace, which produced it, and consequently beyond the Heavens. I grant that the
Air fills all, and its emense nature permits no vacuity, The heart of man is so
vast, and spacious, that God only can fill it.
through the whole universe. The heart of man carries him far higher, being
never able to find satisfaction in it is desires, if it is Creators-selfe, though
without measure, be not its measure. Let the Fire always greedy and ambitious,
scale the heavens in appearance with continual action by the vain attempts of
its ejaculations; The least sparckle of the fire of divine love wherewith man
may be enflamed is so pure and so noble, A man who loves God with all his
heart, lives upon earth in the same fashion, as they live in heaven.
that one can not conceave an example of its perfection. Suppose the
transparent heavens have no matter, then that of other form, and they render
themselves thus wonderful in their simplicity, as in their course still
equal, and still continual: the spirit of man is infinitely more excellent in
its nature, and much more noble also in its actions, since it works without
selfe-motion, but with a manner so divine, that its thoughts carry it every
where without change of state or place. Be it that the Sun all mavelous in
himself, and his effects produces nothing but wonders. The Sun of reason,
wherewith man is illuminate, is wholly miraculous, since it operates in a
divine semblable manner: The reason of man is a ray beaming from the Sun of
Divinity.
the virtue of other creatures vegetable, and sensitive is inseparably adjoined
also to the body of man, as its material: Insomuch that he contains in a
degree of eminence above all the creatures of the world, Man has some titles
of Nobility, to which the very Angels themselves cannot pretend.
more perfections himself alone, then all they together have ever possessed.
And I shall well say more yet. That Man has certain puissances of disposition
to elevate himself so high in his humility, that the Angels shall be below him.

If man were again to be sold, who could ransom him as he cost?
But if I shall yet moreover poize Man, in the balance of the Cross of his
Savior, and set him at the price of the blood, wherewith he was redeemed,
which of the creatures, or rather, which of the Angels, will be so bold, to
dispute the preeminence?

Great Kings Remember then, that you are Men: but more admirable in your
governments, then the Sea in its vastness. Remember that your are Men, but
also capable to purify the Air, by one only sigh, though even that sigh be
made of nothing else. A man makes himself above all things, if he under value
them with misprize.
Remember that you are Men, but a thousand, thousand times yet more noble then
the Fire, since the Seraphins burn incessantly with those divine Fires,
wherewith your hearts may be enflamed. Remember that you are Men: but more
perfect then the Heavens, since they were not created, but to power upon heads
their benign influences. Remember that you are Men, Man is an abridgement
rather of the marvels of heaven, than of the miracles of earth.
but more mavelous without comparison, then the Sun; since your Reason is a
divine light, which can never suffer Eclipse, but by opposition from a
^oluntary depravednesse. Remember that you are Men: but also destined to
command over all other living crea^ures. Remember that you are Men: but also
kneaded as it were, by the hand of one All-powerfull, formed after his Image,
and redeemed by his blood, what can one say more?

If a man did often muse of the end, for which he was created, he would
therein set up his rest for all the inquietudes of the world.
Unto what a point of Glory have ^hou then elevated me, O sweet Sa^iour? in
abasing thy self even to the grave. After thou had formed me of ^arth, thou
have also taken the same ^orme for to resemble me in all things. Thou I say, O
my God, whose infinite greatness, cannot admit only the very admiration of
the Separphins, ^ut through the Traverse of the Veil of their ordinary
submissions. What ^rodigie of bounty is this! Cause ^e then O Lord, if it
please thee, that may estimate my self at the price, which thou have ransomed
me for and that in such sort, that I may live no more, but in loving thee, to
dye also one day of the same disposition* Let me be humbly-haughty, carrying
the lineaments of thy resemblance that I may always follow thee though not
able to imitate thee This is that, which I will continually implore thee for,
until thou has^ heard my vows.

I advow now, O Mercury Trimegistus, that thou have reason to publish that Man
is a great miracle, The magnificence of man has neither bounds nor limits,
since God is his end.
since God himself has been willing to espous^ his condition, to show us in
its mise^ries the miracles of his Love.

I confess Pythagoras, that thou have had no less ground to maintain^ that
Man was a mortal God, Though a man still fade away, he is yet a lively
pourtray of immortallitie.
since except this sweet necessity, which sub^jects him to the Tomb, he has
thousand qualities in him all immo^^tall. I should finally have been (...)
advise with thee Plato then, when tho^ preachedst, every where, that Man was of
the race of the Gods, since (...) piece of work so rare, and so perfect could
not proceed but from a hand Omnipotent, All the creatures are admirable, as the
effects of a sovereign and independent cause: but man has attributes of an
unparalleld glory.
I mean this Rivelet of admiration could not proceed but from a source most
adorable. I am of thy opinion Plotinus, and henceforth will maintain every
where with thee, that Man is an abridgement of the wonders of the world: Since
that all the Univers together was created but for his service, and pleasure.
Say we yet moreover, that those wonders of the world, so renowned, are but the
works of his hands; so that also the actions of his spirit can take their Rise
above the Sun, and beyond the heavens, and this too now in the chains of its
servitude.

Great Kings, Be it supposed that you are living pourtraits of Inconstancy: Man
flies away by little and little, from one part of himself, shat he may
entirely into himself.
The perfection of your Nature lies in this defect of your powers, for this
Vicissitude, which God has rendered inseparable to your condition, is a pure
grace of his bounty: since you wax old only, that you may be exempted from the
tyranny of Ages: since (I say) you dye every moment, only to make acquisition
of that immortallity, to which his love has destined you.

This defect of inconstrancie is the perfection of man; since he ischangeable
to day to be no more so to morrow.
O happy Inconstancy! if in changing without cease, we approach the poin^ of
our sovereign felicity, whose foundations are immovable. O dear Vicissitude!
if row ling without intervall in the dust of our original, we approach by
little and little, to thos^ Ages of glory, which beyond a^ time assign at our
End, the beginnin^ of a better Carreere. O Gloriou^ Death, since terminated at
that crue^ instant, A man is only happy in the perpetual inconstancy of his
condition
which separates us from Immortality.

It is true, I confess it again, Gre^^ Kings, that you are subject to all the
sad accidents of your subjects; The greatest misery that can arrive to a man,
is to offend God.
Bu^ what happiness is it, if these misfo^tunes are as so many several waye^
which conduct you into the Port. B^^ it granted, that you are nothing b^^
Corruption in your Birth, Misery (...) your Life, and a fresh infection (...)
many attributes of honor to yo^^ since you disroabe your selves in t^^ grave
of all your noisomnesse, for (...) Deck your selves with the ornamen^ of
Grace, of felicity and glory, whi^^ belong in proper to your souls, as being
created for the possession of all these Good Things.

Heaven, 'Earth, Nature, the very Devils are admirers of the greatness of man.
Who can be able to dimension the greatness of Man; since he who has neither
bounds nor limits, would himself be the circumference of it? Would you have
some knowledge of Man's power? hear the commandment which Iosuah made to the
Sun, to stop in the midst of his carreere. Would you have witnesses of his
strength, Samson presents you all the Philistines buried together under the
^uines of the Temple, whose foundations he made to totter. Require you some
assurances of his courage? Job offers you as many as he has sores upon his
body. In fine, desire you some proofs of his happiness. Heaven has sewer of
Stars, then of felicities to give him. Man may be whatsomever he will be,
What name then shall we ^ttribute him now, that may be capable to comprehend
all his glory? There ^s no other then this of Man; and Pilate did very worthily
(no doubt) to turn ^t into mockage before the Jews; John 19.5.
he ^hews them a God under the visage of Ecce homo. Behold the Man.
a Man. Let the world also expose the miseries of Man in public; The name Man
is now much more noble than that of Angels.
His Image of Earth is yet animated with a divine spirit, which can never
change Nature. Well may they tear his bark, the Inmate of it is of proof
against the strokes of Fortune, as well as the gripes of Death. The Man of
Earth may turn into Earth; but the Man of heaven takes his flight always into
heaven. With what new rinds some-ever a man he covered, he bears still in his
sorehead the marks of his Creator.
That Man I say, fickle and inconstant, kneaded and shaped from dirt, with the
water of his own tears may resolve, into the same matter: But this stable and
constant Man, created by an omnipotent hand, remains uncessantly the same, as
incapable of alteration.

Rouse then your selves from sleep great Princes, He that would always muse
of Eternity, would without doubt, acquire its glory.
not for to remember Death but rather to represent unto your selve^ that you
are immortal, since Death has no kind of Dominion over you^ Souls, which
make the greatest, as being the Noblest part of you.

Awake then great Monarchs, not for to Muse of this necessity, which drawn you
every hour to the Tomb: bu^ rather to consider, that you may exempt your
selves from it, if your Actions be but as sacred as your Majesty's.

Man ia a hidden treasure, whose worth God only knows.
Great PRINCES Awake, and permit me once more to remembrance You that you are
Men, I mean the Masterpieces of the works of God; since this divine
worke-Master has in conclusion metamorphosed himself into his own work, My
feathered pen can fly no higher.

Man only is she ornament of the world.
Those which have propounded that Man was a new world, have, found out
proportionable relations, and great correspondencies of the one to the other,
for the Earth is found in the matter whereof he is formed, the Water in his
^eares, the Air in his sighs, the Fire ^n his Love, the Sun in his reason,
and the Heavens in his imaginations. But the Earth subsists and he vanishes,
(...) Sweet vanishment! since he is lost (...) himself, that he may be found
in is Creator, But the Earth remains ^^me, and his dust flies away: O hap^y
flight, since eternity it it is aim! The ^ater, though it fleets away, yet
returns ^e same way, and ret orts upon it is own paces: Man may be said to be
happy in being subject to all mishaps.
But Man contrarily being settled upon the declining stoop of his ruin, rouls
insensibly without intervall to the grave, his prison. Death is a grace rather
than a pain.
O dear ruin (...) O sweet captivity! since the soul recovers her freedom,
and this Sepulture serves but as a Furnace to purifi^^ his body. The Air,
although it corrupt, is not for all that destroyed, the corruption of Man
destroys its material. O glorious destruction, since i^steades him as a fresh
disposition to render him immortal. The Fire, thoug^ it fairly devour all
things, is yet preserved still it self, to reduce all the World into Ashes:
But Man perceive himself to be devoured by Time, with out ability ever to
resist it. Oh ben^ficiall Impotence, since he finds h^^ Triumph in his
overthrow! The ^el^citic of man in this world consists in the nec^ssity of
death.
the Sunn^ causes always admiration in its o^dinary luster, but Man's reason
is impaired in the course of Times. Oh we^come impairement, since Time ruin^ it
but only in an Anger, knowing the it goes about to establish its Empire beyond
both time and Ages. In find the Heavens may seem to wax old (...) their
wandering course: How happy is man in decaying evermore since he thus at last
renders himself exempt from all the miseries which pursue him.
they yet appear the same still every day, as they were a thousand years
a'gon: Man from moment to moment differs from himself, and every instant
disrobes him somewhat of his Being. Oh delightful Inconstancy, since all his
changes make but so many lines, which abut at the Center of his stability.

A long life is a heavy burden to the soul, since it must render an account
of all its moments.
How mysterious is the Fable of Narcissus; the Poets would persuade ^^s, that
He became selfe-enamoured, ^^ewing Himself in a Fountain. But (...) am
astonished, how one should become amorous of a dunghill, though ^overed with
Snow or Flowers. A face cannot be formed without Eyes, Nose, and Mouth, and yet
every of these ^arts make but a body of Misery, and Corruption as being all
full of it.

This Fable intimates us the repre^ntment of a fairer truth, since it in^^tes a
Man to gaze himself in the ^ountaine of his tears, thus to become morous of
himself, not for the li^eaments of dust and ashes, whereof ^s countenance is
shaped, but rather of ^ose beauties and graces, wherewith his soul is
ornamented, and all these together make but a rivelet, If a man could
contemplate the becauties of his soul in innocence he would always be
surprised with us love.
which leads him to the admiration of that source from whence they took their
original.

Oh how David was a wise Narcissus! then when he made of his Tears a Mirror,
If a man would of en view himself in the tears of his repentance, be would
soon become a true self^over.
so to become enamored of himself, for he was so selfe-loving in his
repentance, that in this He spent both days and nights, with unparelleled
delights.

But if Narcissus ship-wrack't himself in the fountain of his
selfe-fondnesse; This great King was upon point to Abyss himself in the Sea
of his t^eres, All the vain objects of the world are so many fountains of
Narcissus, wherein prying men may sh^pwracke themselves.
for their liquid Crystalline showed him to himself so beautiful, that he
burned with desire thus to drown himself.

Ladies vie^ your selves in this Mirror, since you are ordinarily slaves to
your own selve love. You will be fair at what price soever; see here is the
means. The Crystal Mirror of your tears flatter not, contemplate therein
the beauty of this grace, which God has given you to bewail your vanities,
This is the only ornament which can render you admirable All those deceitful
Chrystals, Tears are the faithfullest Mirours of penitence.
which you wear hanged at your Girdles, show you but fained beauties whereof
Art is the workmistresse and cause, rather then your visages: Would ye be
Idolaters of the Earth which you tread on? your bodies are but of Dirt; but if
you will have them endeared, where shall I find terms to express their
Noysomnesse? Leave to Death his Conquest, and to the Worms their heritage, If
Ladies would take as much care of their souls as of their bodies, they would
not hazard the loss both of one and to'ther.
and search your selves in that original of Immortality, from whence your
souls proceed, that your actions may correspond to the Nobleness of that
cause. This is the most profitable counsel which I can give You: It is time to
end this Chapter.

Great Kings I serve you this Morning instead of a Page, to awake You, and
remembrance You that you are Men: I mean, Subjects to Death, and consequently
destinated to serve as a Prey to the Worms, a Shittle-cocke to the Winds, and
matter for to form an object of horror and astonishment to you altogether.
Muze a little, that your life passes away as a Dream; The meditation of our
nothingnesse, is a sovereign remedy against vanity.
think a little that your thoughts are vain; consider at the same time, that
all that is yours passes and flies away. You are great, but this necessity of
Dying equals you to the least of your subjects. Men are so near of blood
together, that all bear the same name.
Your powers are dreadful, but a very hand-worme mocks at 'em: your riches are
without number, but the most wretched of men carry as much into the grave as
you. In fine, may all the pleasures of Life make a party in Yours, yet they are
but so many Roses, whose prickles only remain to you at the instant of Death.
Man has nothing so proper to him, as the misery to which he is borne.
The horror which environs You, chaseth away your greatnesses, the weakness
which possesses you, renders unprofitable your absolute powers, and only then
in that shirt, which rests upon your back, are comprised all the treasures of
your Coffers. Are not these verities of importance enough to break your sleep?

If the earth be our mother, heaven is our father.
I awake you then for to remembrance you this last time, that you are Men: but
destined to possess the place of those evil Angels, whose Pride concaved the
Abysses of Hell: that you are Men, but much more considerable for the
government of your reason, then your Kingdom. That you are Men, but capable to
acquire all the felicities of Heaven, if those of the Earth are by you
disdained. That you are Men, but called to the inheritance of an eternal
Glory, if you have no pretense to any of this world.

Lastly, that you are Men: but the living images of an infinite and omnipotent
one. Though the body and soul together make up the man: there is yet as much
d^fference between the one and the other, as between the sc^bberd and the sword.
Clear streams of immortality remount then to your eternal source. fair
rays of a Sun without Eclipse rejoyne your selves then to the body of his
celestial light. Perfect patterns of the divinity, unite your selves then to
it, as to the independent cause of your Being. Well may the Earthquake under
your feet, your wills are Keys to the gates of its abysses: should the Water
or'e-whelme again all, your hopes cannot be shipwrack't. That the Air fills
all things may be, but your expectations admit of some vacuum. Though the Fire
devour all things; the object of your hopes is above its flames, let the
heavens pour down in a throng, Although the puissaences of the soul, work
not but by the senses, the effects in this point are more noble then the cause
their malignant influences here below: your souls are under covert from their
assaults. Let the Sun exhaling vapors make thereof thunders for your ruin:
you are under the protection of him who ejaculates their flashes; Man needs
fear nothing, being a^evated above a.l.
insomuch that instead of hurting you, all things do you homage. The Earth
supports you, the Water refreshes you; the Air imbreaths you, the Fire warmes
you; Man could not be more happy then be is, since God is his last felicity.
the Sun lights you, and Heaven attends you; the Angels honor you, the Devils
fear you, Nature obeyes you, and God himself gives himself to you to obliege
you to the like reciprocation. Is not this to possess with advancement all the
felicities, which you can hope? I dare you to wish more.

A wake thy self then Reader, and let thy conscience and thy misery each in
its turn serve thee as a Page every morning to put thee in mind, That thou art
a Man, To dye is proper to man.
I mean a pourtraict animated with Death, rather then with Life, since thou
can do nothing but dye, but in this continual dying, amid the throng of
evils and pains which are enjoined to thy condition; Consider also that thou
art created to possess an Eternity both of life and happiness, How happy is
man, thus to be able to be as much as he desires.
and that all these infinite good things are exposed as an aim of honor and
glory to the addresses of thy will; for if thou will, Paradise shall be thine,
though Hell gape at thee; Heaven shall be thy share, it is delights thy
Succession, and God alone thy Sovereign felicity.

A PROLVSIVE upon the EMBLEM of the second Chapter.
SWell on unbounded Spirits, whose vast hope,
Scorns the straight limits of all moderate scope.
Be Crescent still, fix not in the Positive,
Graspe still at more, reach the Superlative;
And beyond that too, and beyond the Moon;
Yet all is but vain, and you shall find too soon,
These great acquists are bubbles for a spurt,
And Death will leave you nothing but your Shirt.
Be Richest, Greatest, Pow'rfullest, and Split,
Fames Trumpet with the blast on it, there is it,
That Is all, a Coffin, and a Sheet, and then,
You're dead, and buried like to Common men,
This Saladine foresaw, and wisely stoopes
Unto his Fate, 'midst his triumphant troops.
A world of wealth, and Asiaticke Spoils,
Guerdon his glorious military toils
Ensigns, and Banners shade his armies Eyes
With flying Colors of fled enemies:
Yet humbly he does his chief Standard rear
Only his Shirt displayed upon a Spear.
Meanewhile his valorous Colonels were clad
In rich Coate-armours, which they forced had
From subdu'de foes, and't seemed a glorious thing,
Each man to be apparreld like a King,
The very common Soldiers outside spoke,
Commander now, and did respect provoke.
Their former ornaments were cast aside,
Which before the victory were al theirpride.
To check their Pomp; with clang'ring trumpetsound
A Herald loud proclaim's in Tone profound:
See what the Emperor does present your Eye,
It Is all, that you must look for when you dye.
This Shirt is all even Saladine shall have
Of all his Trophy's with him to the grave.
Then be not over-heightned with the splendor
Of your rich braveries, which you so much tender.
Nor let your honors puff you, least you find
The breath of Eame jade ye with broken wind.
This solemn passage of this Monarchs story
With greatest luster does advance his glory.
Victorious SALADINE caused to be Proclaimed to all his
Army that he carried nothing with him to the
Grave but a SHIRT after all his Conquests.


THE MIRROVR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. II.
The horror and misery of the grave, makes the hair stand on end to the
proudest.
ARrogant spirits, ambitious Hearts be silent, and lend an ear to the public
cry of this Herald, who with a voice animated with horror and affright, as
well as with compassion and truth, proclaims aloud, in the view of heaven and
earth, and in the presence of a world of people; That this Great SALADINE,
magnificent Conqueror of Asia, and Monarch of the whole East, carries away to
the grave for fruit of his victories but only a shirt, which covers the mould
of his body, and even this scrap of linen too, Fortune leaves him, but to give
the worms.

Absolute Kings, puissant Sovereigns, what will you reply to these discourses,
for to you they are addressed? I doubt well, that shame, confusion and
astonishment, bar your speech, This necessily of dying, serves for
temperament to the vanity of the greatest Monarchs of the world.
and that this sensible object of your proper miseries, affects you so with
ruth, to force from your bosoms a thousand sighs. The greatest Monarch of the
earth becomes at a clap so little, as not to be found, no, not in his miseries,
for the wind begins already to carry away the dust whereof he was formed. The
powerfullest King of the world, is reduced to such a point of weakness, that
he cannot resist the worms, after vanquishment and subjugation of entire
Nations. The richest Prince of the East, takes a glory of all his treasures, to
carry away but only a shirt to his Sepulture. What can you answer to these
verities?

This famous Saladine, the terror of men, the valor of the earth, and the
wonder of the world, Man cannot complain of the world, since at his death he
gives him a shirt, which at his birth, his mother Nature refused him.
esteems himself so happy, and so advantaged by fortune, in respect she
leaves him this old ragge to cover his corruption, that he makes this favor,
to be published with sound of trumpet, in the midst of his Army, that none
might be in doubt on it: what beyond this can be your pretentions? I grant you
may be seated like Xerxes, upon a Throne all of massy gold, canopied with a
glistering firmament of precious stones; and that on what side somever you
turn your menacing regards, you see nothing but objects humbled before your
Royal Majesty's. You never seat your selves upon these Thrones of
magnificence, but as it were, to take leave of the assembly, All the speeches
of Men are but discourses of adieu and leave-taking, since every day be marches
straight forward toward Death.
continuing still to give your last God-bwyes, like a man who is upon point to
depart continually, since he dies every moment. Insomuch, that all this Pomp
which accompanyes, you, and which gives shadow to the luster wherewith you are
environed, vanishes away with you, and all those who are its admirers, and
idolaters, run the same fortune, being of the same nature.

Be it from me granted, that the report of your glory, admits no vacuity, no
more then the Air does, and that your name is as well known as the Sun, and
more redoubted then the thunder. This voice of renown is but as the sound of a
Bell, To what purpose does the renown of a Man make a noise in the world? the
noise ^e^seth, the renown passes.
which redoubles a noise to its own detriment, to advertise those that doubt
on it; and this name so famous, and dreadful, finding no memory here below to
the proof of ages, buryes it self at last, in the nothingnesse of its
beginning.

Be it again, that all the Gold of the Indies can be valewed but to a part of
your Estate, and that all the world together, possess less treasure then you
alone; what advantage think you to bear away, more then the most miserable of
the world, that in this you should be vain? Enjoyes not he the same Sun
which lights you? has not he the same usage of the Elements, The tranquillity
of the mind and the health of body, are the only riches of the world.
whereof you make use? But if you have more then he, a gloriousness of
apparel, and a thousand other superfluous things (which are altogether
estranged to virtue, as being imaginary goods, whose appearance alone is the
only foundation) he may answer you with Seneca, that with whatsomever
coverture a Man hides the shame of his nakedness, he shall pass for
well-clothed among wise men. And to come to the point; a Man has always
enough wherewith to follow his way, and to finish his voyage. The surplus is
but a burden of cares, which are metamorphosed into so many briars, when Death
would discharge us of them. Besides, Riches consists but in opinion, though
their treasures be palpable and sensible. A man is Rich, equal to that which
he believes himself to be. He is the most rich, who is most conient.
And though he has nothing, this Grace wherewith he is treasured, to find
rest in his miseries, is above all the Gold of the world.

What difference think you there is betwixt the Rich and the poor? both the
one and the other, are equally pilgrims and travelers, and go alike to the
same place. Then, if the Rich pass through the fairer way, they rencounter
when they dye, All Mortals togeth^r make a dance of blind men, who in dancing
run to death without s^^^g the way they pass.
all the thorns of those roses which they have past upon. There is no arrival
to the Haven of the grave, without being tempested sooner or later, in the
storm of those miseries, which accompany us. And me thinks it is a comfort, to
suffer in good time those evils, which we cannot avoid.

Rich-ones, how miserable do I hold you, if the goods of the earth be your
only treasures! Rich-ones, how unhappy are you, if your felicities be but of
Gold, The treasure of good works only inriches us eternally.
and Silver! Rich-ones, how you compel my pity of your greatnesses, if you
have no other titles then those of your Lord-ships! Richones, how frightfull
only at the hour of Death are your names, since the misery, wherein you are
borne, accompanyes you in the sepulcher.

True it is, that the Air of the Region where you dwell, may be very
temperate, the Seasons of it fair, and the lands fertile: but you consider
not, that while you live, you often sigh back the air which you receive; that
this sweet time, which smiles on you, entraines you in flying to the season of
tears, The content of riches is like an odor ferous fume, but it passes, and
so does their enjoyment also, and there is all.
and that very soon the dunghill of your bodies shall perhaps render the lands
yet more fertile.

The Rich Men of the world have done naught but pass away with the ages, that
gave them birth: you are borne in this, and this very same goes away, and leads
you with it, and all the rest of Men, without skilling what you are, or in what
fashion you are vested, well may you possess an infinite number of treasures;
you must always trot, and rise as soon in the morning as others: but if you
play the slugs, and sleep too long, It Is strange, whether we shift place and
s^at or no, we yet run incessantly to Death.
Death comes in the end to awake you, and interrupt your repose with an
eternal disquiet. What will you say to this? The fable of Midas comprehends in
it important verities; Apollo grants him all that he demands, he satiates the
appetite of his unmeasurable ambition by the virtue which he gives to his
touch, to be able to turn all things into gold. See him now rich for a day,
his hands are as new Philosophers-stones, which make the grossest, and most
impure metals, change both nature, To what purpose is it to be environed with
riches? they are a strange kind of good, whereof one can enjoy the usage but
for a moment only.
and price, he sees himself enrounded in a moment with so great a number of
treasures, that he begins to apprehend the enjoyment of those goods, which he
desired with so much passion; and from fear he comes to astonishment: then,
when pressed with hunger, all the Viandes which he touches with his hands, lips,
or tongue, are metamorphosed into Gold. O inseparable amazement, from a mortal
grief, caused by a semblable regreet, that he could not limit his ambition,
but to the desire of his own ruin!

Rich-men, you are as so many Midasses, since with all your treasures, you
never importune heaven for any other thing, but to increase their number, to
which effect you destinate your cares, your watchings, and your labors. But
make no more imploring vows; behold your selves at last heard. The glistering
of your riches dazles me, your greatnesses and magnificences give you
cheerful tincture; yet let us see the reverse of the Medall.

After your so many strong wishes for Gold and Silver, The covetous grows
poor in measure as he grows rich, since in increasing his treasures,
increases the famine of his insatiable avarice, and thus of what he possesses
he enjoyes nothing.
their treasures remains to you for to satiate, at least in dying, the unruled
appetite of the ambition of your life. Riches I say environ you on all sides,
after your so passionate covetize of them. But in this last instant, their
possession is the saddest object, which can be presented to your thoughts. And
notwithstanding it is the only nourishment which rests to you, amid the hunger
which torments you uncessantly, as if for punishment of part of your crimes,
heaven did permit, that the instruments of your pleasures, A Man carries away
nothing with him at his Death, but either a regreet or else a satisfaction of
an evil or a good Life.
should also be the same of your punishments, considering the greatness of
your miseries, by that of your unprofitable treasures: for after all you must
dye, and though you carry with you this desire, to bear away with you your
riches into the tomb, they remain in your coffers, for to serve as witnesses
to your heirs, of the vanity of their enjoyment.

The Silke-wormes, which have so much trouble to spin out their mouths their
little golden threads, think to stablish to themselves a shelter of honor, to
the proof of all sorts of atteints, and on the contrary, they warp the web of
their own ruin. Just so is it with the Rich-ones of the world, who an
ingenious industry, To what effect is it to seek repose in this world? it is
never to be sound but in God.
employ all their assayes, to lay solid foundations here below of an immortal
life, and yet all their actions cannot but terminate in an end contrary to
their designs; since they search Eternity in the circles of Ages, always in
revolution, and repose in the perpetual instability of all worldly things.
Insomuch, that they trouble themselves to suffer much, and all their cares and
pains, are but as fresh sowings of See the ambiguity of the French word
Soucies, in the first Chapter.
Marigolds, which dying in their gardens, respring in their hearts, there to
dye never. Behold the end of their jorney-worke.

Treasures, to what effect serve you me, if I must enter all naked into the
grave? Pleasures, what becomes of your sweets, if my last sighs are but
bitterness? Grandeurs of this life, in what stead you me, if you cannot exempt
me from the miseries of Death?

LORD, I am rich enough in that I serve for an object of pity to thy adorable
Providence, whose o're-liberall bounty furnishes me for all my days
nourishment enough to pass them, what can I wish more? on what side somever I
take my way, to go the course of Death, Heaven is an object of consolation to
the most miserable.
I can never loose from view the heavens, which are the Gates of thy Palace.
Insomuch, as if any thing fail me, I have but to strike there with my regards,
thou art always upon a ready watch, to succor the miserable. Supply me then,
O LORD, if it please thee, with thy ordinary charities, and since that hope
dies after me, I will rather cease to be, then to hope in thee. These are the
strongest resolutions of my soul.

We beg of God every day new favors, and every day we render our selves
unthankefull for those we have received.
We read of the children of Israel. that having received of God and infinity of
riches, at their coming out of the red Sea, by the wrack of their enemies,
they made of their treasures, Idols, and joining in this sort Idolatry to
Ingratitude, they erected altars to their brutality, since under relief of a
brute beast, they represented their God.

But leave we there the children of Israel, and speak of the Fathers of
BABYLON, I mean those wicked rich ones of the world, to whom God has done so
great favors, in heaping them with so many goods. Are not they every day
convicted of Idolatry, in their unacknowledgement, since the coffers of their
treasures are the Idols of their temples? Are we worthily Christians, when
idolatry is more familiar to us then to infidels, since we make idols of all
the objects of our passions?
More beasts then brutes, in their voluntary depravednesse; they offer incense
to their brutish passions; and no otherwise able, but to erect them secret
altars in their souls, they there sacrifice every hour a thousand sighs of an
unsatiable ambition. Insomuch, that the God of heaven is the God of their
dissimulation, and the Calfe of Gold, the God of their belief and opinion.

Say we then boldly, that the objects of our passions are Golden Calve^ to us,
since our hearts become their Idolaters. One here will sigh for love of
honors, as well as for his Mistress with design to hazard a thousand lives,
and as many souls, for the conquest of their vain felicities: and see here
his idolatry, making his God of these Chimera's of honor, which vanish away
like a Dream, at the rouzing up of our reason.

What folly is it, to seek repose in the world, which subsists only in
revolution?
Another there, will lose quite and clean, all the peace wherein he is of a
quiet life, for to set up a rest purely imaginary in the amassement of
treasures. And of heaven hearing his votes, with design to punish him, give
some favorable success to his cares, and watchings, he becomes and Idolater
now indeed, an Idolater of those goods, which as yet he adored but in hope, and
renders himself miserable, for having desired too ardently felicities, which
only bear the voice to be so, but their usage and possession may prove as
dangerous upon the earth, as Rocks within the Sea.

The goods of the earth are right evils, and at Death each one shall so
experiment 'em.
One will have his heart wounded, and his Soul atteinted with a new trick of
ambition, and as all his desires and thoughts are terminated to the objects of
his designs, he is never in health, while the fever of his passion is
continual. I leave you to consider of what ratiocination he can be capable,
during the malady of his spirit. All sorts of ways seem equally fair unto
him, for to guide him unto the port whither he aspires, having no other aim
but this to acquire, a^ what rate somever that good whereof he is in Quest; and
of this Good, it is where of he makes his Idol, after a shameful immolation of
the best days of his Life, to the anxieties of its possession.

Another will establish his repose in the turmoyle of the word, turning his
spirit to all winds, to be under cover^ from the tempests of fortune. Blind as
he is, he follows this Goddess with the hoodwinckt eyes. Wavering as he is,
he aspires but after the favors of this inconstant Deity, of which he is
secretly an idolater, but if perchance she elevate him very high, there is no
more hazard of his fall, the laws o^ this necessity are inviolable, and one
cannot avoid the rigor of them, if not avoiding their servitude. Insomuch that
after he has sneak't himself a long time amongst the grandeurs of the earth,
he finds himself enlabyrinthed in the miseries, wherein he is borne, without
possessing any thing in propriety, but the usance of a puff of wind, which
enters once again at last into his entrals, to force thence the last sigh. And
thus he becomes the Victime of the Idol of his passions, without purifying
never the less from the sacrifice of his life, the soil of those offerings,
which he has made upon the altars of Vanity. Behold the sad issue of this
Dedalean labyrinth, wherein so many of the world take pleasure to intricate
themselves in.

O how Rich is he, LORD, who has thy love and fear for his treasure? O how
happy is he, If the fruition of all the world together were to be sold, it were
not worth so much trouble as to open the mouth only to say, I will not buy it.
who has for object of felicity the contempt of these things of the world! O
how Contented is he, who thinks always of eternal delights! To have many
riches for a hundred years, is not this to possess at the end of that term a
Good, which is as a good, as never to have been. To taste greedily the sweets
of every sort of prosperity, during the reign of a long life; is it not
already to dye by little and little for grief to abandon them, since in flying
away, they intraine us into the grave. To pant continually for joy in the
presence of a thousand pleasures, is it not to prepare in one's breast, the
matter of as many griefs? since every contentment is a disposition to a kind of
martyrdom, by the necessary and infallible privation of its sweets, whereof
while we taste on it, it menaceth us. In fine, to have all things at wish, is it
not to possess vain businesses, since the world has nothing else to offer us?
The riches which Fortune gives and takes away again when she will, A wicked
rich Man is much astonished at his Death, to have his conscience void of good
works, and his coffers full of money, since with all the gold of the world, he
cannot purchase the grace of the least repentance.
can never enrich a Man, it behooves him to seek his treasure in the mines of
his conscience, so to be under covert from sin; for otherwise he runs the
same hazard, as of the goods which he possesses, I mean in their decay, to
loose himself with them. The prosperities of the earrh, are once more fresh
flowers of the garden, fair to the eye, and of good sent, but it is to much
purpose to gather them, and make nose-gayes; in holding them one holds nothing,
because their fragility renders them so slipperie, that they 'scape both from
our eyes and hands, and though their flight be slow, one day only is all their
durance. The pleasures of the world are of the same nature, I grant they may
have some agreeableness to charm our senses, yet 'twere too vain to vaunt of
their possession, though one enjoyes them, for so much as they slip away, The
arrival of pleasures annunciates us always their fueedie departure.
and vanish without cease from our eyes, like the alwayes-flitting water
trills. Their sway has so short limits, that each moment may be the term
on it. Solid contentments are only found in heaven, and the only means to
relish them beyond all sweetes, is continually to Muze on them, for having
always our spirit arrested upon meditation of an object so delitious, our
thoughts draw thence by their virtue this efficacy, to ravish us with joy. I
return to my first proposition.

The good or ill which we do, accompanies us to the grave.
That the greatest MONARCH of the world, after possession of all things to his
wish, and having led a thousand times fortune herself in triumph, upon the
territories of his Empire should in conclusion be exposed all naked in his
SHIRT, at the end of his carreere, to serve for a prey to the worms, and a
shitlecocke to the winds, certes a man must needs be very insensible, not to be
touched with affright at these truths.

The misprizall of riches, is the only treasure of life.
GREAT KINGS, if you have not other Mines of Gold more precious then those of
the India's; you shall dye as poor as you were borne: and as Tears were the
first witnesses of your misery, sighs shall be the last of your poverty,
carrying with you this regreet into the grave, to have possessed all things,
and now to find your selves in estate of enjoying nothing.

If we would acquire Heaven, we ought to have no pretense to Earth.
GREAT KINGS, if you have no other marks of sovereignty, but this of the large
extent of your territories, the tribute which your subjects shall render you at
the end of the journall, shall be very little, since the long spaces of your
Empire shall be bounded with seven foot.

GREAT KINGS, if you have no other treasures then those of the rent of your
Demeanes, all those goods are false, and the regreet of their privation too
true. The rents of virtue's demeanes are not subject to fortune.
But if you doubt of this yet, consult the dumb oracle of the Ashes of your
Ancestors, and the truth will answer for them, that they never have had any
thing more proper to them then misery, nothing more sensible then disasters,
and that with all the riches which they have enjoyed during life, they have not
been able to procure at the hour of Death, more then that piece of linen,
wherein they are inveloped.

True valor has no other object, but the conquest of eternal things.
GREAT KINGS, if you have no other Philosopher-stone but this, the Conquest
which your Valor may make, all your greatness, and all your riches, shall be
enclosed in the coffins, wherein you shall be buried. For, all that Fortune
shall give you to day, DEATH shall take from you to morrow, and the day after,
one may count you in the rank of the most miserable. I will again change tone.

What a contagious malady in this age, wherein we are, is this passion of
amassing treasures! All the world would be rich, as if Paradise were bought
with ready money, If one knew the peril of being rich, he would only be in
love with poverty.
and that the commerce of our safety were a public Bank, where the most
covetous render themselves the most happy. Every one makes bravado of his
acquists, and poyzeth his felicities to the balance of his riches, being never
able to be otherwise content, but in reference to the measure of what he is
estated in.

There one will assume a pride to have ten thousand Acres of wood, whose
revenue, nourishes his passions, and entertains his pleasures. We may call Man
a Tree, whose root is the immortal soul, and the fruits which it bears are
of the same nature either for glory or punishment.
Insomuch, that he considers not that these Trees are laden but with the fruit
of these world-miseries; and of all together he shall bear away, but the branch
of one only, which shall serve very soon for a Beer to his carcass, See in
what consists the profit of his rents, after their account made.

Another will be rich only in Meadows, and changing his hay into Gold, which
is but Earth; he fills therewith his coffers. But Fool, that he is, he thinks
not that his life is a Meadow, his body the hay thereof and Time the Mower, The
World is a Meadow, and all the objects which therein we admire, are flowers,
which fade every hour.
who by his example makes public traffic of the same merchandise, changing
by little and little the hay of his body into Earth. And is not this to be very
ingenious to cheat a man's self?

Another aim is only to be rich in buildings, some 'the' Country, some 'th'
City, and assuming vanity from the number, as well as the magnificence of his
Palaces, he believes that they are so many Sanctuaries of proof, against the
strokes of fortune, or the thunders of heaven. What a folly's this, to esteem
ones self happy, for having diverse Cabbins upon earth, to put himself under
couvert from the rain, and wind, during the short journey of life? The rain
ceases, the wind is past, and life dies, and then the tempest of a thousand
eternal anguishes comes to entertain him, without possibility of discovery,
even from hope, one only port of safety. To be only rich then, in aedifices,
is to be rich in castles of paper and cards, such as little children lodge
their pety cares in.

We must build upon the unshakeable foundations of eternity, if a man would be
sheltered from all sorts of storms.
To what purpose steads it us to be richly lodged, if every hour of the day may
be that of our departure? Men trouble themselves to build houses of pleasure,
but the pleasures fade away, and we also, and these houses remain for
witnesses of our folly, and for sensible objects of sorrow, and grief, in that
cruel necessity to which we are reduced to abandon them. It is to be
considered, that we are borne to be Travelers and Pilgrims, and as such, are
we constrained to march always straight to the gist of Death, without ever
resting, or being able to find repose even in repose it-selfe. To what then are
all these magnificent Palaces, Though we say the Sun sets every night, yet
it rests not: and so Man, though he lay himself to sleep, rests not from his
voyage to Earth.
when our only retreat beats on to the grave? To what end are all this great
number of structures, when we are all in the way, and point to end our voyage?
O how well is he housed, that lodges his hope in God, and lays the
foundations of his habitation upon ETERNITY! A good conscience is the richest
house that one can have.

Another designs his treasures in numerous Shippings, traficking with all
winds, in spite of storms and tempests: but be it granted a perpetual calm
as heart could wish, and imagine we, (as himself does) that he shall fish
with Fortunes nets, all the Pearls of the OCEAN; what can he do at the end
with all his ventures? if he trucke them away, he can gain but stuff of the
same price, if he sell them, he does but change white purified earth for
yellow, which the Sun purifies as well within the mines: what will he do
now with this new merchandise, or this his gold? behold him always in trouble,
to discharge himself of so many burdens. If gold were potable, he might
perhaps nourish himself therewith for a while; but as MIDAS could not do it
in the fable, he will never bring it to pass in the verity, he must needs keep
watch then day and night to the guard of his riches; and well may he keep
sentinel, Death comes to rob him of them, since at his going out of the
world she takes them away from him. What appearance is there, that the treasures
of the Sea should be able to make a man rich, since the possession of all the
world together cannot do it. A hundred thousand ships are but a hundred
thousand shuttle-cockes for the winds, The treasure of good works, is eternal
riches.
and a hundred thousand objects of shipwreck. Suppose they arrive to the Port,
the life of their Master is always among rocks, for it is a kind of ship, which
cannot arrive at other shore, but at the bank of the grave. And I leave you to
consider what danger he may run, if there the storm of his avaricious
passion cast him. The sand-blind-sighted may foresee his ruin, and the most
judicious will believe it infallible. Behold in fine a man rich to much
purpose, Our life is a Ship, which loosing from the Haven of the Cradle, at the
moment of our birth, never comes ashore again, till it run aground upon the
grave.
that would have drayn'd by his ambition, the bottomless depths of the Ocean,
and now to find himself ith'end of his carreere, in the abysses of hell,
having an eternity of evils for recompense of an age of anxieties, which he
has suffered during his life.

LORD, if I would be rich in wood, let it be in that of thy CROSS, and from
henceforth let its fruits be my revenues, and my rents. If I would traficke in
meads; Let the meditation of the hay of my life, be my only profit. If I set
my self to build houses, He which puts his trust in God, is the richest of the
world, how poor somever he be.
let it be rather for my soul then for my body, and in such sort, that my good
works may be the stones, and the purity of my conscience the foundation. And
lastly, If I would travel the Seas, to go to the conquest of their treasures:
let my tears be the waves thereof, and my sighs the winds, and thy grace
alone, the only object of my riches.

Make me then rich, O LORD, if it please thee, by the only misprise of all the
treasures of the Earth, It Is already a sufficient enjoyment of rest and quiet,
to set up ones rest in God only.
and teach this secret language to my heart, never to speak but of thee in its
desires, nor of other then thy self in its hopes, since of thee alone, and in
thee only lies the fullness of its perfect felicity and sovereign repose. Let
us not rest our selves in so fair a way.

I cannot comprehend the design of these curious Spirits, who go seeking the
Philosophers-stone in that Spitle, where an infinite number of their companions
are dead of regreet to have so ill employed their time. They put all they have
to the quest of that which never was, and burning with desire to acquire
wealth, they reduce all their own into cinders, and their lungs also with
vehement puffing, without gaining other recompense at the end of their labors,
but this, now to know their folly: The love of God is the only
Philosopher-stone, since by it a man may acquire eternal treasures.
but the Sun sets, the candle goes out, the bed of burial is prepared, there
must be their Enter at the Exit of so many unprofitable pains. To what purpose
serves it now, to know they are fools, having no more time to be wise.

What cruel Malady of spirit is it to sacrifice both ones body and soul in
an unluckie alymbicke, for to nourish a vain ambition, whose irregular
appetite can never be satisfied? Is not this to take pleasure in kindling the
fire which consumes us? to burn perpetually with desire of being rich in this
world, An inclination toward the misprize of Earth, is a presage of the getting
of Heaven
and yet get nothing by it: And then to burn again eternally in hell, without
possibility to quench the ardour of those revenging flames: is not this to warp
ones-selfe the web of a fate, the most miserable that ever was?

Produce we then of nothing the creation of this Philosopher-stone, and grant
we it made at present to the hearts of the most ambitious. I am content that
from the miracles of this Metamorphosis they make us see the marvels of a new
gallery of silver, like to that which bare NERO to the Capitol. I am content
that they make pendant at the point of a needle, as SEMIRAMIS, the price of
twenty millions of gold. I am content that after the example of Atabali, King
of Peru.
Atabalipas, they pave their halls with Saphirs. I am pleased, that imitating
Cyrus, they enround their gardens with perches of gold. I am content, The World
is aptly compared to the Sea, since as the storms of this, so are the miseries
of that, and like the flitting billows ever rolling, so are all the objects
which we here admire.
that the Dryades of their fountains be composed of the same material,
following the magnificences of Caesar. I am content that they erect with Pompey
an Amphitheater all covered with plates of Gold. I am content they build a
Palace of Ivory, there to to lodge another Melaus, or a Louvre of Crystal to
receive therein an other Drusus, and let (I am content still) this Louvre be
ornamented with court-cupboards of Pearls equal to those of Scaurus, and with
coffers of the same price as that of Darius. To what will all this come to in
the end? What may be the reverse of all these medals? The scortching heat of
Time, and the Suns-beames have melted this gallery of silver, its admirers are
vanished, and its proprietary. Even Rome it self has run the like fate, and
though it subsist yet, it is but only in name, its ruins mourn at this day
the death of its glory. That so precious Pendant of Semiramis could not be
exempt from a kind of Death, It Is a Rule without exception, that all that is
included in the revolution of Time, is subject to change.
though it were inanimate. I mean that in its insensibility, it has received
the attaints of this Vicissitude, which alters and destroys all things, since
it now appears no more to our eyes. All those Saphir-paved halls are passed
away, though Art had enchained them in beautiful Workemanships. They have had
otherwise a glittering luster, like the Sun; but this Planet jealous of them,
has refused in the end its clearenesse, so much as to their ruins; insomuch
that they are vanished in obscurity. These gardens environed with railes of
gold, have had (like others) diverse Spring-times, to renew their growth, but
one Winter alone was enough to make them dye. Those Dryades which enricht these
fountains are fled upon their own water-trils, and scarce remains us their
remembrance. That proud Amphitheater of Pompey could not eternize it self, but
in the memory of men, and yet we scarce know what they say, when they speak
on it. That Ivory Palace of Melaus goes for a fable in histories, being buried
in the Abisses of non-entitie. That famous Louvre of Crystal having been
bustled against by Time is broken, Meditate here a little, how often the face of
the Earth has been varied since its first creation.
and shivered into so many pieces, that not so much as the very dust on it
subsists, but in the confused Idea of things, which have been otherwhile. All
those high cup-boards of Pearl, and all those coffers of great price have
indeed had an appearance like lightning, but the thunderbolt of inconstancy
has reduced them into ashes, and the memory of 'em is preserved in ours, but
as a dream, since in effect it is no more at all.

But if the precious wonders of past Ages, There is nothing so certain in the
world, as its uncertaintie.
have done nothing but pass away together, with their admirers and owners, is
it not credible, that those covetous rich ones, did run the same fortune with
all the treasures of their Philosopher-Stone, and at the end of their Carreere,
what device could they take but this very same of SALADINE, since of all their
riches, there remains them at their Death, but only a poor Shirt, Fui, and
nibil ampliu
I have been, says this great Monarch, and behold, here is all.

Why, Rich-ones of the World, do you trouble your selves so much, to establish
your glory here below, for to perswadeus at the end of the journall only this,
That you have been? An atome has the same advantage, for this creating power,
which we adore, after he had taken it out of the Abysses of nothing, wherein
you also were buried, made it to subsist in nature. Yet thus is it a
blessedness of our condition, thus to escape by little and little the miscries
which are incident unto us.
Be it that you have been the greatest on Earth, yet now the fair light of
your fair days, is extinguish't for ever. The Sun of your glory is eclips't,
and in an eternal West. And that your fate which interloomed the web of your
greatnesses, together with your lives, lies entombed with your Ashes, to show
us that these are the only unhallowed relics which your Ambition could leave
us.

You have bin then otherwhile the only Minions of Fortune, like Demetrius, but
he and you are now no more any thing, not so much as a hand full of Ashes; for
less then with an Infinite power, 'twere impossible to any, to reunite into a
body, the parcels of the Dust, whereof your Carcasses were formed, behold in
what consists at this day, the foundation of your past glory.

You have bin then otherwhile the same as SALADINE, the only Monarch of the
East, and have possessed (as he) treasures without number, and honors without
parallel: If virtue eternize not our memory, our life passes away like the
wind, without leaving any trace.
But (as He) also you have done nothing else but pass away, and like him
again you have not been able to hide your wretchedness, but under a Scrap of
Linen, whereof the Worms have repasted, to manifest you to all the World.

In fine, you have been otherwhile the wonders of our days, but now you are
the horror of this present, for the only thought of the dung-heap of your
Ashes poisons my spirit, so delicate is it, and I leave farther provocation to
the incredulous, if they be willing to be stronger witnesses of it, but let
us now leave personal reflections, and trouble we not the repose of
Church-yardes.

I grant that you may be at this instant that I speak unto you, so rich and
happy, He which esteems himself rich and happy in this world, knows not the
nature of worldly happiness and riches.
that you cannot wish more of Fortune, nor She able to offer you more: Yet
thus ought you to consider where you are, who you are, and what are the goods
which you possess. You are in the World, where all things fly away, and it is
in this way of flying away, that you read these verities: my meaning is, you
dwell upon the same earth, whereof you are formed, and consequently you lodge
upon your buriall-places, whose entrances will be open at all moments. To say
who you are, I am ashamed, in calling you by your proper names, for to
remembrance you your miseries: Corruption conceaves you, Horror infants you,
Blood nourishes you, and infection accompanyes you in the Coffin. The treasures
which you enjoy are but Chimeras of greatness and apparitions of glory,
whereof living you make experiment, and dying you perfectly know the truth on it.

There is nothing so constantly present with us, as our miseries, since always
we are miserable enough at best.
To what end then can stead you your present felicities, since at present you
scarce enjoy them at all? for even at this very instant another, which is but
newly upon pass, robs you of part of them; and even thus giving you hint of
the cosenage of his companions, Cheates you too, as well as they; and thus they
do altogether to your lives, as well as your contentments; in ravishing these,
they intraine the others: then what remonstrance can you exhibit of esteeming
your selves happy for past felicities, and which you have not enjoyed but in
way of depart? And if this condition be agreeable unto you, still there is a
necessity of setting up your rest at the end of the carreere, and there it is,
where I attend to contribute to your vain waylings, as many resentments of
Pity. Take we another tracke, without loosing our selves.

How ingenious was that famous Queen of Egypt, to deceive with good grace her
Lover. How much better is it to be so happy in fishing, as to angle for grace
in the tears of penitence?
She caused underhand dead fishes to be ensnared to the hook of Antonie, as
often as the toy took him to go a fishing; to the end to make him some sport
by those pleasant deceits. May we not say that Ambition does the same? for when
we cast our hooks into this vast Ocean of the vanities of the world, we fish
but Dead things without soul, whose acquirement countervailes not a moment of
the Time, which we employ to attain it.

Had I all the goodliest fardles of the world laded on my back; I mean, had I
acquired all the honors, wherewith fortune can tickle an ambitious soul,
should I thence become greater of body? my growing time is past. would my
Spirit thence become more excellent? It Is to no purpose to be passionate for
such goods as a man may loose, and the world can give no better.
these objects are too weak to ennoble her Powers. Should I thence become more
virtuous? Virtue looks for no satisfaction out of it self. Should I thence be
more esteemed of the world? This is but the glory of a wind, which does but
pass away. What happiness, what contentment, or what utility, would remain
me then, that I might be at rest? A Man must not suffer himself thus to be
fooled. All honors can be but a burden to an innocent soul, for so much as
they are continual objects of vanity, which stir up the passions, and only
serve but for nourishment to them in their violences, to hurry them into all
sorts of extremities. And after all, the necessity of dying, which makes an
inseparable accident in our condition, gloomes the glittering of all this vain
glory, which environs us. In the anguishes of Death, a man dreams not of the
grandeurs of his life, and being ever and anon upon point to depart, finds
himself often afflicted most with those good things which he possesses, It Is
an irbosome remembrance of past happiness.
measuring already the depth of the fall by the height of the place, whither he
is exalted.

Galba.
He which found Fortune at his gate, found no nail to stay her wheel: But if
She on the one side takes a pleasure to ruin Empires, to destroy Realms, and
to precipitate her favorites: Death on the other side pardons no body, alters
the temperament of all sorts of humors, perverts the order of every kind of
habitude, and not content yet to beat down all these great Colosses of
Vanity, which would be taken for the worlds wonders, calls to the sharing of
their ruin the elements, thus to bury their materials in their first abysses,
where she has designed the place of their entombement.

All things pass away, and by their way tell us that we must do so too.
What can a Man then find Constant in the world, where Constancy does no where
reside? Time, Fortune, Death, our Passions, and a Thousand other stumbling
blocks shall never speak other language to us but of our miseries, and yet we
will suffer our selves like A. LEXANDER to be voyc'd immortal. Our
prosperities, our grandeurs, our very delights themselves, shall tell us, as
they pass, a word in our ear, that we ought not to trust them, and yet for
all this, we will never sigh but after them. Be it then at last for very
regreet, to have vented to the wind so many vain sighs, for Chimeras of sweets
whereof the remembrance can not be but full of bitterness.

no security of pleasure, to enjoy such things as may every moment be lost.
Vain honors of the world, tempt me no more: your allurements are powerful,
but too weak to vanquish me. I deride your wreaths of Laurel, there grows
more on it in my garden then you can give me. If you offer me esteem, and
reputation among men, what should I do with your presents? Time devoures every
day the like of them, and yet more precious. I undervalue all such Good-things,
as It can take away again from me.

Deceitful greatnesses of the Earth, cease to pursue me, you shall never catch
me, your charms have given some hits to my heart, but not to my soul, your
sweets have touched my senses, but not my spirit; what have you to offer me,
which can satisfy me? Time and Fortune lend you all the Scepters and Crowns
which you borrow, Worldly Greatnesses are but like Masking-clothes, which serve
him and t^ other but for that time.
and as you are not the owners, they take them away again when they will, and
not when it pleases you. So then, I will have no Scepters for an hour, nor no
Crowns for a day. If I have desire to reign, it is beyond Time, that I may
thus be under shelter from the inconstancy of Ages. Trouble not your selves to
follow me. This world is a Mass of mir^, upon which a Man may make impresse of
all sorts of Characters, but not hinder Time to deface the draught at any time.
Ambitious Spirits, fair leave have you to draw the Stell of your designs upon
this ready prim'd cloth: Some few years wipe out all. Some ages carry away
all, and the remembrance of your follyes is only immortal in your souls, by
the eternal regreet which remains you of them.

SCIPIO made design to conquer Carthage, and after he had cast the project
thereof upon mould, he afterward took the body of this shadow, and saw the
effect of his desires: But may not one say, that the Trophies of his valor
have been cast in rubbidge within that mass of dirt, whereof the world is
composed, since all the marks thereof are effaced? Carthage it self though it
never had life, could not avoid its Death. Time has buried it so deep under
its own ruins, that we seek in vain the place of its Tomb. I leave you to
ruminate, if its subduer were himself able to resist the assaults of this
Tyranny.

If ALEXANDER had sent his thoughts into heaven, there to seek a new world, as
well as his desires on earth there to find one, he had not lost his time; but
as he did amuze himself to engrave the history of his ambition and triumphs
upon the same mass of clay, which he had conquered; he writ upon water, and
all the characters on it are defaced. The Realms which he subdued, There is
more glory to despise the world, then to conquer it: for after its conquest, a
man knewes not what to do with it.
have lost some of them their names, and of this Triumpher there remains us
but the Idea as of a Dream, since men are ready to require Security, even of
his Memory, for the wonders which it preaches to us of him.

May we not then again justly avow, that of all the conditions, to which a
man may be advanced without the aid of virtue, either by nature or Fortune,
there is none more unfortunate, then to be to these a favorite, nor any more
miserable, then to be a Great-one? This inconstant Goddess has a thousand
favors to lend, All those who engage themselves to the service of fortune, are
ill paid; and of this, every day gives us experi^^^^.
but to give, none but haltars, poisons, poniards, and precipices. It Is a fine
thing to see Hannibal begging his bread even in view of Scipio, after he had
called into question the price of the worlds Empire-dome. Is it not an object
worthy of compassion, to consider Nicias upon his knees before Gillippus, to
beg his own and the Athenians lives, after he had in a manner commanded the
winds at Sea, and Fortune ashore, in a government soveraignly absolute? Who
will not have the same resentiments of pity, reading the history of Crassus,
then when by excess of disaster he survived both his glory and reputation,
being constrained to assist at the funerals of his own renown, All those who
hound after fortune, are well pleased to be deceived, since her deceits are so
well known.
and undergo the hard conditions of his enemies, attending death to free him
from servitude? Will you have no regreet, to see enslaved under the tyranny of
the Kings of Egypt, the great Agesilaus, whose valor was the only wonder of
his Time? What will you say to the deplorable Fate of Cumenes, to whom Fortune
having offered so often Empires, gives him nothing in the end but chains, so
to dye in captivity?

You see at what price Men have bought the favors of this Goddess, when many
times the serenity of a happy life produces the storm of an unfortunate
Death. You may judge also at the same time, of what Nature are these heights of
honor, when often the Greatest at Sunrise, find themselves at the end of the
Day, the most miserable. And suppose Fortune meddle not with 'em, to what
extremity of misery think you is a man reduced at the hour of his
departure? All his Grandeurs, though yet present, are but as past felicities,
he enjoyes no more the goods which he possesses, griefs only appertain to him
in proper, and of what magnificences so'ere he is environed, this object
shows him but the image of a funeral pomp, I wonder not if rich men be
afraid of death, since to them it is more dreadful then to any.
his bed already Emblemes the Sepulcher, the sheets his winding linen, wherein
he must be inveloped. So that if he yet conceit himself Great, it is only in
misery. Since all that he sees, hears, touches, smells, and tastes, sensibly
persuades him nothing else.

Give Resurrection in your thoughts, to great Alexander, and then again
conceive him at last gasp, and now consider in this deplorable estate, wherein
he finds himself involved upon his funeral couch, to what can stead him all
the grandeurs of his life past, they being also past with it. I grant that all
the Earth be his: Fortune sells every day the glory of the world to any that
will, but none but fools are her chap-men.
yet you see how the little load of that of his body weighs so heavy on his
soul, that it is upon point to fall grovelling under the burden. I grant that
all the glory of the world belong to him in proper, he enjoyes nothing but his
miseries. I yield moreover, that all Mankind may be his subjects: yet this
absolute soveraignety, is not exempt from the servitude of pain. Be it, that
with the only thunder of his voice he makes the Earth to tremble: yet he
himself cannot hold from shaking at the noise of his own sighs. I grant in
fine, that all the Kings of the world render him homage: yet he is still the
tributary of Death.

O grandeurs! since you fly away without cease, Omnis motus tendit ad quietem.
what are you but a little wind? and should I be an Idolater of a little tossed
Air, and which only moves but to vanish to its repose?

O greatnesses! since you do but pass away, what name should I give you but
that of a dream? Alas, why should I pass my life in your pursuit, still
dreaming after you?

O worldly greatnesses, since you bid Adieu to all the world, without being
able to stay your selves one only moment; Adieu then, your allurements have
none for me, your sweets are bitter to my taste, and your pleasures afford me
none. I cannot run after that which flies: Worldly Greatnesses are but
childrens trifles, every wise man despises them.
I can have no love for things which pass away; and since the world has
nothing else, it is a long while that I have bidden adieu to it. It had promised
me much, and though it had given me nothing, yet cannot I reproach it, finding
my self yet too rich by reason of its hardness. But I return to the point.

Men of the World would persuade us, that it is impossible to find any quiet
in it, to say, a firm settling of Spirit, The only means to be content, is
to settle the conscience in peace.
wherein a man may be content in his condition, without ever wishing any other
thing. And for my part, I judge nothing to be more easy, if we leave to
reason its absolute power. What impossibility can there be, to regulate a man's
will to God's? And what contradiction in it, to live upon earth of the pure
benedictions of heaven? What greater Riches can a man wish then this, to be
able to undergo the Decrees of his Fate, without murmuring and complaint? If
Riches consisted only in Gold, Diamonds, Pearls, or such like things, of like
raritie, those which have not of 'em, might count themselves miserable. But
every man carries his treasure in his conscience. He which lives without just
scandal, lives happily; and who can complain of a happy life?

Riches are of use to humane life, but not of necessity, for without them a
man may live content.
But if to have the hap of these felicities of this life, a man judge presently,
that he ought of necessity to have a great number of riches: This is to
enslave himself to his own opinion, abounding in his proper sense, and
condemning reason for being of the contrary part. I know well that a man is
naturally swayed to love himself more then all things of the world, Philautia.
and that this love proceeds from the passion of our interests, seeking with
much care and pain, all that may contribute to our contentments; and whereas
Riches seem to be Nurses of them, this consequence is incident to be drawn,
that without them is no contented living. But at first dash, it is necessary to
distinguish this love into Natural and Brutall, and believe, that with the
illumination of reason, When Reason reigns, the passions obey.
we may purify the relishes of the first, even to the point of rendering them
innocent, without departing from our interests, and consequently the enjoyment
of our pleasures, giving them for object, the establishment of our settled
content, in misprision of all those things of the world, which may destroy it.

As for this brutish Love, which estranging us from God, separates us also from
our selves; the passion of it becomes so strong by our weakness, that without
a special grace we grow old in this malady of Spirit, of contenting our
Senses, rather then obeying our Reason, making a new God of the Treasures of
the Earth. But in conclusion, these Gods abandon our bodies to the Worms, and
our souls to the Devils. And for all their riches, the greates^ Great ones can
only purchase a glorious Sepulture. Is not this a great advantage, and a
goodly consolation?

He whose will submits to Gods will, lives ever content.
Maintain we boldly, that a man may find quietness of life in all sorts o^
condition, with the only richenesse of ^tractable Soul, resigned to take the
time as it comes, and as God sends it, without ever arguing with his
providence. There is no affliction, The Spirit of a Man will bear his
infirmity.
whereto our Soul cannot give us assuage. There is no ill whereto it self is
not capable to furnish us a remedy. A man, how miserable somever, may find
his contentment amidst his miseries, if he lives for his soul more then for
his bodies behalf. God makes us to be borne where he will, and of what Parents
he pleases: if the poorness of our birth accompany us even to death, he
has so ordained it; what can we else do, but let him so do? Can he be
accounted miserable, that obey's with good grace his sovereigns decrees?

It Is a greater danger to be very rich, then very poor: for riches often make
men loose their way, but poverty keeps 'em in the straight path.
O, how is it far more easy to undergo the burden of much poverty, then of
great riches! For a man extremely poor, is troubled with no thoughts more
important, then only how to find means to pass his life in the austerities
whereto he is already habituated, without repining after other fortune, as
being estranged equally both from his knowledge and reach; in which respects,
he may well be styled happy. But a man very rich, dreams of nothing but to
eternize the continuance of his days (although this fancy be in vain) in
stead of letting them quietly slide away; insomuch, that being possessed with no
passion more then love of life, he thinks always to live, and never to die.
Death cannot be said to deceive any body, for it is infallible, and yet the
world complains of it.
But Death comes ere he thinks on it, and taking from him all to his very
Shirt, constraines him to confess, that riches are only profitable by
misprision, since by the contempt a man makes of them, he may become the
richest of the world.

O what a sensible pleasure it is to be Rich, say wordly men always! but I
would feign know, in what consists this contentment? what satisfaction can
there be had to possess much treasure, knowing what an infinite number of our
companions are reduced to the last point of poverty? Some in Hospitals, where
they lie in straw, o'rewhelmed with a thousand fresh griefs. Others at the
corner of a street, where a piece of a Dunghill serves them at once, both for
bed and board. Some again in Dangeons, where horror and affright, hunger and
despair tyrannize equally over their unfortunate spirits. And others in some
Desert, to which ill fate has confined them, to make their ills remediless, as
being far removed from all sorts of succors. There is no emptiness in
nature, for miseries fill all.
How with the knowledge of these truths, a man shall be able to relish greedily
the vain sweets of wordly riches, it must needs be for want of reason or pity,
and consequently to be altogether brutish or insensible. I shall have (suppose)
a hundred thousand crowns in rents, and all this revenue shall serve but to
nourish my body and its pleasures, without considering, that a hundred thousand
poor souls sigh under the heavy burden of their miseries every Day: and yet
men shall esteem me happy in being rich in this fate. O how dangerous are the
treasures, which produce these felicities!

It Is a brave generositie, to be sensible of other men's miseries.
Is it possible, that the Great-ones of the world do not think at all in the
middle of their Feasts, of the extreme poverty of an infinite number of
persons, and that in themselves they do not reason secretly in this sort.
What? in this instant that we satiate the appetite of our senses, with all that
Nature has produced most delicious for their entertain; a million and many
more poor souls, are reduced to this extremity, as not to have one only
crumme of bread. And in this serious thought what relish can they find in their
best-cook'd cates, and in their sweetest condiment? does not this important
consideration, mingle a little bitterness? But if their spirits estrange
themselves from these meditations, and fasten to objects more agreeable. O how
hard of digestion is the second service of their collation! He which cannot
love his neighbor, has no love for himself.

To speak ingenuously, every time when I consider in that condition, exempt
from want, wherein God has given me birth, and wherein his goodness (which is
no other then himself) keeps me still alive. I say, when I consider the misery
to which the greatest part of the world is reduced, I cannot be weary of
blessing this adorable Providence, All in God is adorable, and all
incomprehensible; we must then adore, and be silent.
which grants me to see from the haven, the tempests wherein so many spirits
are tossed: which grace to me alone (me thinks) is all extraordinary to see my
self under shelter, from so many evils, wherewith so many persons are
afflicted. By what means could I deserve, before the Creation of all things,
that this sovereign Creator should design me from the Abysses of nothing, to
give me Being, and a being moreover of grace, making me to be borne in a Golden
age, in a Christian Kingdom, and in a City of the Catholic Faith, for to be
instructed and brought up as I have been in the only Religion, wherein a man
may find his Salvation? and with all these benefits, moreover, to elevate me
above the temptations of poverty and misery.

Are not these most pure favors, which would require of this Eternal ONE,
(who has bestowed them me) the term of an Eternity, that I might be able to
arrive to some small condign acknowledgement of them? The most miserable
wretch of the world, wherein did he differ from me in way of merit of some
portion of these favors, which he possesses not; since that before time was,
he and I were nothing at all, and yet from all eternity God has bestowed
these things on me in precedencie, rather then on him? At least (say I) it did
behoove me, that since the first moment, I was capable of reason; I had
employed all those of my life past in the continual meditation of so many, and
so great benefits, whereof to reach the reason, 'twere to find the bottomes of
the Abysses of this infinite mercy, to which I remain infinitely indebted? And
coming to the point, ought not I in this pre-eminence of mine contribute all
my power to the succor of him, The nearest way from Earth to Heaven, is by
Charity.
who enjoys not my happiness, to the end, thus to deserve in a manner, some
party of them under the favor of merits from this great God, who only gives
reward to those good actions, which he makes me do. Can I refuse to be
charitable to him, who only begges some good of me, but to render me worthy of
that, which I have received from heaven? I shall have all things to my wish
amidst my pleasures, when Death it self is deaf to his plaints, in extremity
of his pains: And shall not I give him some sort of consolation, either in
good office, or in pity, being thereunto obliged by yet more powerful reasons?

Earthly greatness is the least gift of Heaven.
Great-ones of the World, you are more miserable then these miserable-ones,
even in the midst of your felicities, if the recite of their evils give you
not some touch. You have riches more then they, but God has given you these,
but to cheer their poverty. As well also, though they now are yours, shall
they take leave of you, at the Even of your depart, and if of them you carry
any thing away, it shall be only the interests of that which you have lent
these Poore-ones.

Great worldly-ones, how is your fate worthy of compassion rather then Envy,
if you have no other Paradise then your riches?

Grandees of the World, how soon will the source of your contentments dry up,
if only your treasures give it springhead?

He whose hopes are only on the world, must needs at last despair.
Great Worldly-ones! of how short endurance shall be your prosperities, though
an Age should be limit to their course, since at the end of that term you
must dye eternally, and dye in a pain always living. Suggest to your selves
often these importancies. Visit and turn over the leaf, to read more of them.

When I consider the great number of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords,
which have governed the World, and the Battles which they have given for its
conquests, since the moment of its creation, I remain all amazed, nor able to
find bounds nor measure in this amuzement. Hours, Days, Years, and Ages may
well be different, but the world is still the same.
How many several Masters may a man imagine then, that the World has had? and
how many times conquered, dividing it into diverse Empires, Kingdoms, and
Lordships? Well, yet the World has still remained the same, and in the same
place still: but its Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords, are vanished away,
one at the heels of other, and all their conquests have served them only as
matter of Passe-time, since all their combats and battles, have had no other
price of Victory, but upon the same earth, where their glories, and bodies
remain together enterred.

O goodly childish sport, to amuze themselves about conquering some little
point within the limits, wherewith the Universe is bounded! Ask but Alexander
what he has done with the bootyes of his Conquest. When he had taken away
all, he had yet nothing, and of himself now remains there nothing at all.
Ambition, behold the reverse of thy Medall.

LORD, Preserve to me always, (if it please thee) this humor wherein I now
find my self, Why should any love the world, which deceives all that trust
in it?
to misprize all the things of the world, and It too with passion. Give me a
heart wavering and inconstant, to this end, that it may uncessantly change from
all worldly Love, till it be subjected to the sweet Empire of thy Love. Render,
render evermore my spirit unquiet, until that it has found its repose in thee
alone, the foundations of such a rest are unremoveable. I will give for nothing
all my pretentions on earth, for thereto pretend I nothing at all. Heaven only
is my mark and aim. Now you shall see soon the end of the Chapter.

How was it possible that the glory of those brave Romans of former time,
could any way arrive to that point (though they aimed it) whereto the renown
of Rome it self could never attain? What a folly was it, These wise worldly
ones have had no other recompense of their folly, but such a blast of Fames
Trump.
that they sought immortality amid'st this inconstancy of Ages, where Death
only was in his Kingdom, for they assisted every day, at the funeral of
their renowned companions, and after they had seen their bodies reduced into
ashes, they might with the same eye, moreover, contemplate their shadows, I
mean their statues, metamorphosed into dust, and all their reputation served
but as a wind to bear them away into an infinity of Abysses, since as a Wind,
being nothing else, it flies away with these heaps of ruin, so far both
from the eye, and all memory, that in the end, there is no more thought on it.

In effect, all these great men of the World did see buried every moment the
hope of this vain glory, whereof their ambition was always laboring to make
acquist; and yet not one of them for all this, stepped back; as if they took a
pride in their vanities, and the folly of them were hereditary. Ambition never
elevates, but to give a greater fall.
CAESAR had seen the death of Pompey, and with him all the glory of his
renown, and Pompey had seen buried in the tomb of Time, and Oblivion, the
renown of that great Scipio, whose valor more redoubted then the thunder had
made the Earth tremble so often. Scipio in his turn might have read the Epitaph,
which despair, shame, and disaster had graven in letters of Gold upon the
Sepulture of Hannibal, and Hannibal might have learned to know by the
unconstancy of the Age, wherein he lived, before he made experiment of them,
the misfortunes, and miseries, which are inseparable to our condition. And yet
notwithstanding, all of them have stumbled one after other, upon one and the
same Stumbling-stone.

The richest of the world at last is found as poor as the poorest companion.
I am not come into Persia, for the conquest of treasures, said Alexander to
Parmenio: take thou all the riches, and leave me all the glory: but after good
calculation, neither of them both had any thing at all. These riches remained
in the world still, to which they properly appertained, and this vainglory
saw its lover dye, without it self being seen. Insomuch that after so great
conquests, the worms have conquered this great Monarch, and as the dunghill of
his ashes has no sort of correspondence with this so famous name of Alexander,
which otherwhile he bore, it is not to be said, what he has been, seeing what
he is now, I mean his present wretchednesses efface every day the memory of
his past greatnesses.

Ambitious spirits, though you should conquer a thousand worlds, as he did
this one, you should not be a whit richer for all these conquests. The Earth is
still as it was, it never changes nature. All her honors are not worth one
tear of repentance: all its glory is not to be prized with one sigh of
contrition. I grant that the noise of your renown may resound through the
four corners of the Universe: That of SALADINE which went round it all, could
not exempt him from the mishaps of life, nor miseries of Death. After he had
encoffered all the riches of the East, yet finds he himself so poor for all
that, hardly can he take along with him so much as a Shirt.

Embalme then the Air which you breathe, with a thousand Odours, be Served in
Plate of Gold, Lie in Ivory, Swim in Honors, and lastly, let all your
actions glitter with magnificence; the last moment of your life shall be judge
of all those, It Is the greatest horror of death, to render account of all the
moments of life.
which have preceded it: then shall you be able at your Death, to tell me the
worth of this vain glory, whereof you have been Idolaters, and after your
Death, you shall resent the pains of an eternal regreet, having now no more
opportunity to repent you to any effect.

Believe me, all is but Vanity, Honor, Glory, Riches, Praise, Esteem,
Reputation, All this is but smoke during Life, and after Death, nothing at
all. The Grands of the world have made a little more noise then others by the
way. But this Noise is ceased, their light is extinguish't, their memory
buried. And if men speak of them sometimes, the answer is returned with a
shake of the head, intimating no more words of them, since such a Law of
silence, Time has imposed hereon. Seek your glory in God, and your Honor in
the contempt of this earthly Honor, if you will eternize your renown, in the
perpetuity of Ages. I have no more to say to you, after these truths.

A PROLVSIVE upon the EMBLEM of the third Chapter.
A Funeral Hearse with wreaths of Cypres crested,
A Skeleton with Roabes imperial vested,
Dead march, sad looks, no glorious circumstance
Of high Achievements, and victorious Chance;
Are these fit Trophy's for a Conqueror?
These are the Triumphs of the Emperor
ADRIAN, who chose this Sable Heraldry
Before the popular gilded Pageantry.
'Stead of Triumphall Arches he does rear
The Marble Columns of his Sepulcher.
No public honors wave his strict intent,
To shrine his Triumph in his Monument.
The Conscript Fathers and Quirites all
Intend his welcome to the Capitol.
The vast expense one day's work would have cost,
He wiser far (since the other had been lost)
To build a Mausolaeum does bestow,
Which now at Rome is called Saint Moles ADRIANI nunc Castru^ S. Angeli.
Angelo;
Where to this Day, from Aelius Adrian's Name,
The Aelian Pons Aelius.
Bridge does still revive his fame.
Now was the peoples expectation high,
For wonted pomp and glittering Chevalry:
But lo their Emperor does invite 'em all,
Not to a Show, but to his Funeral.
They look for Gew-Gaw-fancies; his wise scorn
Contemnes those Vanities, leaves their hope forlorn.
For since all is smothered in the Funeral Pile,
He will not dally with 'em for a while.
This was Selfe-Victory, and deserves more
Then all the Conquests he had won before.
What can Death do to such a man, or Fate,
Whose Resolutions them anticipate?
For since the Grave must be the latter end,
Let our preventing thoughts first thither tend.
Bravely resolved it is, knowing the worst
What must be done at last, as good at first.
ADRIAN Emperor of Rome Celebrates himself his Funerals, and causes his
Coffin to be carried in Triumph before him.



THE MIRROVR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. III.
O How glorious is the Triumph over Death? O how brave is the Victory over a
Man's self! You see how this great Adrian.
Monarch triumphs to day over that proud Triumpher Death, after the happy
vanquishment of his passions. He enters into his Empire by the Port of his
Tomb, thus to reign during his life, like a man that dies every moment; he
celebrates himself his own Funerals, and is led in Triumph to his Sepulcher
to learn to dye generously. What a glory's this to overawe That, which
commands the whole world? what Courage is this, to assail and combat That,
which none could ever yet resist? and what a power is it to tame That which
never yet yielded? Echo her self has not rebounds enough to resound aloud the
wonders of this Victory.

This is not the Triumph of Alexander, when he made his entry into Babylon,
mounted upon a Chariot as rich as the Indies, and more glistering then the
Sun.

In this we see no other riches, but the rich contempt, which ought to be made
of them; no other luster, but of Virtue.

This is not the Triumph of Caesar then, when he was drawn unto the Capitol
by forty Elephants, after he had won twenty four battles. In this we see
naught else but a funeral pomp, but yet so glorious, that Death her self
serves for a Trophie to it.

This is not the Triumph of Epaminondas, where the glorious luster of the
magnificence shamed the splendor of the day, which yet lent its light to it.
The marvels which appeared in this here, seemed as celebrating in black the
Exequies of all the other braveries of the world, since nothing can be seen
more admirable then this.

To triumph over vice, is the noblest Trophie.
This is not the Triumph of Aurelian, where all the graces are led captive with
Zenobia. In this are to be seen no other captives but the world, and all its
vanities, and their defeat is the richest Crown of the Victor.

This is not the Triumph of that pompeous Queen of Egypt entering into Cilicia,
where she raised admiration to her self in a Galley of unutterable value, but
in this we contemplate the more then humane industry of a Pilote, who from
the midst of the storms and tempests of the world, recovers happily to the
Port, the ship of his life, though yet but in the way to approach to it.

In fine, this is not the Triumph of Sesostris, whose stately Chariot four
Kings drew. Passions are the only slaves of this, and Death being here
vanquished, this honor remains immortal, and the name of the Triumpher.

All the glory of men van sheth away with them.
Say we then once again, O how glorious a Triumph is this, over Death! O how
brave is the victory over our selves! and the only means thus to vanquish a
mans-selfe, is to bury his ambition before his body be ensepulchred, preparing
ne'rethelesse the tomb of both; to the'nd, that the continual remembrances of
Death, may serve for temperament and moderation to the delights of life.

We read of Paulus Aemilius, that returning to Rome laden with wreaths of
Laurel, after the famous victory over the Persians; he made his entrance of
triumph with so great pomp and magnificence, that the Sun seemed to rouse it
self many times, as if upon design to contemplate these wonders.

Pompey desirous to expose to the view of day, all the magnificent presents,
which Fortune had given him in his last conquests, entered now the third time in
Triumph into the City of Rome, where the noise of his valor made as many
Idolaters, as admirers, gayning hearts, and now conquering souls, as well as
before Realms and Provinces: But it seems, that the glory, which accompanied
him in this action had this defect, not to be sufficiently worthily known,
even of those that were witnesses of it, as surprising by much, all that they
could possibly express of it.

There was seen advanced before his Chariot, in ostentation, Vanity is a
dangerous enemy, it flatters, only to surprise.
a Checker-worke composed of two sorts of precious stones, whose beauty set
them beyond all price: But yet (me thinks) their sparkling might have in good
time been a light to him, if by a feeling of foresight, touching the
inconstancy of his fortune, he had caused to have been graven thereon the
history of his mishaps. There was admired in sequel, a Statue of the Moon,
all of Gold, in form of a Crescent, and I am astonished, that this Image of
change and Vicissitude, made him not foresee the deturning of the Wheel, I
mean the storm, that was to succcede the calm of his happiness. He caused
moreover to be carried before him a great number of Vessels of Gold, never
thinking that Death might soon replenish some part of them with his ashes.
There was seen to follow a Mountain all of Gold, upon which were all sorts of
animals, and many Trees of the same matter, and this mountain was enrounded
with a Vine, whose golden glittering dazzled the eyes of all that considered its
wonders. Ambition is an incurable disease of the soul, if in good time it be
not looked too.
This proud Triumpher was the Orpheus, which to the Lyrick sound of his
renown, attracted this Mountain, these Animals, these Trees, this Vine. But
as Orpheus, so him also, Fortune destinated a Prey to the fury of Bacchinals, I
mean the Eunuchs which put him to Death. Three Statues of gold, first
Jupiters, then Mars, and then of Pallas, came after. These were his Gods and
his Goddess: what succors could he expect from these Deities, which had no
subsistence, but in statue, and the copy of whose portraict had no principal?
There was had in admiration moreover, over, thirty Garlands all of gold, and
Pearls: A man had need to have an excellent memory, not to forget himself
among his honors.
but these Crowns were too weighty for his head, from whence it came to pass,
that he fell under the burden. A golden Chapel followed after, dedicated to
the Muses, upon which was a great Horologe of the same materials. And as the
Index still turned, ought not he to have considered, that the hour of his
triumphing began to pass away, and that of his overthrow would presently
sound, being sequel to the Laws of that vicissitude, to which Fate has
subjected all things? His statue of gold enrich't with Diamonds, and Pearls,
whereof nor he himself, nor he that enwrought them, knew the value, followed
in its course, and in fine, this his shadow, was more happy then the true body,
as having never been scuffled with, but by time, and the other was van quisht
with misery. Then appeared the great Pompey, seated upon a Throane, where he
and Fortune seemed to give Laws to the whole world, for his Triumphall Chariot
was so richly glorious, so magnificent in rarities, so splendide in new, and
ne're-before-seene wonders, that a ravishment surprised men's spirits, elevating
them at once from admiration to ecstasy, not giving them leisure to make
reflection upon the present realties. Be it our constant meditation, of the
inconstancy to which all worldly things are subjected.
But this Triumphall Chariot still roul'd about, and though the Triumpher
remained seated in his place, yet his Fortune turned about likewise. Insomuch
that in going to the Capitol, he approach't by little and little to the bank,
where his life and happiness, were equally enterred.

In fine, for the fullness of Glory, These proper names of the conquests, which
he had made, were read in golden Characters: The Kingdom of Pontus, See
Pliny's Not. History, 7 Bock, 26 Chapter.
Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, the Hiberians, the
Albanians, Siria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Pride is the passion of
fools: for what a senselessness is it, to be proud, having so many miseries
about us, which are incident to mortal man?
Palestina, Judea, Arabia, and the Rovers of all the Seas. Who can be
comparable to this proud Conqueror? and yet (I say it) having conquered and
subjugated the greatest part of the Earth, Fate permits him not so much, as to
expire upon it, and the Sea yet more treacherous, prepares him shipwreck in
midst of the Port.

What resemblance, and what correspondence can there be now, between this
Triumph so sumptuous, so stately, and magnificent, and that, whose presentation
I show you, where lowliness, humility, and misery hold the first rank, and
possess the highest places. How poor is the vanity of men, having no other
grounds but humane frailty?
Assuredly the difference is great, but yet this inequality here is glorious,
since it brings along with it the price of that virtue, whereof Pompey despised
the conquest. He in his Triumph, raised wonder to the beauty of those two
great precious stones. But the Sepulchrall Marbles, which appeared in this of
ADRIAN, were of another estimate, because Prudence values them above all price,
putting them to that employment, to which she had destinated them. Again, if
he expose to view in vessels of gold, Mountains, Animals, Trees, Vines,
Statues of the same matter; This Hearse covered with black, which serves for
ornament to this Funeral Pomp, contains yet much more treasure, since the
contempt of all together is graven therein. He makes ostentation of his Statue
of gold, enrich't with Pearls: but our Monarch takes as much glory without
them, showing in his own bare Portraict, the original of his miseries. That
proud Conqueror had a thousand Garlands and golden Coronets, as a novell
Trophy: Except the Crown of Virtue, all other are subject to change.
But ours here crowns himself with Cypress during his carreere of life, to
merit those palms which await him in the end. In fine, Pompey is the Idol of
hearts, and souls, and his Triumphall Chariot serves as an Altar; where he
receives the vows and Sacrifices: But this Prince, in stead of causing
Idolaters, during the sway of his Majesty, immolates himself up to the view
of Heaven, and Earth, dying already in his own Funerals, and suffering
himself to be as is were buried by the continual object, which dwells with him
of Death and his Tomb. But if Pompey lastly, boast himself to have conquered
an infinite number of Realms, or all the world together: ADRIAN.
This Man having never had worse enemies then his passions, has sought no
other glory but to overcome them, and in their defeat, a Man may well be styled
the Conqueror of Conquerours; for the Coronall wreaths of this Triumph, fear
nor the Suns extremity, nor the Ages inconstancy. We must pass on farther.

All the objects of Vanity are so many enemies, against which we ought to be
always in arms.
Isidore, and Tranquillus, do assure us, that to carry away the glory of a
Triumph, it was necessarily required to vanquish five thousand enemies, or
gain five victories, as it is reported of Caesar. The consent of the Senate
was also to be had. And the Conqueror was to be clothed in Purple, and Crowned
with Laurel, holding a Scepter in his hand, and in this sort he was conducted
to the Capitol of Jupiter, where some famous Orator made a Panegyricke of his
prowess.

What better Allegory can we draw from these profane truths, then this of the
Victory, which we ought to have of our five Senses (as of five thousand
enemies) whose defeat is necessary to our triumph. Still to wage war against
our passions, is the way to live in peace.
These are the five Victories, which he must gain, that would acquire such
Trophies, whose glory is taken away, neither by time nor Death.

This consent of the Senate is the Authority of our reason, which alone gives
value and esteem to our actions, and it is of her that we may learn the means
in obeying her to command over our passions, and by the conquest of this sway,
triumph over our selves, which is the bravest Victory of the World.

These Scepters and Crowns are so many marks of Sovereignty, which remain us
in propriety after subjection of so many fierce enemies, Heaven is the Capitol,
whither our good works conduct us in triumph, and where the voice of Angels
serves for Orator to publish the glory of our deeds, whose renown remains
eternal.

It Is not all, to love Virtue, it is the practice.
These great Roman Captains, which made love to virtue, though without perfect
knowledge of it, have sought for honor and glory in the overthrow of their
enemies, but they could never find the shadows of solid Honor, which thus
they sought; from whence it came to pass, that they have fashioned to
themselves diverse Chimeras, for to repast their fancy too greedy of these
cheating objects. Not that there is no glory in a Conquest: but 'twas their
Ambition led them along in Triumph, amidst their own Triumphing.

What honor had Caesar borne away, if he had joined to his Trophies the
slavery of Cleopatra? he had exposed to view a Chaptive-Queene, who otherwhile
had subjected him to her Love-dominion. But if the fortune of the war had
delivered him this Princess, He triumphs with an ill grace, over whom his
vices triumph.
the fate of Love would have given, even himself into her hands. Insomuch,
that the Death of Cleopatra, immmortaliz'd the renown of Caesar.

Asdrubal, according to Justin, triumphed four times in Carthage, but this
famous Theater of honor, where glory it self had appeared so often upon its
Throne, serves in conclusion for a Trophy to a new Conqueror, insomuch, that
it buried at once the renown, and memory, even of those, that had presented
themselves triumphant personages.

To day Memphis is all-Triumphant, and on the morrow this proud City is
reduced to slaverie. To day the report of its glory, makes the world shake, and
on the morrow Travelers seek for it upon its own site, but find it not. O
goodly triumph! O fearful overthrow! What continual revolution of the
Wheel! Marcellus shows himself at point of day upon a magnificent Chariot of
Triumph, and at Sunne-set his glory and his life finish equally their carreere.
I mean, in the twinkling of an eye, Fortune takes away from him all those
Laurell-wreaths which she had given him, and leaves him nothing at his death,
but the regreet of having lived too-long.

It may be some consolation in all our miseries, to see all else have their
changes, as well as we.
Marius triumphed diverse times, but with what tempests was the Ship of his
fortune entertained? Behold him now elevated upon the highest Throne of Honor;
but if you turn but your head, you shall see him all naked in his shirt,
halfe-buried under the mire of a common Sink, where the light of the day
troubles him, not being able to endure the Sun, a witness of his
misfortunes. Behold him first, I say, in all abundance of Greatness, and
Soveraigntie, whereof the splendor dazles the world; but stay a little, and
you shall hear pronounced the sentence of his death, being abandoned even of
himself, having no more hope of safety.

How pompeous and celebrious was the Triumph of Lucullus? In which, he raised
admiration to the magnificence of an hundred Gallyes all-armed in the Prow; a
thousand Chariots, charged with Pikes, Halberts, and Corselets, whose shocking
rumbles sounded so high, it frighted the admirers, though they celebrated the
Festival of the Victory. The number of Vessels of Gold, and other Ornaments
of the Triumph, was without number. The Statue of Mithridates also of Gold, six
foot high, with the Target all covered with precious Stones, served anew to the
Triumph. And of this Glory all the world together was an adorer, for the
renown of the Conqueror had diverse times surrounded the Universe.

But, what shame after so much glory! What infamy after so great honor!
Lucullus, Great Men cannot commit little faulis.
victorious over so many Empires, is found in fine subjected under the dominion
of his pleasures: his valor has made many slaves every where, and yet his
sottishness renders him in the end slave to his own passions. Insomuch, that
after he had exalted the splendor of Rome's beauty, by his brave actions,
worthy-admiration, he again blouzeth it is luster by his excessive deboshes,
all black with vice. And now it is in vain to seek for Lucullus triumphant,
since he is only to be found overthrown in reputation, in which he
survives; thus rendering himself doubly miserable.

Plutarchus in Apophtheg. Reg. and Imp. Tristis sollicitusque circumivit urbem.
We read of Epaminondas, that returning victorious from the Leuctrians he
received with regreet the Present o^ the honor of Triumph, which the Senat^
had prepared him, apprehending evermore the deturne of the Wheel: so tha^ the
next morrow after the Festival, he^ took on him mourning habit, to prepar^
himself betimes to suffer the change o^ his fortune.

It is remark't in the history of Demetrius, that entering in Triumph into
Athens, the people cast flowers, and an infinite number of golden Globes up and
down the streets, We are but as so many flowers planted by Nature in the
Garden of the Earth, and only Death gathers us.
for a sign of a sumptuous congratulation. But what sign of Vicissitude and
frailty, could there be more apparent, then this, which these flowers
represented, since there is nothing more frail in Nature then they? And these
balls showed also by their round, and still rouling figure, that the Glory
whereof they were the symbol, and Hieroglyphicke, could not be firm, and
stable according as Truth it self soon after published by a sudden change,
which rendered the fate of this Victor deplorable.

Consider a little upon the same subject, what revolutions has the Ball of
Empire, made since the first Monarch, let it fall at his Death. Is it not
credible, In like respect also we are as Bowls, for still we roll along to
the Grave.
that it has run over diverse times the circuit of the Universe, and its
figure instructs us, that in the inconstancy which is proper to all created
things, it will still roll incessantly from one to another, without ever
staying, since its Center is no where at all? For so long as the world shall
endure, a continual vicissitude will be its foundation. And what means can
there be to find a seat upon the earth, which may be sheltered from
inconstancy, which reigns soveraignly and necessarily, as essential to all
whatsomever subsists here below? I have not been far, behold me upon
return.

Tertullian assures us, that in the Triumphs of the Romans, there was a man
waged to cry aloud to the Triumpher,

Remember thou art a Man.

Worldly honors are so many temptations, to make us idolatrize our selves.
Pliny passes farther yet, and tells us, that they were accustomed to put an
iron ring upon the Conquerors finger, in sign of servitude, as if silently to
intimate unto him, that he was besides himself, by an excess of vanity in
this amplitude of honor, wherein he saw himself elevated above his
companions. And upon the same subject, a great number of Historians do add,
that about the Chariot of the Triumpher, there were two men assigned, the one
carrying a Deaths-head, the other the Image of a Peacocke, and both continually
crying,

REMEMBER THAT THOU ART A MAN. Vanity is a dangerous enemy, since it betrays
us while it seems to oblige us, by the complacence which it gives us.


Certainly, Vanity makes great Prize of us, then when we are elevated to some
eminent degree of honor. And though our heads be but as of dead-mens, for we
are dying uncessantly, and our miseries resemble us to those Images of
Peacockes, which cannot bear up train, but upon ugly Feet: Yet our
Blindness is so great, and this Self-love so extreme, that men are dazzled
with too much Splendor, and a Man becomes slave to himself by loving himself
with too much passion. Greatness and prosperity never let themselves be
possessed, but to take greater possession of us. And as they have allurements to
charm us, and sweets to ravish us, a Man had need implore the succor of
Divine grace, if he would escape their pleasing tyranny, and nothing but
flight from them, or contempt, can give us weapons to resist them. Let us still
return to the point.

We read of Judas Machabeus, that returning victorious from Galile, the people
conducted him to the Temple, by a way all tapistred with flowers. Abraham after
he had vanquished five Kings, was received in Triumph into Salem, now called
Jerusalem.

Judith received the honor of Triumph by the destruction of Holofernes, and
all the people of Bethuli^ laden with Palm, to make her triumphall wreaths,
cried out in her favor Behold the glory of Jerusalem, and the joy of all her
Nation.

Joseph shows himself in Triump^ also upon the Chariot of Pharaoh, Genesis
41.41, 42, etc.
wh^ puts his Royal Ring upon his finger gives him his Chain of gold, and
makes him publicly to be acknowledged for the second person of Egypt.

David triumphs over Goliath, with magnificence worthy of his victory and the
Virgins chant to his glory Saul has killed his thousand, 1 Samuel 18.7.
and David his ten thousand.

Mordecai also had his turn of Triumph, mounted upon the horse of Ahasuerus,
and had his praises Heraldized by Haman, in these terms: Esther 6.11.
Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King will honor.

All these Triumphs are worthy of admiration, I avouch it: but the Triumph over
our selves, is worthy astonishment, as having to combat our passions, and
consequently the winning'st enemies of the world, I say, the winning'st, or the
pleasing'st, since they guard themselves only with such kind of weapons, whose
hurtings makes us often sigh rather for joy then grief.

Certainly, the Victory of Reason over all the revolted faculties of our
^oules, merits alone the honor of a Triumph; and what advantage som^^er a man
has over his enemies, he ^imselfe is yet still vanquished, if his ^ices be not
subdued. I pursue my de^^gne.

They which have enthronized Virtue in their breasts, have laid their
foundations upon the ruins of their passions, to testify to us, that a Man
cannot be virtuous with their predominancy. And after essay of diverse means
upon design to vanquish them, I have found none more powerful, then this, The
Meditation of Death, but if any doubt this, the trial on it will be profitable
for him.

How is it possible that a Man should let himself be mastered with the passion
of Revenge, if he but muze of that Vengeance, which his sins may draw down
every moment upon his head, as being every hour in estate to dye? He shall
hear rumble in his ears the thunder of Divine Justice, by the continual
murmur of his sighs, which advertize him of the approaches of Death. What
courage can he have to avenge himself, being upon point himself to suffer the
torment of eternal vengeance?

Thou that art Vindicative, will thou then quench the ardour of thy Choler,
feel thine own pulse, and consider that this pety slow fever, wherewith thou
art stormed, leads thee by little and little into the grave. It Is more honor
for a man to avenge himself of his choler, then of his enemy.


Who can be Ambitious, if musing of Death, since he must quitt all with his
life? Let us ponder a while the fate of those arrogant spirits, which have muz'd
themselves to conquer the vain greatnesses of the Earth. What has been in
fine their share at the end of the carriere? They have had nothing but
unprofitable regreets, to have so ill employed their time, finding themselves
so poor with all their treasure, as if they had been borne the wreched'st of
the world. Thou Ambitious-one, willt thou be cured of the disease of thy
Passion, think each hour of the day, that that which thou now hear strike,
may be thy Last.

Who would sigh for profane Love, after these objects of dust, and ashes,
Mortal frailty brings blemish to the fairest visages, and mightily takes from
their opinion, being well considered.
if he often considered, that he himself is made of nothing else, and that
this noisome and corruptive matter seekaes nothing more, then abysses of the
grave, there to hide within its loath somenesse, in effect who would give his
flesh a prey to pleasures, if he would consider that the worms do in
expectation, make their fees thereof already. The Meditation of Death, serves
for temperament to all sorts of delights. And if a Man be capable of love in
this muze, it cannot be other then of his Salvation, since this object is
eternal, but all others of the world perishable. Unfortunate Lovers search the
solace of your immodest passions in the Anatomy of the subject, whereof you are
Idolaters. Be assistant at that dead view. Think of your own Death. Behold
you are cured.

He which considers of that wretchedness which is adjunct to Death, easily
mispriseth the riches of this life.
What wretched Rich man would be so much in love with his treasures, if he would
consider, that Death robs him from them every day, making him dye continually,
and that at the end of the term of his life, he carries along with him but
the good, or the evil which he has done, to be either recompensed, or
punished, but with a glory or a punishment, whereof Eternity alone must
terminate the continuance? Covetous Misers, the only means for you to be so
no more, is to celebrate your own funerals, by your Meditations, and often to
consider the Account, not of your riches, but that which you must render one
day of their fruition, since your Salvation depends thereon.

Who, in fine, would make a God of his Belly, seeking with passion all the
delights, which may tickle the sense of Taste, if he represented to himself
the miseries of the body, which he takes so much pains to nourish, and the
rigor of those inviolable decrees, which destinate him a prey to the worms,
and the remains of their leavings to rottenness? This consideration would be
capable to make him loose both appetite, and desire, at the same time, to
nourrish so delicately his carcass. O souls all of flesh, repasting your
selves with nothing else, there is no invention to make you change nature, but
this, to Hear your selves dye by the noise of your sighs, to See your selves
dye by the wrinkles which furrow every day upon your visages, and to Feel your
selves die by the beatings of your pulse, which indexeth this your hecticke
fever, wherewith you are mortally attainted. This is a Probatum-remedie, the
experience thereof is not dangerous.

May not a man then maintain with much reason, that the thought of Death alone
is capable to cure our souls of the disease of their passions in doseing them
both the means, If a man should forget all things else but the miseries of his
condition, this last were enough to exercise the vastest memory.
and the Virtue to triumph over them. But if of this you desire an example,
call to mind that, which I have proposed you in the beginning of the Chapter.
How mavelous is it that a great Monarch, who is able to maintain all manner
of pleasure in his heart, with all the delights which accompany it; celebrates
himself his Funerals in the midst of his carriere of life, beginning to
reign at the end of his reign, since that last object is always present
before his eyes. His Passions do assail him, but he vanquisheth them, they
give him combat, but he leads them in triumph, and buryes them altogether in
the Tomb, which he prepares himself. Consider a little the glory, which is
relucent in this action.

We read of the Kings of Arabia, that they triumphed upon Dromedaries, the
Kings of Persia upon Elephants, of Croatia upon Bulls, the Romans upon horses,
and yet it is remarkt of Nero, that he made himself be drawn in Triumph by
four Hermaphrodite Mares. Camillus by four white Horses. Mark Antony by
four Lions, Aurelian by four Hearts, Caesar by forty Elephants Heliogabalus
by four Dogs.

Moreover, the Poets do assure us, that the triumphant Chariot of Bacchus was
drawn by Tigers, Neptunes by Fishes, of Thetis by Dolphins, Diana's by Hearts,
of Venus by Doves, Juno's by Peacocks.

All these objects of pomp, and magnificence, whereof histories, This Vanity
is a most contagious malady, and the only preservative, is the remembrance of
Death.
and Fables would eternize the vanity, have for all that done nothing but pass
away, and though a little remembrance of 'them stay with us; it is but the
memorial of a Chimera, and of a fantosme, since it preaches nothing else to
us, but the ruin, and nonentity, of that which has been other-while O how
glorious a Triumph is it, These things ruminated on, will make us wise.
when we our selves are encharioted over our passions now enslaved and
subjected under the Empire of Reason? There is nothing so glorious, there is
nothing so magnificent: For these Dromedaries, these Elephants, these Bulls,
these Horses, these Hermaphrodite Mares, these Lions, Stags, and Tygres
aforementioned, are but brute beasts, which draw along in train after them
others as brutish as themselves, as suffering themselves to be transported with
vanity, which only reduces them to this beastly-semblant vanity. Let us
turn our face to another side.

SABELLICUS in his ENNEADS, actively persuades us to believe, that the
Christians of Aethiopia do carry in their processions, great vessels full of
ashes, Let the fire of Divine Love glow upon our ashes.
to emblematize apparently the frailty of our nature. But may not we say upon
too much reason, that we are earthen vessels full of ashes; and what object
more sensibly can be presented before our eyes, to show us the truth of our
miseries, then this of our selves? From Earth is our production, and the same
serves us with nourishment, and for sepulture also, as if ashamed the Sun
should afford his light to our wretchedness.

Make we then every day Funeral processions, or at least visit in meditation
every hour our Tombe^, as the place where our bodies must make so long abode.
Celebrate we our selves our own Funerals, and invite to our exequies, The
thought of our end is a sovereign remedy against our passions.
Ambition, Avarice, Pride, Choler, Luxury, Gluttony, and all the other
Passions, wherewith we may be attainted, to the end to be Conquerours, even by
our own proper defeat: For when a Man yields to the Meditation of Death, then
reason commands sense; All obey to this apprehension of frailty, and
feebleness. Pleasures by little and little abandon us, the sweets of life
seem sour, and we can find no other quiet, but in the hope of that, which
Truth it self has promised us, after so much trouble.

Proud Spirits, be ye Spectators of this Funeral Pomp, which this great
Monarch celebrates to day: He invites the Heaven and the Earth to his
Exequies, since in their view he accompanies his pourtrayed gkeleton unto the
Tomb: his Body conducts thither its shadow, the original the painted figure
in attendance, till a Metamorphosis be made both of one and the other. O glorious
action! where the Living takes a pride to appear Dead, as dying already by
his own choice, as well as necessity. O glorious action! where the Triumpher
takes a glory in the appearance of his overthrow. O glorious action! where all
the honor depends upon the contempt of the worlds honor. O glorious action!
where Garlands of Cypress dispute the pre-eminence with Laurel and Palm. O
glorious action! where the Conqueror under-going the Laws of Nature, elevates
himself above it, making his puissance to be admired, in his voluntary
weakness. But I engage my self too far in it.

Herodotus remarkes, that the Queen Semiramis made her Sepulcher be erected
upon the entrances of the principal Gate of the Babylon.
City, to the end, that this sad object of wretchedness might serve for
Schoolmasters to passengers, to teach them the Art, to know themselves. O
blessed Lesson is that, no better School then the Churchyard.
which the Tombs can afford us! O gracious Science is that, which they
instruct us!

Strabo testifies, that the Persians made Pipes of dead-mens bones, which they
used at Festivals; to the end, that the sad harmony which issued thence, might
temper the excess of joy. But may not we say our Lungs to be to us such kind
of Whistles, and that our dolorous sighs, which produce thence the harmony,
are capable to moderate the violence of our contentments? A strange thing it
is, that all the animated objects, which are affected by our senses, bear the
image of Death, and yet we never think but of Life. Let our eyes but fairly
turn their regards on all sides, All that lives, they may see, dies; and what
has no life, passes away before 'em. Our ears are tickled with the sweet
harmony of Voices, or Instruments, or Tabors, or Trumpets: But these sounds
are but Organs spirited with blasts, whose borrowed wind is lost, when the
motion cease; and there behold the Fail of their life. And for Instruments,
it is true they warble delightfully, yet their melody is often doleful to the
mind, The object of our nothingnesse has a grace and allurement capable to
ravish the best spirits.
when it considers that it proceeds from certain guts of dead beasts, which
Art has so contrived. Tabors being of the same nature, must also necessarily
produce the same effects; and Trumpets also do but sobbe in our ears, since
their clangor is forced only by the violence of a blast of sighs: Our Taste
cannot satiate the hunger of its appetite, but with dead and breathless
things: and all our other senses are subject to the same necessity. Insomuch,
that Death environs us on all sides, though we be always her own, and yet we
never think on it, Death is ever present, and at hand, to our heart, but still
absent from our memory.
but in extremities: as if we were only to learn at the last instant, that
we are Mortal, and the hard experience which we make on it, were the only
Lesson, which by Nature is given us.

LORD render me capable, if it please thee, of this Science, which may
effectually teach me the Art, to know my self; to the end, that this knowledge
may represent to me always the realitie of my wretchedness. Make me that I
may see my self, may understand and feel my self to dye every moment: but
so, that I may see it with the eyes of my heart, perceive it with the eyes of
my soul, and feel it by the sense of my conscience, therein to find my
repose and safety. I know well, that Nature mournes uncessantly the death of
its works, which are devoured every hour by time; and though no where thus
can I see but Sadness it self, yet ne'rethelesse remain I insensible of the
horror of these objects; and though they be terrible, my spirit not
affrighted. Render me therefore, if it please thee, render me fearful, and
make me even to tremble in thinking of it, since the thought of it is so
important, and suffer me not to live a kind of Death, without meditating of
that life which is exempt from Death, and whereof Eternity is the Limit. All
my votes do terminate at this, and all my wishes, which I address to thy
bounty, that I may one day see the effects of my hopes. Let us advance on our
first proposi^ion.

O how celebrious, and glorious is the Triumph over our selves! Let us leave
the Laurels, and Palms to those famous Conquerours of Sea and Land. A Man has
no greater enemy then himself.
Their Crowns are now metamorphosed into dust, their renown into wind,
themselves into corruption, and for a surplusage of mishap after the conquest
of the whole World, they dye in the miseries, whereunto they were borne.

Cyrus could not bound his Ambition less, then to the vast extention of the
Universe; and yet a TOMYRIS.
simple woman only prescribed him an allay, and placed his head in the range
of his own Trophies. Arthomides plays Jupiter upon Earth, his portraict is
the only Idol of his subjects: and yet one turn of the wheel casts him a
sacrifice upon the same altar, which he had erected to his Glory, his life
glistering with triumphs, but his death in such a ruin, clouded even the
memory of his name. All those stately Triumphers, There is nothing more vain,
then Vainglory: it is a body without soul or life, having no subsistence, but
in Imagination.
of whom Antiquity trumpets-out wonders, have had no other recompense of their
labors, but this vain conceit, that one day men would talk of them. But
what felicity is it to be praised in this world, to which they are dead, and
tormented in the other, wherein they live even yet, and ever. I care very
little, that men should talk of me after my Death, the esteem of men is of so
small importance, that I would not buy it so dear, as with a wish only. It
behooves to search reputation in the purity of the conscience, if a man would
have the glory of it last for ever. The renown of a good man is much greater,
then that of Caesar or Alexander; for this has no other foundation, then the
soil where it was sowed, and where the goodlyest things display themselves
like flowers, and like flowers also have but a morning-flourish: But the other
having for a firm stay Eternity, this object ennobleth it to perfection, The
renown of a good man only lasts always.
and thus desiring nothing else but heaven, it remains to us at the end for
recompense.

Blondus in his Treatise of Rome, in its triumphant glory, reckons up three
hundred and twenty triumphs, all remarkable: but where are now these pompes,
these magnificences, this infinite number of Trophies, and a thousand other
ornaments, which rattled out their glory. Where are I say these Conquerours?
where are their slaves? their Idolaters, their admirers? These pompes have but
flash't like lightning, It Is some comfort yet to a wise man, though himself
fade away, to see that all things else do so too.
and so passed away with the day, that accompanied their luster. These
magnificences have been but seen, and so took their passage in flight. These
trophies being only bravadoes of the time, times inconstancy made them vanish
in an instant, and all those other ornaments made but ostentation of their
continual vicissitude, as being an inseparable accident of their nature. These
vanquishers only had the name on it, since Death led them away also in triumph,
for all their triumphings. Their captives were rather slaves of the miseries
whereunto they were borne, then so by the absolute power of him who captived
the^. Their Idolaters have been immolated to the fury of years, which spare
none; and their admirers have incurred the same fate with the subject, which
they admired: Insomuch, that of all together, remaine^ nothing but a faint
remembrance which as it waxes old, is effac't by little and little out of
memory, and scarcely will it subsist so much in the imagination, as to be in
the end buried among fables. Since Eternity only triumphs over Time, we
should only strive to attain that.
Behold here the Anatomy of the glory of the world, see the true portraict of
its false Image. Contemplate, meditate, you will avouch with me, that All is
full of vanity.

O how stately and magnificent is the Triumph of Ages! what trophies may a man
see at their ever-rowling Chariot! what Conquerours are not in the number of
their subjection? what sovereign power can resist their violence? what newer
can Triumph then this of years? Who can give in account the number of their
victories, and ^esse the captives which Death serves ^n for their trophies?
What newer triumph again evermore then of mo^eths, of days, of hours, and
mo^ents? For consider to your self, how many Kings, Princes, and Lords, die ^n
one age in all the places of the world. All these vanquishers are vanquished,
and led in triumph to the grave. Every Year makes its conquest a part, gives
^attell, and carries away the victory over so many, A righteous man only
stands exempt from the terror of death.
and so many men, that hardly can one conceive so lamentable a truth; Months,
Days, Hours, and Moments, triumph in their courses; who can number all those
who dyed yesterday outright, or are dead to day? Nay more, how many dye at
this hour, and at this very instant, that I entertain you with this
discourse. And all these defeats of mortality mark out to us the Triumphs,
whereof time only bears away the glory: But let us not pretend to share in it,
it is not worthy our Ambition. Let Ages, Years, Months, Days, Hours, and
Moments, triumph over us: A good conscience is ever under shelter from all the
inconstant tempests of ages.
Virtue always limits their puissance, and with it we may prescribe a bound
to all these Triumphants. Fair leave may they take to ruinate out-ward beauty,
but that of innocence is of proof against all their strokes. Well may they
impair outward graces; but those of heaven contemn their assaults. No doubt
they may change the visage of all the marvels of Art, and miracles of Nature:
Our Resolution is a rock in midst of all their storms, and may remain
always it self without undergoing other rules then its own. So that thus we
may lead Time it self along in triumph, if we live for nothing more then for
Eternity.

He which lives for eternity, dreads no death.
I scorn the Tyranny of Ages, my aim is beyond 'em all. I despise the power of
years, my Ambition reigns already out of their reach. Let Months, Days,
Hours, and Moments, entraile all things along with 'em; I for my part,
franchise their carreere, since my scope is much more farther yet. Let them
triumph fully, my very defeat shall lead them in triumph at the end of their
term, for the eternity whither I aspire, already assigns out their tomb. Let
us stay no longer in so cragged a way.

The Emperor Trajan caused his Sepulcher to be enfram'd in the midst of Rome's
greatest place, as upon a state^y Theater, on which his successors were to act
their parts. Every man dies ^or himself; Serius aut citius metam properamus ad
unam.
sooner or later we must ^rrive to the place, to which uncessantly ^ee walk.
Be it to morrow, or today, ^t the end of the term all is equal. Nor old nor
young can mark the difference in their course, being arrived to the end of
their carreere, for a hundred Ages when past, and one instant make but the same
thing. It Is only necessary to muze of our last gist in the grave, since
thither we run till we ^re out of breath, from moment to moment.

The Trojans would have the burying-places of their Princes to be in the most
remarkable place of the City, to the end, Plac^s of burial are sad Theaters,
where every day are acted none but Tragedies.
that this sad object might serve as a fixed Memento to remembrance them, that
the Tragedy, which had been acted by these yesterday, might again be
represented by some other to day.

The Philosophers know that objects move the faculties, and that according to
the quality of their impressions, they work upon the spirits, which
contemplate them. Let us say now, that of all the direful objects, which are
presented to our eyes, there is none more powerful over our apprehensions,
then this of Meditation of Death, and the horror of the grave. The most
courageous yield themselves to these assaults, the most valiant resist nor
their violences. All droop at approach of an enemy so redoubtable. But our
defeat, if rightly carried, is more glorious then our Triumph. What success is
this, by being overcome, to bear away the crown of victory? such submission
is a mark of Soveraignety.

If the meditation of death make not a sinner change his life, nothing will do
it.
Petrus Gregorius tells us of the Emperor Charles the fifth, that he caused
his winding head-ketcher to be carried before him for a standard in all his
Armies, six years before he dyed, to the end, that the continual object of
his greatness, might not be too powerful to tempt him to misconceive himself.

We do the same every day, without thinking on it, for our shirts are in a
manner as so many winding-sheetes, which we carry always with us in all
places where we go: But if this sad object be not enough to moderate our
ambition, and rebate our vanity, this voluntary is inseparable from pain, we
must needs undergo the Law, which we impose upon our selves.

It Is best to let Death be welcome to us, since it is inevitable.
LORD suffer me not, if it please thee, so far to mistake my self, as never
to come to the point of meditating of this blessed Decree, which thou have
imposed on me, to dye one day. But illuminate my spirit with the light of thy
grace, which may stead me as a Pharos, to show me the haven of the grave, where
the ship of my life must put ashore. Make me also, if it please thee, to be
ignorant of all things else, but the knowledge to live well, that I may also
dye so; and thus, let the miseries which accompany me, the mishaps that follow
me, and all the other afflictions which thy goodness has subjected me to, be
the ordinary objects of my thoughts, to the end, that I stray not from the way
of my salvation. And now have have I no other passion, but to see the effects
of these prayers. Let us go to the end.

The Combat ought always to precede the Victory, and the Victory the Triumph.
Those that have averred, that the world is to us an hostile Army, composed of
so many Soldiers as there are objects in nature, capable to agitate the power
of our passions, had very good reasons to defend the truth of their Thesis.
These objects of it make war against us continually, with all the assaults,
inventions, and stratagems of a cruel enemy. Beauty, that assaults our
souls, by the way of our eyes, with as much cunning as force; for at first
view, it amuseth the Sense with admiration, by a slight of complacence, to
which its sweets and allurements insensibly engage it. Afterward the Sensus
Communis, receiving the fair Species of the Idea of this fair enemy,
presents them to the Fancy, the Fancy to the Understanding, which after it
has examined them according to its capacity, offers them to the Will, which
by a natural apprehension, finds it self obliged to love the subject from
whence these amiables do proceed. And now then it is the Cue of Reason, either
to condemn or authorize this Love; but most often that becomes charmed it
self, and we vanquished. Not that Reason is not sufficiently strong and
powerful, but whereas its force and virtue depends merely upon grace, Our
passions are the flattering'st enemies of the world, for they assault us with
those semblant satisfactions to us, as may seem most agreeable; and thus they
are most to be feared.
the contempt which ordinarily it makes of this, renders both alike
unprofitable. This is that which obliges us in all these conflicts, to implore
the help of heaven, rather then to trust upon our strengths, and evermore to
have a jealous eye to this our subtle enemy, which yet can never get other
advantage upon us, then that which our wretchlesnesse suffers it to acquire.

We cannot justly complain of our defeat, since it is voluntary.
The very fairest objects of the world, may well enforce admiration, but not
love, since love cannot be formed in our hearts, but by a powerful reflection
of the amiable qualities which are found in the subject, and in this it is
necessary, that the understanding do operate, and the will consent. And this
cannot be done without a free deliberation, which we absolutely authorize.
Insomuch, that we cannot be overcome, if we rush not into it with desire of our
own overthrow. And this not so neither, as if there were no trouble in the
resistance; but rather it is a way to acquire much more glory in the victory
over beauteous objects, by the power of reason, which is more troublesome and
difficult, then that which one gets over an enemy by force of arms. The
rewards which God has prepared after all our troubles, do infinitely surpass
our deserts.
But the honor also surpasses always the difficulty, and what pain soever a
man can possibly take, the Prize and Crown at last can admit of no comparison.

We must then bravely combat those proud beauties, which make public
profession to enchaine our hearts in irons, and put our souls upon the rack,
and let them see, to their confusion, that the natural Magic of their
charms is to us a new Art of Logic, which informs us to make Arguments,
both to give for granted their power, and yet destroy their force. Fair leave
have they to expose to view their blandishments, and graces: the light of
Reason produces a livelyer Day, whose luster duskes the midday-splendour; for
by the aid of this light a man may see, that all their quaintnesses are but
dawbings, their delicacies but artifice, and their attractives, but only
composed by distillatories. And how can one Idolatrize them then, after
meditationall presentment of these verities? Behold the only means to
prescribe a rule over these Sovereigns, who would impose it on the whole
world. He commands best, that can obey reason.
Not that this kind of combat requires force of courage, but rather of
prudence, after first a misprise of them to fly away; and not to put the
victory into hazard.

There are yet other enemies, which render themselves as redoutable as the
former, such are Ambition, riches, etc. what means is there to resist them, or
to speak better, to vanquish them? they have no less allurements, and sweets,
then the beauties afore-spoken of, and though the force of them be different,
they cease not ne'rethelesse, to excite and move the passions with all sort of
violence.

Ambition has its particular delicacies, and charms, to ravish men's hearts,
and soveraignize over their souls; and I believe, that its Empire extends it
self far beyond that of Love: for all the world is not capable of this
latter passion, but of the other every man has a smatch from that defect, from
our original, wherewith a man is tainted. Vanity is bred and borne with us,
but it is in our choice, whether to let it ever keep us company.
And this passion is so much the more to be feared, as it is natural, and
growing up with us in measure as we grow our selves. The means to vanquish
it, is to study to know ones-selfe, and thus plainly to see the frailty of our
foundation.

What Ambition can a man have, that knows the number of the greatest part of
the miseries and mishaps which accompany his life? To what can he pretend,
being not able to dispose of one only moment? Nay, what can he wish for beyond
himself, since for any long time together, he has not strength enough to
look down to his own feet? What high aim can he give his designs, since
all his thoughts, his desires, and hopes, have their limited scope beyond his
power, as depending upon the Future, It Is the best mystery of all humane
Trade, to learn to die daily, and in this Vocation they that are active
apprentises, are Masters.
whereof he cannot dispose. All lies then in this, to know our selves, that
is, to consider the certaineties thus sensible, both of our defects and
infirmities.

The Passion for Riches is always extreme, allowing no moderation in our
hearts. It Is a kind of hydropicke malady, wherein thirst increases the more
one drinks. A rich man of ten thousand pounds a year, wishes thirty
thousand, and if perhaps he see the effects of his desires, he soon
conceives new ones, being never able to find content in the enjoyment of the
goods which he already possesses.

That temperament of spirit, which Philosophy teaches us to live content in,
whatsomever condition a man is in, is a virtue so chaste, that it suffers it
self to be possessed by no body in this age, The true knowledge of Virtue, would
soon insinuate its love.
wherein we are; not that a man cannot enjoy it, but it is to be sought in the
purity of the conscience, rather then in the world, where it is unknown but
only barely in name.

This greedy passion of heaping treasure upon treasure, is so proper to our
criminal and corrupt nature, that a man cannot guard himself from it, without
a special help from Heaven. Since that robbery, which our first Parents made
in the terrestrial Paradise, all our thoughts and hopes are so theevish, that
they would rob the future of those goods, which we wish for then, making no
esteem of those which we already possess; our hearts sigh uncessantly with
impatience, in attendance of a new acquist. What remedy now is there to cure so
contagious a malady, whose insensible dolor makes us often contemn a remedy?
what means I say, Poverty of spirit is the greatest riches.
to triumph over a passion so strong and puissant, and to which our nature it
self lends a hand? It Is certainly an action of study, where reason with time
must get the advantage. It is necessary to consider every time that this desire
to amasse riches, does press and force us; what shall we do with all these
treasures, after we have heapt them up? To leave them to our heirs, it is to
make them rich with our own loss, which they too perhaps will laugh at, in
the possession. It Is I say, to damn our selves for others profit, as if we had
never lived for our selves. To carry them into the grave with us, is to have
labored for worms: what shall then become on 'em? We must of necessity leave
them behind. O cruel necessity! but yet most sweet and pleasing in its
continual meditation, It Is the best providence in this world, to lay up
treasures for the other.
since it teaches us to under-value all that may be lost.

There are a great number of other Passions, which may master us with the same
violence, according to the disposition of the predominating humor which
possesses us; such are Choler, Envy, Detraction, etc. but with the only force
of Reason, assisted with the usual grace, which concurres in all good actions,
we may easily be able to triumph over them.

We read of Pyrander King of Egypt, that being one day in choler against one
of his slaves, he heard a clap of thunder so terrible, that he became suddenly
quite appeased; as if he had had this thought that the Gods were angry with his
fury since they clamoured louder then he Let us have often the same thoughts
but with more truth and illumination every time that this blind passion would
exercise over us its tyranny. My meaning is, that in the violentest heat o^
our choler, we lend an ear of imagination to the noise of the thunder of
divine Justice, that thus we may be appeased at the same time, It Is a good
method first to fear God, then to love him.
for what ground have we to be armed with fury, against our neighbors, when
heaven is animated with just vengeance against our selves?

The Passion of Envy as black as hell, and the most criminal of all together
proceeds from an invenomed mischievousnes, to which nature contributes nothing
at all. It Is a devilish passion, whose fury and rage keeps the soul in
fetters, Envious men are most their own enemies, and rob themselves of the
rowne quiet
and whose theevish jealousy robs away the goods of others in a hounding after
'em, and yet possesses none of 'em. What means is there then to vanquish this
untameable vice? No other but this, to consider the Justice of that adorable
Providence which imparts never its favors and graces, but with weight and
measure. God cannot do but justly, since his Justice is no other then
himself. Then if this man have 10000 ^ounds a year, and I but a 100, whereof
can I complain? shall I doubt ^he reason from Reason it self? shall I ^ccuse
Justice of Injustice? To take for ^ranted, that the Sovereign of all does that
he will, and the Almighty what ^e pleases, I will always rely to that
balance, which God bears in his hand, and by which himself weighs his
actions to the poize of his will, and consequently to the measure of his
Justice. What objection can be made against this truth?

The envious man is never in health, tortured with the Hectic Peaver of this
ever-burning passion.
Envious Maligner, adore that, which thou can not comprehend, and then
instead of pining for the goods, which thou enjoyest not; give thanks to
heaven for those which thou possessest, and how small someover they be, they
are ever great enough to amuze thee all thy life-long to the study of
thankful acknowledgment.

The Passion of Detraction is easily overcome by a fresh consideration of our
own proper defects, for of all the Vices whereof we accuse one another, our
hearts may convince us. If I call a man thief, am not I a greater thief then
he, since against the Laws of charity I rob him of his honor by this injury?
Suppose he be a false villain, yet in calling him by this name, I betray the
secret, which his fault should ^n charity impose upon me. But if he be nothing
so; lo I my self am now a Traitor both at once of his reputation, It Is more
important to learn to hold one's peace, then to hold up the talk.
and mine own conscience. There is no fault more unpardonable, then this of
Obloquie, and in regard that for a just expiation of the crime, it is fitting
that the tongue which did the hurt, should give the remedy.

Thou Detractour, if thou can not moderate thy passion, speak ill only of
thy self, Study thine own vices, Meditate thine own faults, and Accuse thy
self of them before heaven, which is already witness of thy crimes; and by
this way of reproaching, thou shall obtain one day to be praised eternally.
Behold me now at the end of the Chapter.

He which often muzes of Death, will every day learn to live well.
After all these particular remedies with which a man may learn easily to
resist the tyranny of the Passions, there is none more sovereign then this of
the Meditation of Death. All the rest abbut at this only, as the most
authorized, by daily experience.

Great Kings, suffer your selves to be led in triumph by your own thoughts to
the grave, and by the way consider how your greatnesses, your riches, your
delights, and all the magnificence of your Court, follow you step by step,
being brought along by the same fate, whose absolute Tyranny spares none. And
since you may dye every hour, think at the least sometimes of this truth, to
the end that that hour of your life's dyall surprise you not. Much good do it
you to nourish up your selves deliciously, yet all these Viands wherewith you
repast your selves are empoysoned, as containing in 'em the Caliditas,
Frigiditas, Humiditas, Siccitas.
four contrary qualities, whose discord puts into skirmish your humors, and
this battle is an infallible presage of your overthrow: well may you chase away
Melancholy, by virtue of fresh pleasures, these very contentments cheat away
your life, for though you think of nothing but how to pass away the time, it
passes ere you think on it, and Death comes before you have forseen his
arrival. Well may you cocker up your bodies, content your senses, and satiate
the appetite of your desires: the Taper of your life has its limited course,
Pleasures make us grow old, as well as griefs.
as well as that of the day. Every man pursues his carreere, according to the
inviolable Laws of heaven, which has asigned 'em out at once, both the way,
and the bounds. Suffer Time to lead you by the hand to the Tomb, Fata volentem
ducunt, nolentem trahunt.
for fear he hale you thither. But in dying muze at least of that Life, which
never shall have end. All the felicities which you have possessed, are vanished
with the flower of your age, and all those which you will yet enjoy, will fly
away with the rest. What will remain with you then, at the last instant of
your life, Those pleasures cost very dear, which are worth nothing but
repentance.
but an irksome remembrance, to have tasted a thousand pleasures, which are
past, and to have lost so many means of having had others, which would have
lasted eternally. Disinvest your selves then, for one hour every day, of all
your greatness, and in the presence of your own selves, meaning in review of
all your miseries, and mishaps, which are proper to you, confess the truth of
your nullitie, and of your corruption; by this search you shall recover your
selves, and by this confession thus shall you Triumph over your selves.

A PROLVSION upon the EMBLEM of the last Chapter.
VIewing the Ranges of a Library
Of Dead-men's bones pil'd in a Coemitarie,
Great ALEXANDER finds Diogenes,
And thus they Dialogue.
Alex. Cynick, among these
Ruins of frail Mortality, what do look?

Diog. For that, wherein I fear to be mistook,
I seek thy Father PHILIP'S Scull among
This pell-mell undistinguishable Throng.

Alex. Let Us see, which is it? show me. (Diog.) Sure it is that,
Whose nose is bridge-falne.

Alex. Dead-men's all are flat.


Diog. Why then it is that where shrowds perpetual night,
Cav'd in those hollow eye-holes, void of sight.

Alex. Still all are so,


Diog. Why it is yon' skinlesse brow,
Chap-falne, lip-sunke, with teeth-disranked row,
Yond' peeled scalpe

Alex. Thus still all are alike.


Diog. So shall both You and I. and let this strike,
Thy knowledge ALEXANDER, and Thy sense,
'Twixt King and slave once Dead s' no difference.

L'envoy.
Mors seeptra ligonibus aequat. Hor.
THere is no difference, Death has made
Equall' the Scepter, and the Spade.
Noe Dreader Majesty is now
In The Royal Scalp, then Rustic brow.
Fair NEREVS has no beauteous grace,
More then Thersites' ugly face,
Now both are dead, odds there is none
Betwixt the fairest, and fowlest One.
Tell me among'st the hudled pile
Of Dead-mens bones, which was ere while
The subtil'st Lawyer's, or the Dull
And Ignoramian Empty Skull?
Was yond' some valourous Samsons arm?
Or one that never drew sword for harm.
Or wink and tell me, which is which,
Irus the poor, or Croesus rich?
What are they now, who so much stood
On Riches, Honors, and high Blood?
There Is now no Difference, with the Dead
Distinctions all are buried,
Only the Soul as Ill, or Well,
Is Diffrenc't or in Heaven, or Hell.
Alexander, and Diogenes discoursing among the
Sepulchers of the Dead, the Cynick tells the King,
That in the Grave, Monarchs and Meaner Men are all alike.


THE MIRROVR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. IV.
WHat a horrid spectacle is this? what a frightfull object? See you not this
great number of Dead Men's sculls, which heaped one upon another, make a
mountain of horror, and affright, whose balefull, and contagious umbrage,
insensibly invites our bodies on to the grave. What a victory is this over
these? but what an inhumanitie? what a defeat? but what a butchery. May we
not say, that fury and rage, have assassinated, even Natures-selfe, and that we
now alone remain in the world, to celebrate its funerals by our lamentations,
and regreets. Fathers, Mothers, Death is a severe Judge, and pardons none.
Children, Nobles, and Plebeians, Kings, and their subjects are all pell-mell
in this stacke of rotten wood, which Time like a covert, but burning fire
consumes by little and little, not able to suffer, that ashes should be exalted
above dust.

Proud Spirits, behold here the dreadful reverse of the medall. All these sad
objects of mortality, and yet actively animated, with horror and affright, by
their own silence enjoyne the same to you thus to amuze your Spirits in the
contemplation of their deplorable ruins. If you be rich, See here those, who
have possessed the greatest treasures of the world, are not now worth the
marrow of their own bones, whereof the worms have already shared the spoil.
If you be happy; The greatest favorites of fortune, are reduced to the same
noysomnesse as you see the filth that enrounds them. If you be valiant, Hector,
and Achilles, are thus here overcome, behold the shameful marks of their
overthrow. If you be men of Science, Death may be contemned, but not avoided.
Here lies the most learned of the world. It Is the Epitaph on their tomb,
Read it.

I grant more-over, you may be the greatest Princes of the earth. An infinite
number of your companions are buried under these corrupted ruins. Suppose in
fine, that your Soveraignety did extend it self over all the Empire of the
world; A thousand and a thousand too of your semblables, have now nothing more
their own, then that corruption, which devoures, even to the very bones.

Ambitious Heart, see here a Mirror which flatters not, since it represents to
the life the reality of thy miseries. Well may thou perhaps pretend the
conquest of the Universe; even those, who have borne away that universal
Crown, are now crowned, but with dust, and ashes. It Is no wonder the Miser
never thinks of Death, his thoughts are only taken up for this Life.


Covetous wretch, behold the book of thy accounts, calculate all that is due
to thee, after payment of thy debts: learn yet after all this, that thy soul
is already morgaged to devils, thy body to worms, and thus, notwithstanding
all thy treasures, there will not abide with thee one hair upon thy head, one
tooth in thy chops, nor one drop of blood in thy veins, nor never so little
marrow in thy bones, nay the very memory of thy being, would be extinguish't if
thy crimes did not render it eternal, both here, and in the torments of hell.

Pride is but like the noone-flourish of a flower, which at Sunset perishes.
Proud arrogant man, measure with thy bristled brows, the dilatation of the
earth, Brave with thy menacing regards the heavens, and the flarres. These
mole-hills of rottenness, whereof thy carcass is shaped, prepare toward the
tomb of thy vanity. Seneca Epist.
These are the shades of Death inseparable from thy body, Quotidie morimur,
quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vitae.
since it dies every hour. If thou elevate thy self to day, even to the
clouds; to morrow thou shall be debased to nothing. But if thou doubt of this
truth, behold here a thousand witnesses which have made experience of it.

Luxurious Wanton, give thy body a prey to voluptuousness, deny nothing to thy
pleasures; but yet consider the horror, and dreadfulnesse of that
Metamorphosis, when thy flesh shall be turned to filth, and even that to
worms, and those still to fresh ones, which shall devour even thy coffin, and
so efface the very have marks of thy Sepulture.

How remarkable is the answer of Diogenes to Alexander? What art thou musing
on, Cynicke, says this Monarch to him one day, having found him in a
Charnell-yard, I amuze my self here (answers he) in search of thy father
Philips bones among this great number, which thou see; but my labor is in
vain, for one differs not from another.

Great Kings, the discuss of this answer, may serve you now as a fresh
instruction, to insinuate to you the knowledge of your selves. You walk in
triumph to the Tomb, followed with all the train of your ordinary
magnificences: but being arrived at this Port, blown thither with the
continual gale of your sighs, your pomp vanishes away, your Royal Majesty
abandons you, your greatness gives you the last Adieu, and this your mortal
fall equals you now, to all that were below you. The dunghill of your body,
has no pre-eminence above others, unless it be in a worse degree of
rottenness, Corruption optimi pessima.
as being of a matter more disposed to corruption: But if you doubt of this
truth, behold and contemplate the deplorable estate, to which are reduced your
semblables. Their bald scalps have now no other Crown, then the circle of
horror, which environes them; their disincarnated hands hold now no other
Scepter, but a pile of worms, and all these wretchednesses together, give them
to see a strange change, from what they were in all the gloryes of their Court.
These palpable and sensible objects, are witnesses not to be excepted against.
The serious meditation of his miserable condition, is capable to make any man
wise.
Let then your souls submit to the experiment of your senses.

But what a Prodigy of wonder's here* do I not see, the great Army of Xerxes,
reduced and metamorphosed into a handful of dust? All that world of men in
those days, which with its umbragious body, covered a great part of the earth*
shades not so much as a foot on it with its presence. Be never weary of thinking
of these important truths.

In Hercule Octaeo.
Seneca in the Tragedy of Hercule^ brings in Alcmena, with grievous
lamentation, bearing in an urne, the ashes of that great Monster-Tamer; Ecce
vix totam Hercules Complevit urnam, quam leve est pondus mihi, C^i totus ether
pondus incubuit leve?
And to this effect makes her speak; Behold, how easily I carry him in my
hand, who bore the Heavens upon his shoulders. The sense of these words, ought
to engage our spirits to a deep meditation upon the vanity of things, which
seem to us most durable. All those great Monarchs who sought an immortality
in their victories and triumphs, have miss't that, and found Death at last, the
enjoyment of their Crowns and splendours, being buried in the same Tomb with
their bodies. See here then a new subject of astonishment.

The Mathematicians give this Axiom, All lines drawn from the Center to the
Circumference are equal. Kings and Princes, abate your haughtines, The world
is a Game at Chesse, where every of the Set has his particular Name and Place
designed: but the Game done, all the Pieces are pellmell'd into the Bag: and
even so are all motrals into the grave.
your subjects march fellow-like with you to the Center of the grave. If life
gave you pre-eminence; Death gives them now equality. There is now no place of
affectation, or range to be disputed: the heap of your ashes, and their dust,
make together but one hillocke of mould, whose infection is a horror to me. I
am now of humor not to flatter you a whit.

We read of the Ethiopians, that they buried their Kings in a kind of Lestall:
and I conceive there of no other reason, then according to the nature of the
subject, they joined by this action, the shadow and the substance, the effect
with the cause, the stream with its source; for what other thing are we then a
mass of mire, dried and baked by the fire of life; but scattered again and
dissolved by the Winter of Death; and in that last putrefaction, to which Death
reduces us, the filth of our bodies falls to the dirt of the earth, as to its
center, for so being conceived in corruption, let us not think strange to be
buried in rottenness.

It Is well men hide themselves after death in the Earth, or the enclosure of
Tombs, their filth and noysomnesse would else be too discovert.
Earth, dust, and ashes, remain still the same, be it in a vessel of gold, or
in a coffin of wood, or in a Mausolean Tomb of marble. Great Kings, well may
you cover your wretchedness, with a magnificent Sepulcher, they will for all
this not alter condition, the noysomnesse of your bones is never without the
abhorrement, and putrefaction proper to them. And if (suppose) their mass be
reduced into dust, and the wind carry it away, the very wings of the wind are
laden with rottenness, and can scatter nothing else in a thousand places,
where ere they fall. I will a little straggle out the way without loosing my
aim.

Fabius Paulus reports, that upon the Tomb of Isocrates, there was a Siren
seared upon a Ram, and holding a Harp in her hand. And this gave to understand,
That this famous Orator charmed men's souls through their ears, by the sound
of his admirable eloquence. But whereas no melodious air was heard from the
mute Harp of this Siren, it was required of the Spectators, to take for granted
in imagination, the harmony of her sweet touches, How unsufferable is the
vanity of men, who even is on their Tombs, will have the display of their
vain glory.
as emblem of the sweetness of this great Orators voice: But Death imposes
silence on both, and thus remained they a sad sight, both in object, and
mysteries contained under; since now of these passages remains no more but a
weak remembrance, and whereof Time by little, and little effaceth even the
Ideas.

Johannes Baptista Fontanus relates, that upon the Sepulcher of Q. Martius
there was 'graven a Ram supported upon the two fore-feet, and a Hare dead by
its side. The Ram represented the generosity of this great Captain in all
combats, and the dead Hare, his vanquished enemies: But what honor now remains
him after their defeat? This van quisher of an infinite number of miserable
wretches, is at the last overcome with his own miseries. Though Triumphant in
a thousand combats, one marble stone now contains all his trophies, and glory.
O deplorable fate! to have but seven foot-earth, after conquest of the greatest
part of the earth.

Plutarch assures us, that upon the Tomb of Alexander, there was represented
in Emblem Asia, and Europe, appearing vanquished, and in the chains of their
captivity, with this mot, which served as a fresh Trophy, The victory of
Alexander. O poor victory! O sorry triumph! for where are now its Laurels,
and Palms? This great Monarch conquered the whole world, but being never able
to conquer his ambition, This in the end, has taken away all the glory, which
it made him acquire. Great Princes, advance then on to the conquest of the
Universe, but I advertise you one thing, The misprise of the world is more
glorious then all its honors.
All those that are returned from the same action, have much repented
themselves, to have taken so great pains for so small a matter. Le jeu ne vaut
pas la chandelle.
The Game's not worth the Candle, as the Proverb. But if you love to Conquer,
and triumph; your passions will furnish you with such subject every hour.
Let Us once see the end of our carriere.

We read of Cyrus, that he caused to be engraven these words upon the stone of
his Monument, HERE LIES THE CONQVEROVR OF THE PERSIANS. But what excess of
mishap could have reduced so great a Monarch to such an excess of
wretchedness, must it be said? Here lies, of one that lately stood so
triumphant? Would he have men admire his past glory in view of that vault,
where he was enterred? would he have men adore the magnificences of his Life
upon the same Altar, where Death exhibits him as a victime? Is not this a
vanity more worthy of compassion, then envy?

The History of the life of Themistocles was to be read upon the marble of his
Sepulcher, but 'twas forgotten, there to depaint also the story of his Death.
It Is but a poor satisfaction to, have for recompense of so much pains, but
the ostentation of a glorious Sepulcher.
Behold the high deeds of Themistocles, this was the inscription. But to us it
may be of importance to consider, that although the wonders, which he had done,
were only graven upon the port of his Monument, yet for all that, they also
made their entry into it, and followed the fate of their author: so that now
rests nothing of Themistocles, but Name, for of all that he has done, the
wind has carried away the glory, and the small remembrance on it, which sticks
by us, is but a portraict of vanity.

There was represented upon the Tomb of Joshua, the Sun with this
inscription. Josh. 10.12.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon. True it is, the Sun stood still in the
midst of his carreere, to give full Triumph to this great Captain over his
enemies: But after they were overthrown, this Planet jealous of his glory
conducts him also to his grave, as not enduring to see any thing upon earth, as
durable as it self. So true it is, that all things here flit away, There is no
course swifter, then that of Life to Death.
with the swiftness of a Torrent; though their flight to us seem much more
slow.

The Epitaph, which some Sit fides penes Authorem.
writings report us of Adam, has not so much splendor and magnificence, as the
others. He is Dead, says his Epitaph, speaking only of him. O excellent
Epitaph! Men shall say no more of you one day, Great Kings. Well may you with
Q. Martius come off victorious from all combats, and enter in triumph into
Cities with Alexander. Well may you cause to be insculp't the History of your
Acts, upon the marble of your Sepulchers, like as Themistocles; and may you
Sub-poena the Sun for a witness of the reality of your triumphs, like Ioshuah:
Yet for all this, men shall say no more of you, then was said of ADAM, HE IS
DEAD. They are dead, and there is all.

The Epitaph of David composed by some, from consequence of Scripture, is
worthy remarke: Here lies the invincible Monarch, who in his childhood
o'recame Bears, in his adolescency Lions, in his youth Giants, and in his age
himself. Travellour envy not his repose, for thou art in the way to it thy
self. These words are express in a near regard to the sense of those, which
are couch't in Scripture upon this subject, and I thereto can add no more then
this discurse of my astonishment, and rapture.

What! so great a Prince as David, favored by heaven, and redoubted upon
earth, and so endowed by Nature, shall he glympse out a little but like a flash
of lightning, and pass away like a puff of wind? where then shall a man find
constancy and assurance? Inconstancy is the only foundation of created things.
What can be the site and foundation of all these our new wonders of the world,
whose beauty seems to contest for luster with the very Sun? O LORD, to me it
is a most agreeable consolation, to see in my race to the tomb, how all things
follow me. I am well apayd, that there is nothing here below durable, but thy
Word alone, since this makes me hope for an Eternity, which shall never be
subject to the inconstancy of times. Let all things LORD change with me, and
thus I love this change, for in rolling along, from time to time toward the
grave, I still approach toward thee, and consequently to my sovereign repose,
and last felicity. Let us follow our first traces.

The first Epitaph which was put upon Tombs, was that of the fair RACHEL, as
is partly remark't from Scripture, Genesis 35.20.
and Borchardus assures us it was a Pyramide, which Jacob erected, sustained
upon a dozen precious stons, with this inscription, (...) HERE LIES BEAVTIE AND
LOVE.

Ladies, let your sweetness and blandishments now change language, and let 'em
tell us no more that you are fair, since Beauty is buried in the Tomb of the
fair Rachel: But if you make bravado of your crisped hairs, whose glistering
charms dazzle the eyes, and captivatemens souls at once: Her bright locks
dispersed into a thousand golden wreaths, had the power to enchaine men's
hearts, and yet her virtue was to despise this power. But for all this, Ladies,
if you be sair^ to day, there is a to morrow when you shall not.
notwithstanding Nature was never able to exempt from rottenness this Mistress,
or Masterpiece of the works of her hands. Suppose that Majesty it self, has
no better Mirror then from the clear reflections of your ivorie foreheads:
Rachels was so perfect, that it is in vain to seek terms to express its
accuratnesse, and yet now it is nothing but ashes, if so much.

Let your Eyes (suppose) be more clear and beautiful then the Sun, able to
make a rape upon men's liberties, and enamourate the sternest hearts: those of
Rachel were so admirable and bewitching, that she her self ^edoubted their
force and power. Looking her self in a Miriour, her own eyes enflamed her,
^^ll the tenures of bod^l^ perfect^ us are held of time, wh^^e (...) ^^slan^y
^leases away with they every moment.
and of this pleasing heat, she apprehended the iustu^nce, being her self
even tempted to desire it: But for all this, those two sparkling wonders,
quickened with Natures sweetest, and most aymiable graces, are now nothing but
rottenness and corruption.

Be your Cheeks half Lilyes, half Roses, your lips Carnation-Gilly-flowers,
your teeth Orient Pearl, your bosom purest Alabaster, and all these lovely
parts enlivened with a spirit divine: fair Rachel possessed all these
perfections soveraignely, and more then e're you saw, or wished, as elevated
above your knowledge. But (O mishap) she herself, in whom all these rare
beauties were united, and assembled, is now no more ought at all; or if she be
somewhat, it can be but a little dust, and earth, and ashes, Every thing fades
sooner in us, then vanity and sin.
which the worms keep possession of in deposite. O fearful metamorphosis.

Ladies, will you yet presume your selves fair, after you have thus now
assisted in imagination and thought, to the funerals of Beauty it self after
you have read, I say, the Epitaph, which Truth it self has written upon her
Sepulture. I grant you have a thousand sweets, and graces: yet now at least
confess ye, that these blandishments are but of so thin aeriall worths,
that the wind carries them away, as if they were composed of naught else; for
scarcely have they birth, but you see them decay, and then the misprise, that
each one makes of them, renders 'em more capable to produce pity then love.

It Is remark't in the life of the happy Francis Borgia, of the Society of the
Jesuits, that being engaged in the world to seek a fortune, although the
greatness of his birth, and merits, were of very great consideration; the
Emperor Charles the fifth committed to his charge the dead body of his dear
Spouse, to be conducted and carried to the Sepulcher of her ancestors, which
he under took, holding for an excess of honor the commandment which he had
received, and the particular choice which his Majesty had made of his person.
But then, when being arrived to the place, where were to be performed the last
Exequies of this Princess they were desirous to visit the corpse according to
the ordinary formallities accustomed to be practiced in an action so important.
Never was seen so much horror, and dismay, as upon overture of the Coffin, on
the countenances of the Spectators. They look for the body of this Princess
in his presence, There is no object more affrightfull then mortal misery, but
the daily habit of our sad experiences, takes away the horror.
and it is not to be found, for none can know it: her visage heretofore full of
blandishments, and all the graces, both of Majesty, and sweetness is now but
a heap of filth, whereof the worms in swarms, and still increasing, keep the
Court of guard upon the putrefaction. And the rest of her body is still a fresh
stock for these vermin, But O the worm of conscience is to weak souls much
more dreadful, then those which devour the body.
who have now already reasonably well satisfied their hunger with this prey.

Even those that enwrap't this Princess in her winding linen, dare not
maintain it was she, and he to whose care the body was deposited, knows not
what to say, finding himself so confounded, and astonished with so sudden
and affrightfull a Metamorphosis, that he straight resolved at that instant,
to quit the world, and divest himself of all his greatnesses, since they are
not able to exempt the body from corruption.

Ladies, suffer your selves to be no more surprised by vanity, you see to what
extremity of horror and misery, All beauties but of virtue are still
changing.
are reduceable your allurements and charms. The greatest Princess of the
world, and one of the fairest as has been, being now fallen from her
Imperial Throne into the grave, not one of her attendants can retain any
knowledge of her in so short a space. The worms having effaced the lineaments
of her resemblance, have inveloped it so deep into corruption, that no where is
it to be found else being but Rottenness. Reader, render up thy self to the
hits of a Truth so sensible.

It Is reported of Semiramis, that she caused to be put upon her Tomb this
Inscription. The King that shall have need of money, shall find within this
Sepulcher as much as he would have on it. And some time after, King Darius
transported with a violent passion of Avarice, caused this Sepulcher to be
opened; but found within no other riches, then of so much gold as was
necessarily employed, in the engraving of these words. Covetous wretch, It Is an
insolence to the privileges of Nature, to trouble the repose of the Dead.
which come to disturb the repose of the dead, satiate thy greedy passion
upon the treasure of my miseries, since this object is powerful enough to make
thee undervalue all the riches of the ^orld.

You that are Covetous, Enter often, at least in Meditation, into Tombs; visit
to such effect the Churchyards, and you shall find therein more riches ^hen
you wish for, considering the horror of that rotten earth, wherein ^our
semblables are enterred, you will reason without doubt thus;

To what purpose at last will stead ^e all, the treasures, which I amasse ^p in
my coffers, if the very richest of ^he world be but earth, and ashes before my
eyes? What shall I do at ^he hour of my death, with all the ^oods which I now
possess, if even ^^y body be a prey destinated to worms ^^d rottenness?

LORD, I aim at nothing of this world, ^ut that glory alone, which a man may
acquire by the contempt of it, but as is a glory, whereof the acquisition
depends of thy grace, more then my force; All our hopes depend from grace,
nothing from our selves.
give me the Courage, if it please thee, to surmount all the temptations,
which shall oppose themselves against my design of Victory, to the end, that
my vows may be heard, and my pains recompensed. I return to my self.

When I consider, that all the world together, is but as it were a Caemitarie
or Churchyard, wherein every hour of the day, some wretchedness, or other,
brings to the grave those whom such their miserable condition has destroyed, I
have no more passionate desire of life, since evils and troubles are
proprietaries of it, He which meditates of another man's death, puts himself
in mind of his own, since we are all slaves to the same fate.
rather then we. Who can keep account of the number of persons, that expire at
this very moment, that I am now speaking to you, Or the different deaths, which
terminate the course of their carreere? All is universally dreadful, and yet
we quake not, either in horror, or astonishment.

A Walk into Churchyards, and Charnels, though it be sad and melancholy, by
reason of the doleful object there obvious, In many of the Churchyards of
France, are thousands of dead men's skulls and bones, piled up, as at S.
Innocents at Paris, Saint Croix at Orleans, etc.
has yet ne'rethetlesse something in it agreeable to content good souls, in
the contemplation of those very objects, which they there find. How often have
I taken pleasure to consider a great number of Dead-mens sculls arranged one in
pile upon another with this conceit of the vanity, and arrogance, wherewith
otherwile they have been filled? Some have had no other care but of their
Hair, employing the greatest part of their time, Meditation upon the vanities
of life is a piece of serious felicity before death.
either to frizle or to empouder them; and represent unto your selves by the
way, what recompense now betides them for all their pains. Others all full of
ambition, had no other aims but at Coronall wreaths, consider a little in this
their misery, the injustice of their pretentions.

I have remark't in sequel how a little worm did gnaw the arm of some late
Samson, reducing thus all his force to an object of compassion, and
wretchedness, since that arm heretofore so strong, and dreadful, had not now
force enough to resist a little worm. Reader muze often of these truths, and
thou shall find therein more joy then sadness.

Typotius reports of John Duke of Cleveland, that to testify the frailty of
our nature and the miseries of our condition, he had taken the Emblem of a
Lilly, with this device.

Hodie Lilium, Cras Nihilum.
Hodie hoc, cras nihil. It flourishes to day, to morrow it is nothing.

Great Kings, your life is like this Lily, it appears like this flower, at
Sunnerise with glittering and pomp, Even those things, which seem most
durable, have in effect but a morning prime like flowers.
but at noone its vivacitie and luster begin to fade, and at the end of the day
it vanishes away with it, and scarce its being is remembered.

We read in Appianus of Pompey, that after he had triumphed over three parts of
the world, he carried nothing away with him to the grave, but these words, Hic
situs est magnus Pompeius, Pompey is here buried with all his pomp.

O World, how poor art thou, since thou have but such a thing of naught to
give? O Fortune, how miserable art thou, when thy favorites are exposed to
public view, as objects of compassion? Let him trust in 'em who will, a man
shall never be able to escape their tromperies, but by despiting their favors.

Here lies Hannibal: Behold all the honor, which posterity rendered to the
memory of so great a Captain. And Time, Time is as inexorable as Death, and
neither of them spare any.
even jealous of the glory of his name, though not able to bury it in the
Abysses of Oblivion, has yet devoured the very marble of his Sepulcher. Are
not these things truths worthy to raise astonishment?

It Is remark't in Suetonius, of one of the Roman Emperors, that being now at
last gasp, and as it were at a bay with Death, he cried out in excess of
astonishment; Fui omnia, sed nihil expedit: I have been all in all, but now it
nothing helps me. I have tasted all the pleasures of all the greatness of
the world, but the sweetes are changed into soures, and only their bitter
disgust stays with me.

Experiment all the delights of the Earth, Great Kings, the distaste will ever
at last only remain to your mouths, and sorrows to your hearts, and if these
do no good on you, a thousand eternal punishments will possess your souls.
Represent to your selves, that all the felicities of Life, are of the same
nature as that is* That decaies every moment, and they slit away without cease.
The contentments which men receive here below, Contentments causein their
privation as extreme discontents.
are like the pleasures of the Chase, which are only rellish't running. I draw
to an end.

Belon in his Monuments of the Kings of Egypt, says, that they were enterred
with such a splendor of pomp and magnificence, that even those who had
diverse times before been admirers of it, were for all that often in doubt,
whether the people went to place the corpse in the Throne again, rather then in
their Sepulcher. O how ill to the eyes is the luster of this sad kind of
honor! For if vanity be insupportable barely of it self, these excesses of
it, put the spirits upon the rack.

Diodorus Siculus, speaking of the Tomb which Alexander caused to be erected,
for his favorite Ephestion, assures that the magnificences, which were there to
be admired, were beyond as well all value, as example. Marble, Brass, Gold,
and Pearls, were profusely offered to most cunning Artisans, to frame thereof
such works, wherein sadness and compassion, might be so naturally
represented, that they might affect the whole world with the like. Diamonds,
Rubies, and all other precious stones, were there employed, under the Image of
a Sun, Moon, and Stars. It seems this Monarch blinded with Love, thought to
hold the Planets captive in the glorious enchainments of those fair
Masterpieces, A Man should never be angry with his (...) fates the d^^^^^
on it, are ^^^^^lable.
as if he would revenge himself of them for their malign influences, which
they had powered upon the head of his dear Ephestion. But this conceit was
vain, for the same stars, whose captivity he ostented upon this Tomb,
conducted him also by little and little to his grave.

The Romans transported with passion, to honor the memory of the Dictator
Sylla, caused his statue to be framed of a prodigious height, all composed of
perfumes, and cast it into the funeral pile, where his body, whereof of this
was also but a shadow, was to be burned to ashes: Being desirous by this
action, to give to understand, that as the odor of his statue dispersed it
self through all the City of Rome, the much more odoriferous savor of his
peculiar virtues would spread it self through all the world. But to go to the
rigor of the literal sense, it is credible, they had not cast in this
aromaticall statue into the stacke, but only to temper the excess of the
stench of the body, which was to be consumed with it. And I proceed to imagine
beside, that the odor of this statue, the cinders of his body, and all the
glory of the actions of Sylla, had all the same fate, since the wind triumph't
over 'em altogether. Behold the reverse of the Medall of Vanity.

It Is remark't in the life of the Emperor Severus, by the report of DION, that
he made to be set at the gate of his Palace an Vrne of marble, and as often as
he went in or out, he was accustomed to say, laying his hand on it; Behold the
Case that shall enclose him, whom all the world could not contain.

Great Kings, have often the same thoughts in your souls, if you have not the
like discourses in your mouths, the smallest vessel of earth is too great for
the ashes of your bodies, which shall remain of them, after the worms have
well fed on them: for the wretchedness of your humane condition, reduces you
at last to so small a thing, that you are nothing at all. But if I must give a
name to those grains of corrupted dust, which are made of your deplorable
remains, I shall call them the Idea's of a dream, Man only is considerable
in respect of his noble actions.
since the memory of your being can pass for no other together with the time.
Behold a fresh subject of entertain.

Some of our Ethnicke Historians report to us, that the Troglodites buried
their kindred and friends, with the tone of joyful cries, and acclamations of
mirth.

The Lothophagi cast them into the Sea, choosing rather to have them eaten of
fishes in the water, then of worms in the earth.

The Scythians did eat the bodies of their friends, in sign of amity,
insomuch that the living were the Sepulchers of the dead. The Hircanians cast
the bodies of their kindred to the Dogs. The Massagetes exposed them as a
prey to all manner of ravenous beasts.

The Lydians dried them in the Sun, and after reduced them to powder, to the
end the wind might carry them away.

Amongst all the customs, which were practiced amongst these strange Nations,
I find none more commendable then the first, of the Troglodites, looking for no
hell, they had good reason to celebrate the funeral of their friends and
kindred, with laughter and acclamations of cheerefulnes, rather then with
tears, and lamentations.

For though that Life be granted us by divine favor, There is mo^e of tem^^ent
in die th^^ to live, if we ^^nsider the end, which man was created.
yet we enjoy it but as a punishment, since it is no other thing then a
continual correction of our continual offenses. Besides the sad accidents
which accompany it inseparably, even to the grave are so numerous, that a^ man
may justly be very glad at the end of his journey, to see himself discharged
of so ponderous a burden. The body of Man being made of earth is subject to
earth; but the soul holds only of its sovereign Creator.
Not that I here condemn the tears, which we are accustomed to shed, at the
death of our nearest friends, for these are ressentments of grief, whereof
Nature authorizeth the first violences. But neither do I blame the virtue of
those spirits, who never discover alteration upon any rencounter of the
mishaps, and miseries of the world, The living are more to be bemoned then the
dead, they being still in the amidst ^f this life's tempest, but these are
a^^eady arrived to their Port.
how extreme soever they be. And what disaster is it to see dye, either our
kindred or friends, since all the world together, and Nature it self, can do
nothing else. What reason then can a man have to call himself miserable, for
being destinated to celebrate the funerals of those, whom he loves best, since
the divine Providence, has soveraignely established this order, and since
moreover in this carreere of Death, to which all the world speeds, the Present
on it, being not distinguished but by Time, it will appear when all is come to
the upshot, that one has lived as long as another, since all ages though
different during their continuance, are equal then when they are past. Change
we the discourse.

I advow once again, There is no remedy more sovereign to cure the passion
of arrogance, then this the of consideration of Caemitaries, and Tombs. The
most vainglorious and ambitious are forced to yield themselves at the
assaults of these sad objects. For a spirit never so brave and valourous,
cannot but be astonished, when he sees at his feet the bones and dust of an
infinite number of persons, To what purpose is Courage against those perils,
which cannot be avoided.
who were as valiant as he, what thoughts can he have but of submission, and
humility, considering that one part of himself is already reduced into dust
and filth? I say a part of himself, since he himself is but a piece of the
same matter, which now serves him for object, and to the same last point will
be extended one day the line of his life.

When Virgil tells us of the fate of Priam, Aeneid. lib. 2. lacetingens litore
truncus, Avulsumque humeris caput, and sine no mine cor^u^.
he bring in Aeneas astonished at it, that so great a Monarch should leave to
posterity no other Monument of his greatness, but a Tronck of flesh, a head
separated from the shoulders and a carcass, without name or shape.

He which makes himself rightly sensible of his miseries is partly in way to
be exempted from their tyranny.
Great Kings, This truth is a Mirror which flatters not. Gaze here often in
these meditations, and you will surely at length consider, that All is full of
vanity, and that this glory of the world, whereof you are so strongly
Idolaters, is but a Fantasy, and Chimera, to which your imaginations give
that beauty, which charms you, and that delicacie, which ravishes you. What
think you is it, to be the greatest of the world? It Is an honor, whereof
misery and inconstancy are the foundations, for all the felicities which can
arrive us, are of the same nature as we are, and consequently, as miserable as
our condition, and as changing. This Earth whereon you live, is the lodging of
the dead, what eternity believe you to find in it? Eternity of honors,
riches, and contentments, there was never any but in imagination, and this
Idea, which we have of them, is but a reflection from the lightning of Truth,
wherewith heaven illuminates noble souls, thus to guide them to the search of
the true source of all, by the aid of these small rivolets. There is nothing
eternal in this world but this scope of truth.
It is time to finish this work.

I have made appear to you in the first Chapter, the particular study which a
man ought to take, to come to the Hoc jubet illa Pyrhicis oraculis adscripta
vox, Nosce Te.
Knowledge of himself, Seneca.
wherein lies the accomplishment of perfection. And herein the precept is, The
Consideration of the miseries, which are destinated to our Nature, as being so
many objects capable enough, to force up the power of our reason, to give
credence to the resentments of frailty, which are proper to us. But this is not
all to be merely sensible of our wretchedness. Serious Consideration must
often renew the Ideas of them in our souls, more then the hard experience of
them. And this to the end, that vanity, to which we are too incident, may not
surprise us, He that searches into himself shall not lose his labor.
during the intervals of a meditation, so important. We must often dive into
our selves, and seek in the truth of our nothingnesse, some light to make us
thus to know our selves. Afterward making a rise a little higher, it is
necessary to consider the End, for which we were created, and in this
consideration to employ all the powers of the several faculties of our souls,
to the generous design of getting possession of that glory. Behold the
Corollarie of my first Argument, or Chapter.

The second instructs us a new means, to resist powerfully the hits of the
vanities of the world, from the example of the wretchedness of Saladine.
one of the greatest Monarchs of the world. Fortune had refused him nothing,
because she meant to take all from him, for in the height of his glory he finds
himself reduced to the poorness of his shirt only, which is all he carries
with him into the grave. Povetty and Riches depend upon opinion, and a noble
soul is above his fortune in what condition somever he be.
And this makes us sensibly perceive that the greatnesses of the earth are
Goods, as good as estranged from humane nature, since in this mortal and
perishing condition we can only possess their usance, and the term of this
possession is of so short endurance that we see as soon the end, as the
beginning. Reader represent unto thy self, how thou shall be dealt with at thy
death, both by Fortune and the world, since the Minion of this blind Goddess,
Et quae veneraris, and quae-despicis unus exae quabit cinis.
and the greatest of the Universe is exposed all naked in his shirt in sight of
all his subjects to be given in prey to the worms, Sen.
as well as the most miserable of the Earth.

The Third Chapter, where Life leads Death in Triumph teaches, us the Art to
vanquish this untamable, by considering its weakness: for in effect, if Death
be but a privation, The horror of Death, is purely in the weakness of
imagination.
it is to be deprived of reason and judgment, to give it a being, since it
cannot subsist but in our impaired imaginations. The fantosme of an Idea is it,
whose very form is immateriall, as having no other subsistence, I say but
that, which the weakness of our spirit gives it. And again, to come to the
most important point; Let this be the close of the recapitulation, that you may
have means not to stand in fear on it; Sen.
Incertum est, quo te loco Mors expectet: itaque tu illam omni loco expecta.
Muze on it always, look for it in all places, and o'recomming your selves,
you shall triumph over it. Never did an unblemisht life fear Death.

The last Chapter, where the object of Caemiteries, and Sepulchers, is laid
before your eyes, may now again serve for the last touch, since it is a
Theater, where you must play the Tragedy of your lives. All this great number
of Actors, Hodie mihi Cras tibi. Think on that Reader, it may be thy turn to
morrow.
whose bones and ashes you see there, have every one played their part, and it
may be, that the hour will soon Knell, that you must act yours. Reader, live
ever in this providence, a Man cannot too soon resolve to do that well, which
howsomever must be done of necessity. God grant, that these last lines may
once again reproach thee, the bad estate of thy Conscience; delay not too long
this Check to thy self, least too late the regreets be then in vain. Thy
salvation is fastened to an instant, Momentum est unde pendet aete^nitas.
consider the infinite number of them, which are already slip't away, when
perhaps at that moment, thou were in estate (if dying) to incur the
punishment of a second Death, and that eternal. If thou trust to thy youth,
put thy head out of the window, and thou shall see carried to the grave some
not so old as thy self. If thou rely upon the health, which thou now
enjoyest, it is but a false going-dyall. The calm of a perfect health, Saepe
optimus status corpotis pericul^ susimuuuml;s.
has oftentimes ushered the Tempest of a sudden Death. What hopest thou for?
Hip.
hope is deceitful; what stayest thou so^. Sera nimis Vita est crastina, vive
hodie.
A wise man ought never to defer till to morrow, what should be done to day.
Lastly, what desire thou? The peace of conscience is the only desirable good.
Go on then right forward, thou can not miss the way which I have chalk't
thee.

FINIS.
PERLECTORI, The TRANSLATOVR'S COROLLARIE.
SO, Now it is done, although it be no Task,
That did much Brains, or toylesome Study ask:
The meaning I 'vouch good, but Merit small,
In rendering English, the FRENCH PRINCIPAL:
It is but a Translation I confess,
And yet the Rubs of Death in it nerethelesse
May trippe some cap'ring Fancies of the Time,
That Domineere, and Swagger it in Rhyme,
That Charge upon the Reader, and give Fire,
On all, that do not (as they do) admire,
Either their rugged Satyrs cruel vein,
Or puffe-paste Notes 'bove Ela in high strain,
Then in prevention quarrel like a cursed,
Scold, who being guilty, yet will call Whore first.
When any dies whose Muse was rich in Verse,
They claim Succession, and profane his Hearse,
They only are Heirs of his Braine-estate,
Others are base, and illegitimate.
All but their own Abettors they defy,
And LORD-it in their Wit-Supremacy.
Others they say but Sculke, or lie in the lurch,
As we hold Schismatics from the true Church,
So hold they all, that do decline their way,
Nor swear by Heaven, All Is excellent they say,
Twere well they would see the fing'ring on these frets,
Can neither save their Souls, nor pay their Debts
Or would they they think of Death as they should do,
They would live better, and more honored too.
It Is base to do base deeds, yet for false fame,
To Keep a stir, and bustle into Name:
Whilst each applauds his own, contemnes an others,
Becons his own deserts, but his he smothers,
They fear Fame's out of breath, and therefore they,
Trumpet their own praises in their own way.
Or join in Trick of Stale Confed'racy.
Called Quid pro Quo, Claw me, and I Will claw thee
Marry, at others ( Tooth and Nail) they fly,
That do not tread their Path, but would go bye.
Farewell to these, my aim not here insists,
Leave we these wranglers unto equal lists.
To Nobler Natures I my breast expose,
The Good I bow to in an humble Cloze:
To such as knowing how vain this Life is,
Exalt their thoughts to one better then This.
It Is the best Method to be out of Love;
With things below, and thence to soar above.
To which effect my souls integrity,
In L'envoy thus salutes each courteous eye.
L'ENVOY.
INgenuous READER, thou do crown
The Moral active course laid down,
By De la SERRE, what is penned,
If thy ACTIONS recommend.
Relating to the first EMBLEM.
WHen haughty thoughts impuffe thee, than
Dictate thy self, Thou art but Man,
A fabric of commixed Dust,
That's all the prop of humane trust.
How dares a Clod of mouldring Clay
Be Proud, decaying every day?
And yet there is away beside,
Wherein may be a lawful Pride.
When sly Temptations stir thee, Than,
Again the Word, Thou art a Man,
Rouse up thy Spirits, do not yield,
A brave resistance winnes the Field:
Shall a soul of Heavenly breath,
Grovell so far, its worth beneath:
Foully to be pollute with slime,
Of any base and shameful crime?
Thou art a Man, for Heaven borne,
Reflect on Earth, disdainefull scorn,
Be not abused, since Life is short,
Squander it not away in sport:
Nor hazard heavens eternal Joys,
For a small spurt of wordly Toys.
Do Something ere thou do bequeath,
To Worms thy flesh to Air thy breath;
Something that may, when thou art dead,
With honor of thy name be read.
Something that may, when thou art cold,
Thaw frozen Spirits, when it is told,
Something that may the grave control,
And show thou had a noble Soul.
Do something to advance thy bliss
Both in the other World, and This.
Relating to the second EMBLEM.
WEre both the Indias treasures Thine,
And thou LORD of every Mine,
Or had thou all the golden Ore,
On Tagus or Factolus Shore,
And were thy Cabinet the Shrine,
Where thousand pearls and Diamonds shine,
All must be left, and thou allowd,
A little linen for thy Shroud.
Or if 'twere so thy Testament,
Perhaps a goodly Monument.
What better is a golden Chase,
Or Marble, then a Charnell place?
Charon hence no advantage makes,
A halfe-penny a soul he takes,
Thy heirs will leave thee but a Shirt,
Enough to hide thy rotten Dirt.
Then be not Greedy of much pelf,
He that gets all, may lose himself.
And Riches are of this Dilemme,
Or they leave us, or we must them.
Death brings to Misers double Woe,
They loose their Cash, and their souls too.
Change then thy scope to heavenly gains,
That wealth eternally remains.
Relatory to the third EMBLEM.
BE not curious, to amaze
With glittering pomp the Vulgar gaze,
Strive not to cheat with vain delight,
Those that are caught with each brave sight.
How soon will any gaudy show,
Make their low Spirits overflow,
Whose Souls are ready to runne-ore,
At any Toy nere seen before.
Rather thy better thoughts apply,
For to address thy self to dye.
Be never so glorious, after all
Thy latest pompe's thy Funeral.
Shall a dress of Tyrian Dye,
Or Venice*gold Embroyderie,
Or new-fash'on-varied Vest,
Tympanize thy out-strutting breast,
There Is none of these will hold thee tacke,
But thy last color shall be Black.
Be not deceived, There comes a Day,
Will sweep thy Gloryes all away.
Mean while, the thought on it may abate
The Excesses of thy present 'state.
Death never can that Man surprise
That watches for it with wary Eyes.
Do So, And thou shall make thereby
A Virtue of Necessity;
And, when thy Dying-day is come,
Go, like a Man that is walking home.
Heaven Guard thee with Angelicke power
To be prepared for that hour,
When every Soul shall feel what It Is
To have lived Well, or done Amiss.
Relating to the fourth EMBLEM.
LEt not the Splendor of high Birth
Be all thy Gloss without true worth,
Let neither honor, nor vast wealth
Beauty, nor Valor, nor firm health
Make thee bear up too high thy head,
All men alike are buried.
Stare not with Supercilious brow,
Poor folks are Dast, and so art Thou.
Triumph not in thy worldly Odds,
They dye like men whom we count Gods,
And in the Grave it is all one,
Who enjoyed all, or who had none.
Death cuts off all superfluous,
And makes the proudest One of us,
Nor shall there diffr'ence then between,
The dust of LORDS, or slaves be seen.
Together under ground they lie
Without distinctive Heraldry;
Unless it be thar some brave Tomb,
Do grace the Great-ones in Earths womb.
But better it is that Heaven's door,
Is oft'nest open to the poor;
When those, whose backs and sides with sin,
Are bunch't, and swollen, cannot get in.
Beware the Bulk of thy Estate,
Shocke thee from entrance at that Gate.
Give Earth to Earth, but give thy Mind
To Heaven, where it is seats assigned,
If, as it came from that bright Sphere;
Thither thou tend, not fix it here.
Live, that thy SOVLE may White return,
Leaving it is Partner in the VRNE,
Till a BLESSED DAY shall reunite,
And beam them with Eternal Light.
Ainsi Souhaite Vostre tres humble Serviteur Tho. Carry.
TOWER HILL, Antepenultima Augusti. 1638.
To my endeared Friend, the Translatour, Mr THOMAS CARRY.
1.
It Is Moral Magic, and Wits Chymistrie,
Out of Deaths Ugliness
T'extract so trim a Dress:
And to a Constellated Crystal tie
Such an imperious spell,
As who looks on it well,
By sprightie Apparitions to the Eye
Shall see he must, and yet not fear to dye.
2.
No brittle toy, but a tough monument
(Above steel, marble, Brass)
Of Malleable Glass:
Which also will (while Wisdom is not spent)
Out-price the adored wedge,
And blunt Times Sickle's edge:
Ushered with gracious safety in its vent,
For, to disfeaver Spirits fairly lent.
3.
FRIEND, here remoulded by Thy English hand,
(To speak it, is no fear)
In hew as slicke and clear.
Nay, when Thy own Minerva now does stand
On a Composing state;
'Twas curt'sie, to Translate.
But most thy choice does my applause command;
First for thy Self, then for this crazie Land.
H. I. LECTURO.
COnspice, quod vani nudat tectoria Fastus;
Et penetrabundi concipe vera Libri,
O falsis animose bonis: Sirenaque rerum
Dedoctus, vitreas exue delicias.
Interpres Genium, quo vivax Author, habebit:
Nec tantum Patrii claustra decora soni.
Tam been Cinnamea pingit feralia canna,
Phoenicis miro quae qua si rapta rogo.
E gemitu solatiolum, e paedore venustas,
Eque cadavereo vita reculta situ.
Alter in arcanis sapiat subtle docendis,
Sublimique suus stet ratione liber:
Alter amet flores, bibuli mulcedo popelli;
Surdescens tandem plausibus ipse suis.
Praesentem Libitina librum sibi vendicat; illa
Corripiens artem Rhetoris, illa Sophi.
H. I. TO ENTEYXAENO IAIKA.
(...)
(...)OLON, KENO'N.
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...) ((...)
(...))
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
HEN. JACOB. Advertissement au Lecteur.
Generous READER,
'TWas upon occasion of the last Summer's sad effects generally over all
England, and some ressentments of mine own; when the Reading and Copying
English this Author's French Original, seasonably engaged my thoughts, and
Pen. I think all is not forgotten yet: But in a longer intervall, and indeed
always, there ought still to be a deep apprehension of our Mortality. This
our AUTHOR inculcates to us in Notions quick and pertinent, though in some
historical allusions he may a little o're-trust his Memory.

Valebis. THO. CARRY.

-- Laudatus abunde Non fastiditus --
Jmprimatur, Lingua Vernacula,

SA. BAKER.


