A faithful and true pronosticatio^ upon the year.M. CCCCC. xlix. and
parpetually after to the worlds end gathered out of the prophecies and
scriptures of god, by the experience and practice of his works, very
comfortable for all Christen hertes divided into seven chapters. And in the
end ye shall find an almanac for ever, translated newly out of hye Alma^yne
into englysh by Miles Couerdale.

THe first chapter of genesis declares how that at the beginning when the
water was now in his place, God said: Let the earth bring forth grene grass
and herb, that bears seed, and fruitful trees, that may bear fruit every
one after his kind. etc. Genesi, i. And so it came to pass Afterward upon
the forth day made he lyghtes in the firmamente of heaven, one grater light
for the day, and a less for the night, namely the Son and the Moon, and
made them to be tokyns, and not to have influence upon these nethermost bodies.
as the Philosophers and our pronosticatours have written hither to. Contrary
unto it ye god says. here, how that they should be unto tokens, and how that
the earth was fruteful or ever the stars and lyghtes were made.

Now where as they show any thing yt is his doing, and not theyrs, he only
does great wonders. Psalm.c. xxxv. he covers the sky with clouds, he
prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the
mountains. Psalm.c. xlvi. therefore are not they the cause of tempests or
storms, nether of good wethers or frutefulnes in these nethermost creatures,
whether it be in man, be, or fruit: but are tokens only, For the which cause
God does often warn us in the law. Leuiti.xx. Deuteronomy.xviii. And in the prophets
Iere.xxvii. Esa.xlvii. yt we should regard no heaven gaser no beholder of
stars, nor soythsayer because they have no power to change the time nor yt
courle of heaven

wherefore me think it a foolysh thing, yt we are so afraid where no fear
should be, and that we regard so many vain pronosticacyons. why do not we
rather rejoice, in so much as all things are in Gods hand, and governed by
Jesus Christ. Must not all things be subdued unto him.i

Cor.xv. Heb, ii, Can any creature of his, work otherwise then he will have it
Or how so ever they work, do not al things turn to our best No doubt Put
thou thy trust then in god, and be sure, that as long as he is thy fre^d
(which he has promised to be if you love him and his word) there ca^ nothing
harm the. And as for the plages yt shall happen this year unto yt persecuters
and enemies of Gods word, (if thou cleue unto it) thou nedest not fear the^
nor be afraid of the^, but certaynlye may thou look to be pertaker not only
of his outward blessings this year, but of the joy for to come, which is
everlasting.

The first chapter concerning the governors of this year.
When I look well and consider the hy master of ye stars in his doctrine and
writing, Christi. the ^ospell the ^orlde.
I find ye this year and from hence forth unto ye end of the world, the
Sun, Mars and Marcurius shall reygne Now where as other me^ seek their
speaculacio^ out of the stars that do not I regard so much as experience in
the doctrine of Christ. And for the exhortacion and warning of all estates, I
will describe the nature and properties of these three gouernoures.

The Soon a mighty Lord over heaven and earth, is Isesus Christ our only
redemer and savior, in all thiges like unto his heavenly father Psalm, ii.
Io.xiiii. the bryghtnes of his glory. Sap.vii. Heb.i. the image of the
invisible god: by whom al things that are in heaven and earth, were created,
things visible and things invisible, whether they be majesty's or lordeshyps,
either rules or powers, Col.i. This Jesus Christ the everlasting word of his
heavenly father, which took our nature upon him. Heb, ii Phil.ii. and showed
us his fathers will, coming into this world, brought with him Mars that is
the gospel, The go^ is called Mars.
even one of the bosom of his father. But wonder not thou that I call the
gospel Mars. Christ our savior says in Mathewe, Think not yt Iam come to
send peace upon earth, I came not to send peace, but a sword, For I am come
to set a man at variau^ce against his father, and ye daughter aginste her
mother. etc. and a ma^s foes shall be they of his own household. Mat.x. Luce.xii.
Michee.vii. Is not this a battle They shall put you to trouble says he and
kill you, and of al people shall ye be hated for my names sake. ^ersecuti^^
folo^^eth the ^ospell.
Mat.xxiiii. Therefore may the gospel well be called Mars, for where it is
preached there is ye sword, there is troble and persecucyon, there will the
enemies sometime draw their daggers at the preachers thereof.

As for Mercurius, the Poets said him to be the messenger and oratoure of ye
Neithen gods, for the which cause he may well be lykened unto the world,
which wc eloquence, painted words and outward appearau^ce perfourmeth ye
message of the deuel, and entiseth me^ so long, till it bring them into
destruction. But (as saint Ihon says in his epistle) the world passes away
and the lust thereof i. to.ii. And as S. Paul says. The fasshion of this
world passes away i. Cor.vii. Therefore must we so hold us within the fear
of god ye we suffer not our selves to be disceaued or seduced by Mercurius
from the son and Mars, Lest we be corrupt with this dsceytful world and so be
defrauded of ye ioi of ye ever lasti^g world to com, nether should yt painted
wisdom of this world move us, in so much as god makes it very foolyshnes.i.
Cor.i. and his word (which seems to be but folyshnes in the sight of the world
that shows he to be only wisdom and the very power of god, to the
salvation of as many as believe thereon. Roma.i.

who so ever now has the grace to perceive and consider this, let him not go
after Mercurius, let him not follow the world and the beautiful lusters thereof,
let him not enter in at the wide gate and broad way that leads unto
destruccio^. Mathe.vii. but let him go in at the strait gate, and at the
narowe way, which is even Jesus Christ. Ioh.xiiii. the only mercyseate.
Romansiii. and mean to come by the favor of GOD. By him who soever entrethe,
he may be sure to be saved. Ioh.x. to receive mercy, to find grace, and to be
helped in the time of need. Hebre.v. which god the father grant us for his
sake. Amen.

The second Chapter, concerning the increace or growinge of fruits, and the
dearth of the same.
THe son shows plainly: that all soch as fear god, shall have a very
fruitful year. Psalm. c* xxvii. and ple^teousnes in the days of derth.
Psalm.xxxvi. In so much yt though Christ send them without wallet, without
scripe and with out shues, yet will he so provide for them that they shall
lack no thing. Luce.xxii. For he sayethe him self: The labourer is worthy of
his meat. Math.x. Luc.x. who so now will labor, shall eat. But who so ever
will not work, Sturdy (...) felows she not eace.
ought out to eat, ii Tessal, iii.

Now if we labor, I say, we shall eat also. Ye but where shall we get it?
Christ our sauyoure says: Be not ye careful for your life, what ye shall
eat or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not
ye life more worth then meat, and the body more of value then raiment?
Behold ye souls of the air, for they sow not, nether reap, nor yet carry
into the barnes, and yet your heavenly father fedeth them* math vi. He gives
meat to the young caves. Psa. c.xlvi. he opens his hand and fyllethe his
creatures with plenteousnes. Psalm. c.iii.

^e ought (...) labor ^^th our ^andes and (...) cast our are upon the Lord.
Therefore though our hands should always be occupied in some good labaure.
Ephesians.iiii. yet ought not our hertes to take thought what we shall eat or
drink, but first to care how to seek the king dome of god. math.vi. and so
should all things necessary be ministered unto us. And why? Man, lives not, by
bred only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of god.
Deute.viii. math iiii. which thing Christ our save our has manifestly
declared, in that he fed so many people with so few loaves and fyshes, like as
he had done before unto the children of Israel by ye space of forty years in
the wilderness, where they wanted nothing, for he him self fed them, and
blessed them in all ye works of their hand. wherefore in so much as god our
merciful father takes soch care for us (.i. Pe v.) we should by right cast
all our care upon him, and fathfully to cleue unto his word in our hertes; so
ye we nether mystrust his godli provision, nor lead an idle life. And if we
mean well in our hertes, and deal truly with our hands, doutlesse he shall
send us necessary meat by some body, as he did to Elias the prophet by the
wedowe in Sarepta.iii. Re.xvii. and like as he provided a break fa^t unto
Daniel among the Lions by the ministration of Abacuc. Da^.xiiii, Thus, I say,
they that fear god* shall have plentye and abundance of all things this
year,

But so far as I can se or perceive By this theological Astronomye, Mars
threateneth a very evil and unfruitful year to diverse spiritual prelates,
as popish bishops, and popish preistes, and other mo, except ye son through
his gracious influence be good unto the^, although Mercurius reign i^ the^
with never so many horces, great pomp, authority, riches, oppression, with
exceeding many servants and dogs, which nevertheless if they will forsake
their a^^sions, and dyete them selves after the qualities of the Son, they
shall be kept fro many diverse fur fettes, and have a very fruitful year in
all things. And so would I council them to do. For Mars goes about now this
year, to withdraw from the spiritualtye the excess of their fruits, riches,
and worldly auctorite (like as he has threatened them this great while) and
intends plainly to refourme them, And where as their whordome and old
custom withstand the furtherau^ce of ye truth Mars purposes to take ye
Son to help, and with the plaster of marriage to heal the infirmity of
their uncleanness, ye and with his own sword of the spirit, to subdue their
old evil customs,

As for the multitude of the ungodly in general, there shall come a great derth
upon the^, acording to ye words of a certain true a^conomer, Behold, the time
comes (says the lord god) that I shall send an honger into the earth, not
the honger of bred, nor the thyrst of water, but an honger to hear ye word of
the lord, so yt they shall go from the one see to the other, ye from the
north unto yt east, re^nynge about to seek the word of ye lord and shall not
find it. Amos.viii. but because they will not believe the truth and have
pleasure in unrighteous, therefore shall God send them strong delusion that
they may believe lies.ii. Tess.ii. so that the time shall come wha^ they shall
desire to se one day of the son of man, and shall not se it. Luce.xvii. I
pass over many other plages that Mars threateneth unto them, because they will
not know the time of their visitacion. Luce.xix.

The third Chapter concerning the sicknesses and disceases of this year.
THe Egipcyans had a manner and use in their ba^ckettes, to carry about an
image of death* and to say unto every man that was at the bancket, Look
upon this, eat, drink and be merry, such one shall thou be when thou dyest.

And this they did (no doubt) to put men in remembrance of temperauncy and of
death, lest they indiscreetly through excess of eating and drinking, should
happen to dye before their age, for so does god use to punyshe soche syn?
wherefore if we dyete and temper our selves through the influence of the sone,
we shall have few diseases, except Mars bring some other thing to pass, that
we mysknowe not our selves.

As for such as follow Mercurius, living night and day in ryote and
uncleanness, these (I say) shall through ye Son have great diseases in all the
members of the body, in the lunges, lever, hands and sete, yea and parel also
of the soul, I pass over ye poverty that dronkardes and riotous persons
shall have? woe shall be unto them? sorrow, strife, brawling, and wounds shall
be among them.

Pro.xxiii. yea and soch as will needs be ouerladen with excess of eating and
with dronkennes. etc shall suddenly be prevented with the day of the Lord.
Luce.xxi

There is douteles a marvelous sore punyshme^t to come upon the hole world of
the wicked, sword wars, honger, not only spiritual (as I said before) but
temporal, which plages have been before our time, but are not yet all paste. I
need not reherce the pestilence and other great plages that god will send to
the reformacion of as many as shall be warned. As for the common sort of the
ungodly, there shall such a fearfulnes of death come upon the^ yt they shall not
tell where to turn the^ nor how to escape death. O how byter and greueous shall
the remembrance of death be this year, to soch as seek rest and consolacion
in trans^tory substance of this world, to soche as know of no aduersite but
have good days, and live in* voluptuousnes. Eccle.xli. But O death how
acceptable and welcome shalt thou be unto soch as are in aduer site, i^ their
last age, or in despair*

Who so ever thou be therefore ye woldeste escape the sickenesses of this year,
bewarre that thy body be not ouerladen with over much eating or with
dronkennes, man is out (...).
Luc xxi. For excess of meats brings sycknesse. and glotonye comes at the
last to an unmeasurable heat, Eccle, xxxvii, Through glotonye shall many one
perisshe this year, but he that dyeteth him sell e temperatlye, shall prolonge
his life As for insatiable eaters, they shall not only sleep unquietly this
year, but shall have ache and pain of the body. Eccle.xxxi.

Concerning the spiritual disease and sycknes that shall reign this year, as
it has done before time* Pault one of ye truest Astronomers says plainly,
that we be all sinners. To.iii. if we say that we have no sin, we disceaue
our selves, and the truth is not in us i. Io.i. This is now the spiritual
disease that shall commonly reign this year, sin is (...) in them will no a
know of it
but specially in them that feale least of it, and will not knowledge it. Io.ix.
For ye Son has soch virtue, that who so ever can. se this disease, and will
complain of it.i. Ioh.i, it shall cleanse them, and make them whole. ye ye
astronoemer says plainly, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners.i. Timo.i. And an other that warns us in his pronosticacio^ to
bewarre of this sickness, gives us yet good conforte and says: If any man
sin, we have an advocate with the father even Jesus Christ which is
ryghteous. and he it is that optayneth grace for our sins, not for our
sins only. but also for ye sins of the whole world.i. Ioh.ii.

Who soever therefore has this disease as there is no man without it let him
do wisely* let him prove and examen him self by times.i. Cor.xi. ii. Cor.xiii.
man is ^rt sin
And go to physic before he be to se or sick. Eccle.xviii. And above all
things let him bewarre of soche false surgeons and feigned phisicyans, as heal
the hurt of the people with sweet words. Iere.vi. and as a true Astronomer
reporceth) through sweat preachinges and flatteringe words disceaue the hearts
of inocentes, and all for their belyes sake. Romansxvi.

Soch false phisicia^s lay wrong plasters to men's sores, and speak the
meaning of their own eherte, but not out of the mouth of the lord Iere.xxiii.
yea they make soche as despise the word of god, to continue scill in their
dregs. Soph. i, and to do as their fathers have done before them to their
utter de struccion. Ierm.xliiii. For soche false Phisians, as long as they
have any thing to byte upon, preach unto men that all shall be well,
Michee: iii. and mayntaint them in their wyckednes, making them believe to do as
their el^ers have done before them, though it be contrary to goos word, is the
right way. Tusihe, say they, ye shall prosper right well. Ier.xxiii And unto
all them that walk after the lust of thyer own heart, they say: Tusshe,
there shall no mysfortune happen unto you. ye shall se no swerd, there shall no
ho^ger come upon you. Iere.xiiii. But if a man put not something in their
mouths, they preach of war against hi^. mic.iii. wherefore if thou wylt be
hole of thy disease, bewa^ of soch feigned Phicia^s, at whom if thou seek health
they shall make the pay dubble for it, ^w aere of use phisici us
yt shall never do the good, but go thou boldly unto him, which only heals
the contrite in heart, and byndeth up their wondes. Psalm. c.xlvi. He shall not
cast ye away. Ioh.vi. But if thou come unto him, he shall refreshe the, he
shall ease the. Math* xi. if thou be sick, go unto him for he is the right
Phisician for soch as are diseased. Math.ix. if thou be thyrsty, and come
unto him, he has the water of life for the. Ioh.iiii. if thou be an ho^gred
after righteousness, thou shall be satisfied. Mat.v. Summa he him self will
feed the, and bring the to rest. Eze.xxxiiii. Though thou be lost, he wylseke
ye though thou haste gone astray, he will bring the again. though thou be
wounded, he will bind the vpthough thou be sick and weak, he will make the
hole and strong Seek him therefore this year and as long as thou lyuest, for
with him there is mercy, and ple^teous redempcyon. Psalm.xxix. He has salvation
enough for the, thou nedest not to seek help at any other, nether is there
salvation in any other. Act.iiii. Therefore bids he the ever come to him
self.

Math.xi. Ioh.vi. He never bad ye seek other phisicions to heal the of this
disease, for there is no help in the children of men. Psalm. c.xlv As for
corporaldiseaces, god has ordained outward medecynes for them in his creatures
by the ministracyon of true phisicia^s. which gift of god no wyseman will
abhor. Eccle: xxxviii. But against the sycknesse of sin there is no help
nor succor: but only in him self. And as there is no salvation without him,
so is there ever grace. mercy, pardon, and clean remission freely in him,
Esa.lv. for all soch as will receive it, and be thankful for the same.

The fourth Chapter concerning the strife and trouble of this year, and the
cause thereof?
THe sword that I spoke of partly in ye first Chapter, is like to be drawn
this year, for why, The Son, Mars, and Mercurtus can not agree together. How
accords the world with Christ and the gospel. They shall never be at one
Sore eyes may not abide y^ clear light of the sone, the light will not consent
to the works of darkness, nether will y^ beleuers have part with
infidels.ii. Cor.vi,

Thus can there be no agremente, for they be of contrary natures. Again, a
scornful body) as Solomon says) loves not one that rebukes him. Pro.xv.
The children of this world are scornful and therefore are they not content
to be reformed by the gospel, The gosp^^ shall have victory.
which nevertheless though it have many enemies (as it has ever had) yet
because it is the truth, it shall bear away the victory.iii. Esd.iii. And
that shortly. For god has put into the hertes of diverse princes to fulfill his
will, and to hate ye whore of Babylon, to make her desolate and naked, to put
down her abusions. Apo.xvii. and utterly to set her out of her stole. So yt it
appears euydently, that satan shall no more have so great dominion, as he
has had in times paste. And now that he seythe that his kingdom will have
a fall, he works (and shall do) al ye he can by the children of unbelief
(specially by the shaue^ Madianites) to stir up wars, sedicio^s. secret
treason, and utter defiau^ce both among Princes and cominalties. For soch
adversaries of the truth had rather set all nacyons by the ears, and wyckedly
to resyste the ordinance of god in the auctorite of their Prince, then to
submite them selves to the gospel.

And where as God has raised up good men to preach his word, the deuell is so
wood at it, that he has sent them a letter of defiau^ce by some of his
me^bres, even with soch an answer as was given to Jeremy the prophet. For they
say plainly. As for the gospel, we will not hear it, but what so ever goes out
of our own mouth, that will we do, we will set up ^andels and offer to
stocks and stones, we will do as our fathers have done before us. For when we
so did then had we plenteousnes of vytayls, then were we in prosperity, and no
mysfortune came upon us. Iere.xliiii. But sense we left of soche Gods service,
we have had scarcenes of all things, and the world was never well sense etc.

Soch strife (I say) and debate shall happen this year because of the word
of god, for the enemies thereof had rather draw their daggers at it, then to be
reformed. But the lovers of it shall spare no labor to convert them, and to
maintain peace, and therefore I trust verily that through the gracyous
influence of the son this strife and deuysyon shall turn to no blood
sheddynge, for god shall send princes to defend his people from the malice of
the wicked yet shall the enemies of Gods word not cease from persecutyng but
do all the myscheife they can, that by one way or other the gospel of the
glory of God may be stopped. Therefore thou lover of God and his word, wha
any soch heat of trouble happens unto ye (for by trouble must thoube tried)
Marvel not at it as though it were a strange thing but rejoice, in as much
as thou art partaker of Christ's affliccions: that when his glory apperethe,
thou may be merry and glad. And be even as content to be reuyled as he was.i.
Peter.ii. For there is no disciple above his malster, nether seruante better
then his lord. mat x. if they have called the good man of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call the^ of his household so? These and many other
sweet words says he him self unto the, that in him thou may have peace
and a quiet conscience. In ye world thou shall have trouble: but be of good
conforte, he has ouerco^me the world. Ioh.xvi.

The fyfth chapter concerning the estate of kings, and princes, and superioure
powers?
THe influence of the Son and Mars declares evidently by all conjectures
(ye certainly without any dout) that kings and princes shall have a
prosperous year: and me think I dare be bold to say the same, in as much as
I se that they begin now some of them to seek the true honor of God, and to
deliver their people from oppression. make me doubt ye less herin. Solomon
(which was a king him self, and that of great experience) says these
words: Pro.xxv.

Take away ungodliness from the king, and his seat shall be stablished with
righteousness. Saying now that god begineth so graciouslye to work in Princes,
who has not occasion to hope for great increace of prosperity in the^. For
like as when a prince delyteth in lies (as says the wise man. Pro.xxix.) all
his servants are ungodly, even so wha^ ye king or prince is a favor and
mayntener of the teneth, his people shall ye more be given to the fear of God.
And I dout not, but god this same year (by the faithful ministracion of his
auctorite in kings and princes) shall bring noble acts to pass, to the
great deliuerau^ce of poor people, and reformacyon of the ignorant.

Thynkest thou not that God intends great good unto us, in that he so
gracyously endeweth yt hertes of diverse prices, dout not therein. Let them
remember therefore that the power which theye have, is given them of the Lord,
and the strength from the highest.

Sap.vi. lest they being officers of Gods empire, be necligent in keeping the
law of ryghteousnes But if they delight in much people, let them love the
light of wisdom which is gods word. for by it they shall set the people in
order, and the nacyo^s of their enemies shall be subdued unto them. Sap.viii. who
so ever he be then that loves not to resyst the ordinance of god, let him
submytte him self to the auctorite of his prince, and let him not byte his
lyppe at it, though good Ezechias, break ye brazen serpente, that the children
of Israel have worshypped so long.iiii. Re.xviii, let it not grieve him (I
say) that the virtuous king Josias expels soyth sayers, charmers,
expounders of tokens, Idols, and other abhominacyons out of his land, to set
up ye words of the law of God.iiii. Reg.xxxiii. Let every man rather give
thanks unto God, and be glad, that Bell is delivered into Daniels power, that
the falshede of Bells prestes is come to light, and that the dragon is
devoured, whom the people was wont to worship. Dam.xiiii. Let no man
therefore resyst this power of God that does soch acts by ye ministracion of
princes, but let every wise man be content to be reformed of his error, to
do well, and remember that the king bears not that swerd for naught. To.xiii.
and the (as the wysema^ says.) The kings displeasure is a messau^ger of
death. Pro.xvi: Be thou therefore thankful unto god and obedient unto thy
prince, and doutte not but thou shallte have a right prosperous year, and I
can not se how it is possible to be otherwise, for as long as the king makes
so many Daniels of his council it must needs be to the great wealth and
prospirite of the people.

The syxte Chapter concerning the darkness of this year?
When I consydre the corrupt nature of Mercurius, and how he has been, is, and
ever shall be contrary unto Mars and the Son, I find by all experience, that
he shall cast agreate myste between us and the Son, so that it shall be
dark: for though ye light shine in darkness, and be come into the world
John.i. yet shall they (whose works are evil and after the condycions of
Mercurius) love yt darkness more then the light. And thus shall this
darkness be in the^ yt live naughtelye and follow their own abhominacions,
for because they do evil, therefore shall they hate the light, and not come to
it, lest their deeds be reproved. Ioh.iii And (as Paul says) if the gospel
shall be yet hyd, it shall be hid in them that are lost, among who^ the God of
this world shall blind the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of
the gospel of the glory of Christ (which is the image of god) should shine
unto them.ii. Corint.iii. But where the children of God are, there shall be
light. Exodusx. and the works of life. Seeing therefore that the light is yet
a little while with the walk while thou haste it, that the darkness fall not
upon the. Ioh.xii. for he that walks in darkness woteth not whether he goethe,

But believe thou stedfastlye on the light, while thou have it, that thou may
be the child of light, and escape the horrible darkness of the wicked.
sapi.xvii.

The seventh Chapter, concerning the estate of the spiritualte
IF our spiritualtye sat not out of Moses seat, Mathewe, xxiii. and taught
not their own laws and constitutions. if they taught us the truethe,
although they were but sayers and not doers them selves Mat, xxiii. if they
transgressed not the commandment of god because of their own tradicyons,
math.xv. if they laid not to heavy burthe^s upon men's shulders, mat.xxiii. if
they loved not the highest seats, and shute not up the kingdom of heaven before
men, if they devoured not wedowes houses under the color of long prayers,
and were not full of robberye and uncleanness, ypocrisie and wyckednes within,
if these corrupcyons I say) where not in them. ye if all the abhominacyons of
the world beside were not in a manner as a shadow in comparyso^ to theirs it
were not to be mistrusted, but that they should have a right prosperous year,
but seeing they speak evil of the way of truth, and through covetousness with
fained words make marchau^dyse of us ii. Pet.ii. Seeing they follow the way
of Balaam, and walk still in their erroures. Seeing they speak false through
ypocrisi, forbiddynge al prestes to marye, and comaundynge to abstain from the
meats which god created to be received with thanks geuynge.i. Tim.iiii.
seeing they have not fed the flock of Christ, but the^ selves, and are churles
to the people. Ezech xxxiiii. saying the most part of the^ enter not in at ye
door into ye shepefolde, but come in some other way to stele, to kill, and
destroy, Io.x. Seeing they tell but lies to maintain their preachynges withal,
and blaspheme the name of God unto the people for an handful of barlye or a
piece of bread, Ezechi.xiii. Seeing (I say) that their wall is builded but with
untempered mortar, it must needs fall, for the Lord him self will upon them
and require his sheep out of their hands. (...) broken I^ will one.
Eze.xxxiiii. ye the sheep them selves shall follow them no more. but fly
from, them seeing they are but strangers, and hired servants. For in so much
as Christ goes now before his sheep, they will follow him, and harken no more
to the voice of strangers. John.x. This is now the year of aduersite that ye
spirituality is like to have for in so much as they have not Gods word on
their side, they shall be feign to stop their mouths. Mich.iii. And all
plants ye the father in heaven has not planted, shall be pluct up by the rotes.
Math.xv.

For all this when I consydre ye gracyous influence of the sonne-I find by the
instruccyon of Mars, that though all the constellacions be against the
spiritualtye if they will obey the ordinance of God, and submytte them selves
to his word, there shall none peryshe but the children of perdicion. Ioh.xvii.
As for all soche as strive against the stream, and will needs of malice
resist the power and persecute the people of God, let them bewarre that they
be not drowned with their Pharao. For God has herd the complainte of his
poor oppressed, and sent them a Moses to be their gyde, to bring them out of
Egypt, and not only to defend them, but all other also as many as will
convert unto his word, and be reformed by his auctorite and power in his
anointed kings. Seeing then that god has called so many of the spirytualtye
all ready, and does daily call me to ye knowledge of his word, I can not
despair but y^ he will also be gracyous to many mo of them, for though the r
bellyons are like to have an evil year, I doubt not but there be mani among
them, which shortly wha^ the hyer powers shall require them, will be reformed
to the great worshipe of the word of God. To whom for the co^uersacion of some
all ready be thanks, honor and glory now and ever more. AMEN

Here ends this true and faithful Pronosticaco^ upon the year.M.CCCCC.xlix.
gathered out of the scriptures of God


