A colei
Che se stessa rassomiglia and non altrui.



THE ART OF ENGLISH POESY.

Contrived into three Books: The first of Poets and Poesy, the second of
Proportion, the third of Ornament.

printer's or publisher's device ^ANCHORA^ SPEI^


AT LONDON Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackfriars, near
Ludgate. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM CECILL KNIGHT, LORD OF BVRGHLEY, LORD HIGH
TREASVRER OF ENGLAND, R. F. Printer wishes health and prosperity, with the
commandment and use of his continual service.
THis Book (right Honorable) coming to my hands, with his bare title without
any Authors name or any other ordinary address, I doubted how well it might
become me to make you a present thereof, seeming by many express passages in
the same at large, that it was by the Author intended to our Sovereign Lady
the Queen, and for her recreation and service chiefly devised, in which case
to make any other person her highness partener in the honor of his gift it
could not stand with my duty, nor be without some prejudice to her Majesty's
interest and his merrite. Perceiving besides the title to purport so slender a
subject, as nothing almost could be more discrepant from the gravity of your
years and Honorable function, whose contemplations are every hour more
seriously employed upon the public adminisration and services: I thought it
no condign gratification, nor scarce any good satisfaction for such a person
as you. Yet when I considered, that bestowyng upon your Lordship the first vewe
of this mine impression (a feat of mine own simple faculty) it could not
scypher her Majesty's honor or prerogative in the gift, nor yet the Author
of his thanks: and seeing the thing it self to be a device of some novelty
(which commonly gives every good thing a special grace) and a novelty so
highly tending to the most worthy praises of her Majesty's most excellent name
(deerer to you I dare conceive them any worldly thing besides) me thought I
could not devise to have presented your Lordship any gift more agreeable to
your appetite, or fitter for my vocation and ability to bestow, your Lordship
being learned and a lover of learning, my present a Book and my self a
printer always ready and desirous to be at your Honorable commandment. And
thus I humbly take my leave from

the Blackfriars, this xxviij. of May. 1589. Your Honors most humble at
commandment, R. F.

THE FIRST BOOK, Of Poets and Poesy.
CHAP. I.
What a Poet and Poesy is, and who may be worthily said the most excellent
Poet of our time.

A Poet is as much to say as a maker. And our English name well conformes with
the Greek word: for of (...) to make, they call a maker Poeta. Such as (by way
of resemblance and reverently) we may say of God: who without any travel to
his divine imagination, made all the world of naught, nor also by any pattern
or mould as the Platonicks with their Idees do phantastically suppose. Eue^ so
the very Poet makes and contriues out of his own brain, both the verse and
matter of his poem, and not by any foreine copy or example, as does the
translator, who therefore may well be said a versifier, but not a Poet. The
premises considered, it gives to the name and profession no small dignity and
pre-eminence, above all other artificers, Scientificke or Mechanical. And
nevertheless without any repugnancie at all, a Poet may in some sort be said a
follower or imitator, because he can express the true and lively of every
thing is set before him, and which he takes in hand to describe: and so in
that respect is both a maker and a counterfaitor: and Poesy an art not only of
making, but also of imitation. And this science in his perfection, can not
grow, but by some divine instinct, the Platonicks call it furor: or by
excellency of nature and complexion: or by great subtlety of the spirits and
wit, or by much experience and observation of the world, and course of kind,
or peradventure by all or most part of them. Otherwise how was it possible that
Homer being but a poor private man, and as some say, in his later age blind,
should so exactly set forth and describe, as if he had been a most excellent
Captain or General, the order and array of battles, the conduct of whole
armies, the sieges and assaults of cities and towns? or as some great Princes
maiordome and perfect Surueyour in Court, the order, sumptuousness and
magnificence of royal bankets, feasts, weddings, and enteruewes? or as a
Politician very prudent, and much inured with the private and public affairs,
so gravely examine the laws and ordinances Civil, or so profoundly discourse
in matters of estate, and forms of all politic regiment? Finally how could
he so naturally paint out the speeches, countenance and manners of Princely
persons and private, to wit, the wrath of Achilles, the magnanimity of
Agamemnon, the prudence of Menelaus, the prowess of Hector, the majesty of
king Priamus, the gravity of Nestor, the policies and eloquence of Ulysses,
the calamities of the distressed Queens, and valiance of all the Captains and
aduenturous knights in those lamentable wars of Troy? It is therefore of
Poets thus to be conceived, that if they be able to devise and make all these
things of them selves, without any subject of verity, that they be (by manner
of speech) as creating gods. If they do it by instinct divine or natural, then
surely much favored from above. If by their experience, then no doubt very
wise men. If by any president or pattern laid before them, then truly the most
excellent imitators and counterfaitors of all others. But you (Madame) my most
Honored and Gracious: if I should seem to offer you this my devise for a
discipline and not a delight, I might well be reputed, of all others the most
arrogant and injurious: your self being already, of any that I know in our
time, the most excellent Poet. Forsooth by your Princely purse favors and
countenance, making in manner what ye list, the poor man rich, the lewd well
learned, the coward courageous, and vile both noble and valiant. Then for
imitation no less; your person as a most cunning counterfaitor lively
representing Venus in countenance, in life Diana, Pallas for government, and
Juno in all honor and regal magnificence.

CHAP. II.
That there may be an Art of our English Poesy, as well as there is of the
Latin and Greek.

THen as there was no art in the world till by experience found out: so if
Poesy be now an Art, and of al antiquity has been among the Greeks and
Latins, and yet were none, until by studious persons fashioned and reduced
into a method of rules and precepts, then no doubt may there be the like with
us. And if thou art of Poesy be but a skill appertaining to utterance, why may
not the same be with us as well as with them, our language being no less copious
pithie and significatiue then theirs, our conceits the same, and our wits no
less apt to devise and imitate then theirs were? If again Art be but a
certain order of rules prescribed by reason, and gathered by experience, why
should not Poesy be a vulgar Art with us as well as with the Greeks and
Latins, our language admitting no fewer rules and nice diversities then
theirs? but peradventure more by a peculiar, which our speech has in many
things differing from theirs: and yet in the general points of that Art,
allowed to go in common with them: so as if one point perchance which is their
feet whereupon their measures stand, and in deed is all the beauty of their
Poesy, and which feet we have not, nor as yet never went about to frame (the
nature of our language and words not permitting it) we have in stead thereof
twenty other curious points in that skill more then they ever had, by reason
of our rhyme and tunable concords or simphonie, which they never observed.
Poesy therefore may be an Art in our vulgar, and that very methodicall and
commendable.

CHAP. III.
How Poets were the first priests, the first prophets, the first Legislators
and politicians in the world.

THe profession and use of Poesy is most ancient from the beginning, and not
as many erroniously suppose, after, but before any civil society was among
men. For it is written, that Poesy was the original cause and occasion of
their first assemblies, when before the people remained in the woods and
mountains, vagarant and dipersed like the wild beasts, lawless and naked, or
very ill clad, and of all good and necessary provision for harbor or
sustenance utterly unfurnished: so as they little diffred for their manner of
life, from the very brute beasts of the field. Whereupon it is feigned that
Amphion and Orpheus, two Poets of the first ages, one of them, to wit Amphion,
builded up cities, and reared walls with the stones that came in heaps to the
sound of his harp, figuring thereby the mollifying of hard and stony hearts
by his sweet and eloquent persuasion. And Orpheus assembled the wild beasts
to come in herds to harken to his music, and by that means made them tame,
implying thereby, how by his discreet and wholesome lessons uttered in harmony
and with melodious instruments, he brought the rude and savage people to a more
civil and orderly life, nothing, as it seems, more prevailing or fit to
redress and edify the cruel and sturdie courage of man then it. And as these
two Poets and Linus before them, and Museus also and Hesiodus in Greece and
Archadia: so by all likelihood had mo Poets done in other places, and in other
ages before them, though there be no remembrance left of them, by reason of the
Records by some accident of time perished and failing. Poets therefore are of
great antiquity. Then forasmuch as they were the first that intended to the
observation of nature and her works, and specially of the Celestial courses,
by reason of the continual motion of the heavens, searching after the first
mouer, and from thence by degrees coming to know and consider of the
substances separate and abstract, which we call the divine intelligences or
good Angels (Demones) they were the first that instituted sacrifices of
placation, with inuocations and worship to them, as to Gods: and invented and
stablished all the rest of the obseruances and ceremonies of religion, and so
were the first Priests and ministers of the holy mysteries. And because for the
better execution of that high charge and function, it behooved them to live
chaste, and in all holiness of life, and in continual study and contemplation:
they came by instinct divine, and by deep meditation, and much abstinence (the
same assubtiling and refining their spirits) to be made apt to receive visions,
both waking and sleeping, which made them utter prophesies, and foretell things
to come. So also were they the first Prophets or seears, Videntes, for so the
Scripture terms them in Latin after the Hebrew word, and all the oracles
and answers of the gods were given in meeter or verse, and published to the
people by their direction. And for that they were aged and grave men, and of
much wisdom and experience in the affairs of the world, they were the first
lawmakers to the people, and the first polititiens, devising all expedient
means for th'establishment of Common wealth, to hold and contain the people
in order and duty by force and virtue of good and wholesome laws, made for
the preservation of the public peace and tranquillity. The same peradventure
not purposely intended, but greatly furthered by the aw of their gods, and such
scruple of conscience, as the terrors of their late invented religion had led
them into.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Poets were the first Philosophers, the first Astronomers and
Historiographers and Orators and Musitiens of the world.

Utterance also and language is given by nature to man for persuasion of
others, and aid of them selves, I mean the first abilite to speak. For
speech it self is artificial and made by man, and the more pleasing it is,
the more it prevails to such purpose as it is intended for: but speech by
meeter is a kind of utterance, more cleanly couched and more delicate to the
ear then prose is, because it is more current and slipper upon the tongue, and
withal tunable and melodious, as a kind of Music, and therefore may be termed
a musical speech or utterance, which cannot but please the hearer very well.
Another cause is, for that it is briefer and more compendious, and easier to
bear away and be retained in memory, then that which is contained in
multitude of words and full of tedious ambage and long periods. It is beside a
manner of utterance more eloquent and rethoricall then the ordinary prose,
which we use in our daily talk: because it is decked and set out with all
manner of fresh colors and figures, which makes that it sooner inuegleth the
judgment of man, and carries his opinion this way and that, whither soever the
heart by impression of the ear shall be most affectionatly bent and directed.
The utterance in prose is not of so great efficacy, because not only it is
daily used, and by that occasion the ear is ouerglutted with it, but is also
not so voluble and slipper upon the tongue, being wide and lose, and nothing
numerous, nor contrived into measures, and sounded with so gallant and
harmonical accents, nor in fine allowed that figurative conueyance, nor so great
license in choice of words and phrases as meeter is. So as the Poets were also
from the beginning the best perswaders and their eloquence the first Rethoricke
of the world. Even so it became that the high mysteries of the gods should be
revealed and taught, by a manner of utterance and language of extraordinary
phrase, and brief and compendious, and above al others sweet and civil as the
Metricall is. The same also was meetest to register the lives and noble gests
of Princes, and of the great Monarkes of the world, and all other the memorable
accidents of time: so as the Poet was also the first historiographer. Then
forasmuch as they were the first obseruers of all natural causes and effects
in the things generable and corruptible, and from thence mounted up to search
after the celestial courses and influences, and yet penetrated further to know
the divine essences and substances separate, as is said before, they were the
first Astronomers and Philosophists and Metaphisicks. Finally, because they did
altogether endeavor themselves to reduce the life of man to a certain method of
good manners, and made the first differences between virtue and vice, and then
tempered all these knowledges and skilles with the exercise of a delectable
Music by melodious instruments, which withal served them to delight their
hearers, and to call the people together by admiration, to a plausible and
virtuous conversation, therefore were they the first Philosophers Ethick, and
the first artificial Musiciens of the world. Such was Linus, Orpheus, Amphio^
and Museus the most ancient Poets and Philosophers, of whom there is left any
memory by the profane writers. King David also and Solomon his son and many
other of the holy Prophets wrate in meeters, and used to sing them to the
harp, although to many of us ignorant of the Hebrew language and phrase, and
not observing it, the same seem but a prose. It can not be therefore that
any scorn or indignity should justly be offered to so noble, profitable,
ancient and divine a science as Poesy is.

CHAP. V.
How the wild and savage people used a natural Poesy in versicle and rhyme as
our vulgar is.

ANd the Greek and Latin Poesy was by verse numerous and metricall, running
upon pleasant feet, sometimes swift, sometime slow (their words very aptly
serving that purpose) but without any rhyme or tunable concord in the end of
their verses, as we and all other nations now use. But the Hebrews and Chaldees
who were more ancient then the Greeks, did not only use a metricall Poesy,
but also with the same a manner of rhyme, as has been of late observed by
learned men. Whereby it appears, that our vulgar running Poesy was common to
all the nations of the world besides, whom the Latins and Greeks in special
called barbarous. So as it was notwithstanding the first and most ancient
Poesy, and the most universal, which two points do otherwise give to all
humane inventions and affairs no small credit. This is proved by certificate
of merchants and travelers, who by late nauigations have surueyed the whole
world, and discovered large countries and strange peoples wild and savage,
affirming that the American, the Perusine and the very Canniball, do sing and
also say, their highest and holiest matters in certain riming versicles and
not in prose, which proves also that our manner of vulgar Poesy is more ancient
then the artificial of the Greeks and Latins, ours coming by instinct of
nature, which was before Art or observation, and used with the savage and
uncivil, who were before all science or civility, even as the naked by
prioritie of time is before the clothed, and the ignorant before the learned.
The natural Poesy therefore being aided and amended by Art, and not utterly
altered or obscured, but some sign left of it, (as the Greeks and Latins
have left none) is no less to be allowed and commended then theirs.

CHAP. VI.
How the riming Poesy came first to the Grecians and Latins, and had altered
and almost spilt their manner of Poesy.

But it came to pass, when fortune fled far from the Greeks and Latins,
and that their towns flourished no more in traficke, nor their Universities in
learning as they had done continuing those Monarchies: the barbarous conquerers
inuading them with innumerable swarms of strange nations, the Poesy metricall
of the Grecians and Latins came to be much corrupted and altered, in so much
as there were times that the very Greeks and Latins themselves took pleasure
in Riming verses, and used it as a rare and gallant thing: Yea their Orators
proses nor the Doctors Sermons were acceptable to Princes nor yet to the common
people unless it went in manner of tunable rhyme or metricall sentences, as
appears by many of the ancient writers, about that time and since. And the
great Princes, and Popes, and Sultans would one salute and greet an other
sometime in friendship and sport, sometime in earnest and enmity by ryming
verses, and nothing seemed clerkly done, but must be done in ryme: Whereof we
find diverse examples from the time of The Emperors Gracian and Valentinian
downwardes: For then aboutes began the declination of the Romain Empire, by the
notable inundations of the Hunnes and Vandalles in Europe, under the conduict
of Totila and Atila and other their generalles. This brought the ryming Poesy
in grace, and made it prevail in Italy and Greece (their own long time cast
aside, and almost neglected) till after many years that the peace of Italy
and of The Empire Occidentall revived new clerks, who recovering and perusing
the books and studies of the ciuiler ages, restored all manner of arts, and
that of the Greek and Latin Poesy withal into their former purity and
netnes. Which nevertheless did not so prevail, but that the ryming Poesy of
the Barbarians remained still in his reputation, that one in the schole, this
other in Courts of Princes more ordinary and allowable.

CHAP. VII.
How in the time of Charlemaine and many years after him the Latin Poets
wrote in ryme.

ANd this appears evidently by the works of many learned men, who wrote
about the time of Charlemaines reign in the Empire Occidentall, where the
Christian Religion, became through the excessive authority of Popes, and deep
devotion of Princes strongly fortified and established by erection of orders
Monastical, in which many simple clerks for devotion sake and sanctity were
received more then for any learning, by which occasion and the solitariness of
their life, waxing studious without discipline or instruction by any good
method, some of them grew to be historiographers, some Poets, and following
either the barbarous rudenes of the time, or else their own idle inventions, all
that they wrote to the favor or praise of Princes, they did it in such manner of
minstrelsie, and thought themselves no small fools, when they could make their
verses go all in ryme as did the school of Salerne, dedicating their book of
medicinal rules unto our king of England, with this beginning.

Anglorum Regi scripsit tota schola Salerni
Sivis incolumem, sivis te reddere sanum
Curas toll graves, irasci creed prophanum
Nec retine ventrem nec string as fortiter annum.
And all the rest that follow throughout the whole book more curiously then
cleanely, nevertheless very well to the purpose of their art. In the same
time king Edward the iij. him self quartering the Arms of England and France,
did discover his pretense and claim to the Crown of France, in these ryming
verses.

Rex sum regnorum bina ratione duorum
Anglorum regno sum rex ego iure paterno
Matris iure quidem Francorum nuncupor idem
Hinc est armorum variatio facta meorum.
Which verses Phillip de Valois then possessing the Crown as next heir male
by pretexte of the law Salique, and holding out Edward the third, answered in
these other of as good stuff.

Praedo regnorum qui diceris esse duorum
Regno materno priuaberis atque paterno
Prolis ius nullum vbi matris non fuit vllum
Hinc est armorum variatio stulta tuorum.
It is found written of Pope Lucius, for his great avarice and tyranny used
over the Clergy thus in ryming verses.

Lucius est piscis rex and tyrannus aquarum
A quo discordat Lucius iste parum
Deuorat hic homines, hic piscibus insidiatur
Esurit hic semper hic aliquando satur
Amborum vitam silaus aequata notaret
Plus rationis habet qui ratione caret.
And as this was used in the greatest and gayest matters of Princes and Popes
by the idle invention of Monastical men then reigning al in their superlatiue.
So did every scholar and secular clerk or versifier, when he wrote any short
poem or matter of good lesson put it in ryme, whereby it came to pass that
all your old Proverbs and common sayings, which they would have plausible to
the reader and easy to remember and bear away, were of that sort as these.

In mundo mira faciunt duo nummus and ira
Mollificant dura peruertunt omnia iura.
And this verse in disprayse of the Courtiers life following the Court of Rome.

Vita palatina dura est animaeque ruina.
And these written by a noble learned man.

Ire redire sequi regum sublimia castra
Eximius status est, sed non sic itur ad astra.
And this other which to the great injury of all women was written (no doubt
by some forlorn lover, or else some old malicious Monk) for one woman's sake
blemishing the whole sex.

Fallere flere nere mentiri nilque tacere
Haec quinque vere statuit Deus in muliere.
If I might have been his Judge, I would have had him for his labor, served as
Orpheus was by the women of Thrace. His eyes to be picket out with pinnes, for
his so deadly belying of them, or worse handled if worse could be devised. But
will ye see how God raised a revenger for the silly innocent women, for about
the same ryming age came an honest civil Courtier somewhat bookish, and wrate
these verses against the whole rabble of Monks.

O Monachi vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi
Vos estis Deus est testis turpissima pestis.
Anon after came your secular Priests as jolly rymers as the rest, who being
sore agreeued with their Pope Calixtus, for that he had enjoined them from
their wives, and railed as fast against him.

O bone Calixte totus mundus perodit te
Quondam Presbiteri, poterant vxoribus vti
Hoc destruxisti, post quam tu Papa fuisti.
Thus what in writing of rymes and registring of lies was the Clergy of that
fabulous age wholly occupied.

We find some but very few of these ryming verses among the Latins of the
ciuiller ages, and those rather happening by chance then of any purpose in the
writer, as this Distick among the disportes of Ovid.

Quot caelum stellas tot habet tua Romapuellas
Pascua quotque haedos tot habet tua Roma Cynaedos,
The posterity taking pleasure in this manner of Simphonie had leisure as it
seems to devise many other knackes in their versifying that the ancient and
civil Poets had not used before, whereof one was to make every word of a verse
to begin with the same letter, as did Hugobald the Monk who made a large poem
to the honor of Carolus Caluus, every word beginning with C. which was the
first letter of the king name thus.

Carmina clarisonae Caluis cantate camenae.
And this was thought no small piece of cunning, being in deed a matter of some
difficulty to find out so many words beginning with one letter as might make
a just volume, though in truth it were but a fantastical devise and to no
purpose at all more then to make them harmonicall to the rude ears of those
barbarous ages.

Another of their pretty inventions was to make a verse of such words as by
their nature and manner of construction and situation might be turned backward
word by word, and make another perfect verse, but of quite contrary sense as the
gibing Monk that wrote of Pope Alexander these two verses.

Laus tua non tua fraus, virtus non copia rerum,
Scandere te faciunt hoc decus eximium.
Which if ye will turn backward they make two other good verses, but of a
contrary sense, thus.

Eximium decus hoc faciunt te scandere, rerum
Copia, non virtus, fraus tua non tua laus.
And they called it Verse Lion.

Thus you may see the humors and appetites of men how diverse and chaungeable
they be in liking new fashions, though many times worse then the old, and not
only in the manner of their life and use of their garments, but also in their
learninges and arts and specially of their languages.

CHAP. VIII.
In what reputation Poesy and Poets were in old time with Princes and
otherwise generally, and how they be now become contemptible and for what
causes.

FOr the respects aforesaid in all former ages and in the most civil
countries and commons wealths, good Poets and Poesy were highly esteemed and
much favored of the greatest Princes. For proof whereof we read how much
Amyntas king of Macedonia made of the Tragical Poet Euripides. And the
Athenians of Sophocles. In what price the noble poemes of Homer were holden
with Alexander the great, in so much as every night they were laid under his
pillow, and by day were carried in the rich jewel cofer of Darius lately
before vanquished by him in battle. And not only Homer the father and Prince
of the Poets was so honored by him, but for his sake all other meaner Poets, in
so much as Cherillus one no very great good Poet had for every verse well made
a Phillips noble of gold, amounting in value to an angel English, and so for
every hundredth verses (which a cleanely pen could speedely dispatch (he had a
hundred angels. And since Alexander the great how Theocritus the Greek Poet
was favored by Tholomee king of Egypt and Queen Berenice his wife, Ennius
likewise by Scipio Prince of the Romans, Virgill also by The Emperor
Augustus. And in later times how much were Iehan de Mehune and Guillaume de
Loris made of by the French kings, and Geffrey Chaucer father of our English
Poets by Richard the second, who as it was supposed gave him the manner of new
Holme in Oxfordshire. And Govver to Henry the fourth, and Harding to Edward
the fourth. Also how Frauncis the French king made Sangelais, Salmonius,
Macrinus, and Clement Marot of his privy Chamber for their excellent skill in
vulgar and Latin Poesy. And king Henry the 8. her Majesty's father for a few
Psalms of David turned into English meetre by Sternhold, made him groom of
his privy chamber, and gave him many other good gifts. And one Gray what good
estimation did he grow unto with the same king Henry, and afterward with the
Duke of Sommerset Protector, for making certain merry Ballades, whereof one
chiefly was, The hunte it up, the hunte is up. And Queen Mary his daughter for
one Epithalamie or nuptial song made by Vargas a Spanish Poet at her marriage
with king Phillip in Winchester gave him during his life two hundred Crowns
pension: nor this reputation was given them in ancient times altogether in
respect that Poesy was a delicate art, and the Poets them selves cunning
Princepleasers, but for that also they were thought for their universal
knowledge to be very sufficient men for the greatest charges in their common
wealths, were it for counsel or for conduct, whereby no man need to doubt
but that both skilles may very well concur and be most excellent in one
person. For we find that Julius Caesar the first Emperor and a most noble
Captain, was not only the most eloquent Orator of his time, but also a very
good Poet, though none of his doings therein be now extant. And Quintus Catulus
a good Poet, and Cornelius Gallus treasurer of Egypt, and Horace the most
delicate of all the Romain Lyrickes, was thought meet and by many letters of
great instance provoked to be Secretary of estate to Augustus The Emperor,
which nevertheless he refused for his vnhealthfulnesse sake, and being a quiet
minded man and nothing ambitious of glory: non voluit accedere ad Rempublicam,
as it is reported. And Ennius the Latin Poet was not as some perchance
think, only favored by Scipio the Africane for his good making of verses, but
used as his familiar and Counselor in the wars for his great knowledge and
amiable conversation. And long before that Antimemdes and other Greek Poets,
as Aristotle reports in his Politiques, had charge in the wars. And Firtaeus
the Poet being also a lame man and halting upon one leg, was chosen by the
Oracle of the gods from the Athenians to be general of the Lacedaemonians
army, not for his Poetry, but for his wisdom and grave persuasions, and
subtle Stratagemes whereby he had the victory over his enemies. So as the
Poets seemed to have skill not only in the subtilties of their art, but also
to be meet for all manner of functions civil and martial, even as they found
favor of the times they lived in, insomuch as their credit and estimation
generally was not small. But in these days (although some learned Princes may
take delight in them) yet universally it is not so. For as well Poets as Poesy
are despised, and the name become, of honorable infamous, subject to scorn and
derision, and rather a reproach than a praise to any that uses it: for commonly
who so is studious in th'Arte or shows him self excellent in it, they call
him in disdain a fantastical: and a light headed or fantastical man (by
conversion) they call a Poet. And this proceeds through the barbarous
ignorance of the time, and pride of many Gentlemen, and others, whose gross
heads not being brought up or acquainted with any excellent Art, nor able to
contriue, or in manner conceive any matter of subtlety in any business or
science, they do deride and scorn it in all others as superfluous knowledges
and vain sciences, and whatsoever devise be of rare invention they term it
fantastical, construing it to the worst side: and among men such as be modest
and grave, and of little conversation, nor delighted in the busy life and vain
ridiculous actions of the popular, they call him in scorn a Philosopher or
Poet, as much to say as a fantastical man, very injuriously (God wot) and to
the manifestation of their own ignorance, not making difference betwixt
terms. For as the evil and vicious disposition of the brain hinders the
sound judgment and discourse of man with busy and disordered fantasies, for
which cause the Greeks call him (...), so is that part being well affected,
not only nothing disorderly or confused with any monstrous imaginations or
conceits, but very formal, and in his much multiformitie uniform, that is
well proportioned, and so passing clear, that by it as by a glass or mirror,
are represented unto the soul all manner of bewtifull visions, whereby the
inuentiue part of the mind is so much helped, as without it no man could
devise any new or rare thing: and where it is not excellent in his kind, there
could be no politic Captain, nor any witty enginer or cunning artificer, nor
yet any law maker or counselor of deep discourse, yea the Prince of
Philosophers sticks not to say animam no^ intelligere absque phantasmate,
which text to another purpose Alexander Aphrodiscus well notes, as learned men
know. And this fantasy may be resembled to a glass as has been said,
whereof there be many tempers and manner of makinges, as the perspectiues do
acknowledge, for some be false glasses and show things otherwise than they be
in deed, and others right as they be in deed, neither fairer nor fouler, nor
greater nor smaller. There be again of these glasses that show things
exceeding fair and comely, others that show figures very monstrous and
illfauored. Even so is the fantastical part of man (if it be not disordered)
a representer of the best, most comely and bewtifull images or apparances of
things to the soul and according to their very truth. If otherwise, then does
it breed Chimeres and monsters in man's imaginations, and not only in his
imaginations, but also in all his ordinary actions and life which ensues.
Wherefore such persons as be illuminated with the brightest irradiations of
knowledge and of the verity and due proportion of things, they are called by
the learned men not phantastici but euphantasiote, and of this sort of
fantasy are all good Poets, notable Captains stratagematique, all cunning
artificers and enginers, all Legislators Polititiens and Counselors of
estate, in whose exercises the inuentiue part is most employed and is to the
sound and true judgment of man most needful. This diversity in the terms
perchance every man has not noted, and thus much be said in defense of the
Poets honor, to the end no noble and generous mind be discomforted in the
study thereof, the rather for that worthy and honorable memorial of that
noble woman twice French Queen, Lady Anne of Britain, wife first to king
Charles the viij. and after to Jews the xij. who passing one day from her
lodging toward the kings side, saw in a gallerie Master Allame Chartier the
kings Secretary, an excellent maker or Poet leaning on a tables end a sleep,
and stooped down to kiss him, saying thus in all their hearings, we may not
of Princely courtesy pass by and not honor with our kiss the mouth from
whence so many sweet ditties and golden poems have issued. But me thinks at
these words I hear some smilingly say, I would be loath to lack living of my
own till the Prince gave me a manner of new Elm for my riming. And another to
say I have read that the Lady Cynthia came once down out of her sky to kiss
the fair young lad Endimion as he lay a sleep: and many noble Queens that have
bestowed kisses upon their Princes paramours, but never upon any Poets. The
third me thinks shruggingly says, I kept not to sit sleeping with my Poesy
till a Queen came and kissed me. But what of all this? Princes may give a good
Poet such convenient countenance and also benefit as are due to an excellent
artificer, though they neither kiss nor cokes them, and the discret Poet
looks for no such extraordinary favors, and as well does he honor by his pen
the just, liberal, or magnanimous Prince, as the valiant, amiable or
bewtifull though they be every one of them the good gifts of God. So it seems
not altogether the scorn and ordinary disgrace offered unto Poets at these
days, is cause why few Gentlemen do delight in the Art, but for that
liberality, is come to fail in Princes, who for their largess were wont to
be accounted the only patrons of learning, and first founders of all excellent
artificers. Besides it is not perceived, that Princes them selves do take any
pleasure in this science, by whose example the subject is commonly led, and
allured to all delights and exercises be they good or bad, according to the
grave saying of the historian. Rex multitudinem religione impleuit, quae semper
regenti similis est. And peradventure in this iron and malicious age of ours,
Princes are less delighted in it, being over earnestly bent and affected to
the affairs of Empire and ambition, whereby they are as it were enforced to
endeavor them selves to arms and practices of hostility, or to entend to the
right pollicing of their states, and have not one hour to bestow upon any
other civil or delectable Art of natural or moral doctrine: nor scarce any
leisure to think one good thought in perfect and godly contemplation, whereby
their troubled minds might be moderated and brought to tranquillity. So as,
it is hard to find in these days of nobleme^ or gentlemen any good
Mathematicia^, or excellent Musician, or notable Philosopher, or else a cunning
Poet: because we find few great Princes much delighted in the same studies. Now
also of such among the Nobility or gentry as be very well seen in many
laudable sciences, and especially in making or Poesy, it is so come to pass
that they have no courage to write and if they have, yet are they loath to be a
known of their skill. So as I know very many notable Gentlemen in the Court
that have written commendably, and suppressed it again, or else suffered it to
be published without their own names to it: as if it were a discredit for a
Gentleman, to seem learned, and to show himself amorous of any good Art. In
other ages it was not so, for we read that Kings and Princes have written
great volumes and published them under their own regal titles. As to begin
with Solomon the wisest of Kings, Julius Caesar the greatest of Emperors,
Hermes Tresmegistus the holiest of Priests and Prophets, Euax king of Arabia
wrote a book of precious stones in verse, Prince Auicenna of Physic and
Philosophy, Alphonsus a king of Spain his Astronomicall Tables, Almansor a
king of Marrocco diverse Philosophical works, and by their regal example our
late sovereign Lord king Henry the eight wrate a book in defense of his
faith, then persuaded that it was the true and Apostolical doctrine, though it
has appeared otherwise since, yet his honor and learned zeal was nothing
less to be allowed. Queens also have been known studious, and to write large
volumes, as Lady Margaret of France Queen of Navarre in our time. But of all
others the Emperor Nero was so well learned in Music and Poesy, as when he
was taken by order of the Senate and appointed to dye, he offered violence to
him self and said, O quantus artisex pereo! as much to say, as, how is it
possible a man of such science and learning as my self, should come to this
shameful death? The Emperor Octauian being made executor to Virgill, who had
left by his last will and testament, that his books of the Aeneidos should be
committed to the fire as things not perfited by him, made his excuse for
infringing the deads will, by a number of verses most excellently written,
whereof these are part.

Frangatur potius legum veneranda potestas,
Quam tot congestos noctesque diesque labores
Hauserit vna dies. And put his name to them. And before him his uncle and
father adoptiue Julius Caesar, was not ashamed to publish under his own name,
his Commentaries of the French and Britain wars. Since therefore so many
noble Emperors, Kings and Princes have been studious of Poesy and other
civil arts, and not ashamed to bewray their skils in the same, let none other
meaner person despise learning, nor (whether it be in prose or in Poesy, if
they them selves be able to write, or have written any thing well or of rare
invention) be any whit squeimish to let it be published under their names, for
reason serves it, and modesty does not repugne.

CHAP. IX.
How Poesy should not be employed upon vain conceits or vicious or infamous.

Wherefore the Nobility and dignity of the Art considered as well by
universality as antiquity and the natural excellence of it self, Poesy
ought not to be abased and employed upon any unworthy matter and subject, nor
used to vain purposes, which nevertheless is daily seen, and that is to
utter conceits infamous and vicious or ridiculous and foolish, or of no good
example and doctrine. Albeit in merry matters (not dishonest) being used for
man's solace and recreation it may be well allowed, for as I said before, Poesy
is a pleasant manner of vtteraunce varying from the ordinary of purpose to
refresh the mind by the ears delight. Poesy also is not only laudable,
because I said it was a metricall speech used by the first men, but because it
is a metricall speech corrected and reformed by discreet judgments, and with
no less cunning and curiosity then the Greek and Latin Poesy, and by Art
bewtified and adorned, and brought far from the primitive rudeness of the
first inuentors, otherwise it might be said to me that Adam and Eues apernes
were the gayest garments, because they were the first, and the shepheardes
tente or pauillion, the best housing, because it was the most ancient and most
universal: which I would not have so taken, for it is not my meaning but that
Art and cunning concurring with nature, antiquity and universality, in things
indifferent, and not evil, do make them more laudable. And right so our
vulgar riming Poesy, being by good wits brought to that perfection we see,
is worthily to be preferred before any other manner of utterance in prose, for
such use and to such purpose as it is ordained, and shall hereafter be set
down more particularly.

CHAP. X.
The subject or matter of Poesy.

Having sufficiently said of the dignity of Poets and Poesy, now it is time
to speak of the matter or subject of Poesy, which to mine intent is, what
soever witty and delicate conceit of man meet or worthy to be put in written
verse, for any necessary use of the present time, or good instruction of the
posterity. But the chief and principal is: the laud honor and glory of the
immortal gods (I speak now in phrase of the Gentiles.) Secondly the worthy
gests of noble Princes: the memorial and registry of all great fortunes, the
praise of virtue and reproof of vice, the instruction of moral doctrines, the
revealing of sciences natural and other profitable Arts, the redress of
boistrous and sturdie courages by persuasion, the consolation and repose of
temperate minds, finally the common solace of mankind in all his trauails and
cares of this transitory life. And in this last sort being used for recreation
only, may allowably bear matter not always of the grauest, or of any great
commodity or profit, hut rather in some sort, vain, dissolute, or wanton, so
it be not very scandalous and of evil example. But as our intent is to make
this Art vulgar for all English men's use, and therefore are of necessity to
set down the principal rules therein to be observed: so in mine opinion it is
no less expedient to touch briefly all the chief points of this ancient
Poesy of the Greeks and Latins, so far forth as it is conformeth with ours.
So as it may be known what we hold of them as borrowed, and what as of our
own peculiar. Wherefore now that we have said, what is the matter of Poesy,
we will declare the manner and forms of poemes used by the ancients.

CHAP. XI.
Of poemes and their sundry forms and how thereby the ancient Poets received
surnames.

AS the matter of Poesy is diverse, so was the form of their poemes and manner
of writing, for all of them wrote not in one sort, even as all of them wrote
not upon one matter. Neither was every Poet alike cunning in all as in some one
kind of Poesy, nor uttered with like felicity. But wherein any one most
excelled, thereof he took a surname, as to be called a Poet Heroic, Lyrick,
Elegiack, Epigra^matist or otherwise. Such therefore as gave them selves to
write long histories of the noble gests of kings and great Princes entermedling
the dealings of the gods, half gods or Heroes of the gentiles, and the great
and weighty consequences of peace and war, they called Poets Heroic, whereof
Homer was chief and most ancient among the Greeks, Virgill among the Latins:
Others who more delighted to write songs or ballads of pleasure, to be song
with the voice, and to the harp, lute, or citheron and such other musical,
instruments, they were called melodious Poets [melici] or by a more common name
Lirique Poets, of which sort was Pindarus, Anacreon and Callimachus with others
among the Greeks: Horace and Catullus among the Latins. There were an other
sort, who sought the favor of fair Ladies, and coueted to bemone their estates
at large, and the perplexities of love in a certain pitious verse called
Elegy, and thence were called Eligiack: such among the Latins were Ovid,
Tibullus, and Propertius. There were also Poets that wrote only for the stage,
I mean plays and interludes, to receate the people with matters of disporte,
and to that intent did set forth in shows pageants accompanied with speech the
common behauiours and manner of life of private persons, and such as were the
meaner sort of men, and they were called Comicall Poets, of whom among the
Greeks Menander and Aristophanes were most excellent, with the Latins Terence
and Plautus. Besides those Poets Comic there were other who served also the
stage, but meddled not with so base matters: For they set forth the doleful
falls of unfortunate and afflicted Princes, and were called Poets Tragical.
Such were Euripides and Sophocles with the Greeks, Seneca among the Latins.
There were yet others who mounted nothing so high as any of them both, but in
base and humble style by manner of Dialogue, uttered the private and familiar
talk of the meanest sort of men, as shepherds, heywards and such like, such
was among the Greeks Theocritus: and Virgill among the Latins, their poemes
were named Eglogues or shepheardly talk. There was yet another kind of Poet,
who intended to tax the common abuses and vice of the people in rough and
bitter speeches, and their inuectiues were called Satyrs, and them selves
Satyricques. Such were Lucilius, Iuuenall and Persius among the Latins, and
with us he that wrote the book called Piers plowman. Others of a more fine and
pleasant head were given wholly to taunting and scoffing at indecent things,
and in short poemes uttered pretty merry conceits, and these men were called
Epigrammatistes. There were others that for the peoples good instruction, and
trial of their own wits used in places of great assembly, to say by rote
nombers of short and sententious meetres, very pithie and of good edification,
and thereupon were called Poets Mimistes: as who would say, imitable and meet
to be followed for their wise and grave lessons. There was another kind of
poem, invented only to make sport, and to refresh the company with a manner of
buffonry or counterfaiting of merry speeches, converting all that which they
had hard spoken before, to a certain derision by a quite contrary sense, and
this was done, when Comedies or Tragedies were a playing, and that between the
acts when the players went to make ready for another, there was great silence,
and the people waxt weary, then came in these manner of conterfaite vices, they
were called Pantomimi, and all that had before been said, or great part of it,
they gave a cross construction to it very ridiculously. Thus have you how the
names of the Poets were given them by the forms of their poemes and manner of
writing.

CHAP. XII.
In what form of Poesy the gods of the Gentiles were praised and honored.

THe gods of the Gentiles were honored by their Poets in hymns, which is an
extraordinary and divine praise, extolling and magnifying them for their great
powers and excellence of nature in the highest degree of laud, and yet therein
their Poets were after a sort restrained: so as they could not with their
credit untruly praise their own gods, or use in their lauds any manner of
gross adulation or vnueritable report. For in any writer untruth and flattery
are counted most great reproaches. Wherefore to praise the gods of the Gentiles,
for that by authority of their own fabulous records, they had fathers and
mothers, and kindred and allies, and wives and concubines: the Poets first
commended them by their genealogies or pedegrees, their marriages and aliances,
their notable exploits in the world for the behoof of mankind, and yet as I
said before, none otherwise then the truth of their own memorials might bear,
and in such sort as it might be well avouched by their old written reports,
though in very deed they were not from the beginning all historically true,
and many of them very fictions, and such of them as were true, were grounded
upon some part of an history or matter of verity, the rest altogether
figurative and mystical, covertly applied to some moral or natural sense, as
Cicero sets it forth in his books de natura deorum. For to say that
Jupiter was son to Saturn, and that he married his own sister Juno, might be
true, for such was the guise of all great Princes in the Oriental part of the
world both at those days and now is. Again that he loved Danae, Europa, Leda,
Calisto and other fair Ladies daughters to kings, besides many meaner women,
it is likely enough, because he was reported to be a very incontinent person,
and given over to his lusts, as are for the most part all the greatest
Princes, but that he should be the highest god in heaven, or that he should
thunder and lighten, and do many other things very unnaturally and absurdly:
also that Saturnus should geld his father Celius, to the intent to make him
unable to get any more children, and other such matters as are reported by them,
it seems to be some witty devise and fiction made for a purpose, or a very
noble and impudent lie, which could not be reasonably suspected by the Poets,
who were otherwise discreet and grave men, and teachers of wisdom to others.
Therefore either to transgress the rules of their primitive records, or to
seek to give their gods honor by belying them (otherwise then in that sense
which I have alleged) had been a sign not only of an unskillful Poet, but
also of a very impudent and leude man. For untrue praise never gives any true
reputation. But with us Christians, who be better disciplined, and do
acknowledge but one God Almighty, everlasting, and in every respect self
suffizant [autharcos] reposed in all perfect rest and sovereign bliss, not
needing or exacting any foreign help or good. To him we can not exhibit
overmuch praise, nor belie him any ways, unless it be in abasing his
excellency by scarsitie of praise, or by misconceauing his divine nature,
weening to praise him, if we impute to him such vain delights and peevish
affections, as commonly the frailest men are reproved for. Namely to make him
ambitious of honor, jealous and difficult in his worships, terrible, angry,
vindicatiue, a lover, a hater, a pitier, and indigent of man's worships: finally
so passionate as in effect he should be altogether Anthropopathis. To the gods
of the Gentiles they might well attribute these infirmities, for they were but
the children of men, great Princes and famous in the world, and not for any
other respect divine, then by some resemblance of virtue they had to do good,
and to benefit many. So as to the God of the Christians, such divine praise
might be verified: to the other gods none, but figuratively or in mystical
sense as has been said. In which sort the ancient Poets did in deed give them
great honors and praises, and made to them sacrifices, and offered them
oblations of sundry sorts, even as the people were taught and persuaded by
such placations and worships to receive any help, comfort or benefit to them
selves, their wives, children, possessions or goods. For if that opinion were
not, who would acknowledge any God? the very Etimologie of the name with us of
the North parts of the world declaring plainly the nature of the attribute,
which is all one as if we said good, [bonus] or a giver of good things.
Therefore the Gentiles prayed for peace to the goddess Pallas: for war (such
as thriued by it) to the god Mars: for honor and empire to the god Jupiter: for
riches and wealth to Pluto: for eloquence and gain to Mercury: for safe
navigations to Neptune: for fair weather and prosperous winds to Eolus: for
skill in music and leechcraft to Apollo: for free life and chastity to Diana:
for beauty and good grace, as also for issue and prosperity in love to Venus:
for plenty of crop and corn to Ceres: for seasonable vintage to Bacchus: and
for other things to others. So many things as they could imagine good and
desirable, and to so many gods as they supposed to be authors thereof, in so
much as Fortune was made a goddess, and the fever quartaine had her aulters,
such blindness and ignorance reigned in the hearts of men at that time, and
whereof it first proceeded and grew, besides the opinion has been given,
appears more at large in our books of Ierotekni, the matter being of another
consideration then to be treated of in this work. And these hymns to the gods
was the first form of Poesy and the highest and the stateliest, and they were
song by the Poets as priests, and by the people or whole congregation as we
sing in our Churchs the Psalms of David, but they did it commonly in some
shadie groves of tall timber trees: In which places they reared aulters of
green turfe, and bestrewed them all over with flowers, and upon them offered
their oblations and made their bloody sacrifices, (for no kind of gift can be
dearer then life) of such quick cattaille, as every god was in their conceit
most delighted in, or in some other respect most fit for the mystery: temples
or churches or other chapels then these they had none at those days.

CHAP. XIII.
In what form of Poesy vice and the common abuses of man's life was
reprehended.

SOme perchance would think that next after the praise and honoring of their
gods, should commence the worshippings and praise of good men, and specially of
great Princes and governors of the earth in soueraignety and function next
unto the gods. But it is not so, for before that came to pass, the Poets or
holy Priests, chiefly studied the rebuke of vice, and to carpe at the common
abuses, such as were most offensive to the public and private, for as yet for
lack of good ciuility and wholesome doctrines, there was greater store of
lewd lourdaines then of wise and learned Lords, or of noble and virtuous
Princes and governors. So as next after the honors exhibited to their gods,
the Poets finding in man generally much to reprove and little to praise, made
certain poems in plain meetres, more like to sermons or preachings then
otherwise, and when the people were assembled together in those hallowed places
dedicate to their gods, because they had yet no large halles or places of
conuenticle, nor had any other correction of their faults, but such as rested
only in rebukes of wise and grave men, such as at these days make the people
ashamed rather then afeard, the said ancient Poets used for that purpose,
three kinds of poems reprehensiue, to wit, the Satyr, the Comedy, and the
Tragedy: and the first and most bitter inuectiue against vice and vicious men,
was the Satyr: which to the intent their bitterness should breed none ill
will, either to the Poets, or to the recitours, (which could not have been
chosen if they had been openly known) and besides to make their admonitions
and reproofs seem grauer and of more efficacy, they made wise as if the gods
of the woods, whom they called Satyrs or Siluanes, should appear and recite
those verses of rebuke, whereas in deed they were but disguised persons under
the shape of Satyrs as who would say, these terrene and base gods being
conversant with man's affairs, and spiers out of all their secret faults: had
some great care over man, and desired by good admonitions to reform the evil
of their life, and to bring the bad to amendment by those kind of preachings,
whereupon the Poets inuentours of the devise were called Satyristes.

CHAP. XIIII.
How vice was afterward reproved by two other manner of poems, better reformed
then the Satyr, whereof the first was Comedy, the second Tragedy.

But when these manner of solitary speeches and recitals of rebuke, uttered by
the rural gods out of bushes and briers, seemed not to the finer heads
sufficiently perswasiue, nor so popular as if it were reduced into action of
many persons, or by many voices lively represented to the ear and eye, so as a
man might think it were even now a doing. The Poets devised to have many parts
played at once by two or three or four persons, that debated the matters of
the world, sometimes of their own private affairs, sometimes of their
neighbors, but never meddling with any Princes matters nor such high
personages, but commonly of merchants, soldiers, artificers, good honest
householders, and also of unthrifty youths, young damsels, old nurses, bawds,
brokers, ruffians and parasites, with such like, in whose behauiors, lies in
effect the whole course and trade of man's life, and therefore tended altogether
to the good amendment of man by discipline and example. It was also much for
the solace and recreation of the common people by reason of the pageants and
shows. And this kind of poem was called Comedy, and followed next after the
Satyr, and by that occasion was somewhat sharp and bitter after the nature of
the Satyr, openly and by express names taxing men more maliciously and
impudently then became, so as they were enforced for fear of quarrel and blame
to disguise their players with strange apparel, and by coloring their faces
and carrying hatts and capps of diverse fashions to make them selves less
known. But as time and experience do reform every thing that is amiss, so
this bitter poem called the old Comedy, being disused and taken away, the new
Comedy came in place, more civil and pleasant a great deal and not touching
any man by name, but in a certain generality glancing at every abuse, so as
from thenceforth fearing none ill will or enmity at any bodies hands, they
left aside their disguisings and played bare face, till one Roscius Gallus the
most excellent player among the Romans brought up these vizards, which we see
at this day used, partly to supply the want of players, when there were more
parts then there were persons, or that it was not thought meet to trouble and
pester princes chambers with too many folks. Now by the change of a vizard
one man might play the king and the carter, the old nurse and the young damsel,
the merchant and the soldier or any other part he listed very conveniently.
There be that say Roscius did it for another purpose, for being him self the
best Histrien or buffon that was in his days to be found, insomuch as Cicero
said Roscius contended with him by variety of lively gestures to surmount the
copy of his speech, yet because he was squint eyed and had a very unpleasant
countenance, and looks which made him ridiculous or rather odious to the
presence, he devised these vizards to hide his own ilfauored face. And thus
much touching the Comedy.

CHAP. XV.
In what form of Poesy the evil and outrageous behauiours of Princes were
reprehended.

But because in those days when the Poets first taxed by Satyr and Comedy,
there was no great store of Kings or Emperors or such high estats (al men being
yet for the most part rude, and in a manner popularly egall) they could not say
of them or of their behauiours any thing to the purpose, which cases of Princes
are since taken for the highest and greatest matters of all. But after that
some men among the more became mighty and famous in the world, soueraignetie and
dominion having learned them all manner of lusts and licentiousnes of life, by
which occasions also their high estates and felicities fell many times into
most low and lamentable fortunes: whereas before in their great prosperities
they were both feared and reverenced in the highest degree, after their deaths
when the posterity stood no more in dread of them, their infamous life and
tyrannies were laid open to all the world, their wickedness reproched, their
follies and extreme insolences derided, and their miserable ends painted out
in plays and pageants, to show the mutabilitie of fortune, and the just
punishment of God in revenge of a vicious and evil life. These matters were
also handled by the Poets and represented by action as that of the Comedies:
but because the matter was higher then that of the Comedies the Poets style was
also higher and more lofty, the provision greater, the place more magnificent:
for which purpose also the players garments were made more rich and costly and
solemn, and every other thing apperteining, according to that rate: So as
where the Satyr was pronounced by rusticall and naked Syluanes speaking out of
a bush, and the common players of interludes called Plampedes, played barefoote
upon the floor: the later Comedies upon scaffolds, and by men well and
cleanely hosed and shod. These matters of great Princes were played upon lofty
stages, and the actors thereof ware upon their legs buskins of leather called
Cothurni, and other solemn habits, and for a special pre-eminence did walk
upon those high corked shoes or pantofles, which now they call in Spain and
Italy Shoppini. And because those buskins and high shoes were commonly made of
goats skins very finely tanned, and dyed into colors: or for that as some
say the best players reward, was a goat to be given him, or for that as other
think, a goat was the peculiar sacrifice to the god Pan, king of all the gods
of the woods: forasmuch as a goat in Greek is called Tragos, therefore these
stately plays were called Tragedies. And thus have ye four sundry forms of
Poesy Dra^matick reprehensiue, and put in execution by the feate and
dexterity of man's body, to wit, the Satyr, old Comedy, new Comedy, and
Tragedy, whereas all other kind of poems except Eglogue whereof shall be
entreated hereafter, were only recited by mouth or song with the voice to some
melodious instrument.

CHAP. XVI.
In what form of Poesy the great Princes and dominators of the world were
honored.

But as the bad and illawdable parts of all estates and degrees were taxed by
the Poets in one sort or an other, and those of great Princes by Tragedy in
especial, (and not till after their deaths) as has been before remembered, to
the intent that such exemplifying (as it were) of their blames and adversities,
being now dead, might work for a secret reprehension to others that were
alive, living in the same or like abuses. So was it great reason that all good
and virtuous persons should for their well doings be rewarded with
commendation, and the great Princes above all others with honors and praises,
being for many respects of greater moment, to have them good and virtuous then
any inferior sort of men. Wherefore the Poets being in deed the trumpetters of
all praise and also of slander (not slander, but well deserved reproach) were
in conscience and credit bound next after the divine praises of the immortal
gods, to yield a like ratable honor to all such amongst men, as most resembled
the gods by excellence of function, and had a certain affinity with them, by
more then humane and ordinary virtues showed in their actions here upon earth.
They were therefore praised by a second degree of laud: showing their high
estates, their Princely genealogies and pedegrees, marriages, aliances, and such
noble exploites, as they had done in the affairs of peace and of war to the
benefit of their people and countries, by invention of any noble science, or
profitable Art, or by making wholesome laws or enlarging of their dominions by
honorable and just conquests, and many other ways. Such personages among the
Gentiles were Bacchus, Ceres, Perseus, Hercules, Theseus and many other, who
thereby came to be accounted gods and half gods or goddesses [Heroes] and had
their co^me^dations given by Hymn accordingly or by such other poems as their
memory was thereby made famous to the posterity for ever after, as shall be
more at large said in place convenient. But first we will speak somewhat of
the playing places, and provisions which were made for their pageants and pomps
representative before remembered.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the places where their enterludes or poemes drammaticke were represented
to the people.

AS it has been declared, the Satyrs were first uttered in their hallowed
places within the woods where they honored their gods under the open heaven,
because they had no other housing fit for great assemblies. The old comedies
were played in the broad streets upon wagons or carts uncovered, which carts
were floored with bords and made for remouable stages to pass from one street
of their towns to another, where all the people might stand at their ease to
gaze upon the sights. Their new comedies or civil enterludes were played in
open pauilions or tents of linen cloth or lether, half displayed that the
people might see. Afterward when Tragidies came up they devised to present them
upon scaffoldes or stages of timber, shadowed with linen or lether as the
other, and these stages were made in the form of a Semicircle, whereof the bow
served for the beholders to sit in, and the string or forepart was appointed
for the floor or place where the players uttered, and had in it sundry little
divisions by curteins as trauerses to serve for several rooms where they might
repair unto and change their garments and come in again, as their speeches
and parts were to be renewed. Also there was place appointed for the musiciens
to sing or to play upon their instruments at the end of every scene, to the
intent the people might be refreshed, and kept occupied. This manner of stage in
half circle, the Greeks called theatrum, as much to say as a beholding place,
which was also in such sort contrived by benches and greeces to stand or sit
upon, as no man should empeach another sight. But as civility and withal
wealth increased, so did the mind of man grow daily more haultie and
superfluous in all his devises, so as for their theaters in half circle, they
came to be by the great magnificence of the Romain princes and people
somptuously built with marble and square stone in form all round, and were
called Amphitheaters, whereof as yet appears one among the ancient ruins of
Rome, built by Pompeius Magnus, for capasitie able to receive at ease fourscore
thousand persons as it is left written, and so curiously contrived as every man
might depart at his pleasure, without any annoyance to other. It is also to be
known that in those great Amphitheaters, were exhibited all manner of other
shows and disports for the people, as their fence plays, or digladiations of
naked men, their wrastlings, runnings, leapings and other practices of
actiuitie and strength, also their baitings of wild beasts, as Elephants,
Rhinocero^s, Tigers, Leopards and others, which sights much delighted the
common people, and therefore the places required to be large and of great
content.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Shepherds or pastoral Poesy called Eglogue, and to what purpose it
was first invented and used.

SOme be of opinion, and the chief of those who have written in this Art among
the Latins, that the pastoral Poesy which we commonly call by the name of
Eglogue and Bucolick, a term brought in by the Sicilian Poets, should be the
first of any other, and before the Satyr comedy or tragedy, because, say
they, the shepherds and haywards assemblies and meetings when they kept their
cattle and herds in the common fields and forests, was the first familiar
conversation, and their babble and talk under bushes and shadie trees, the
first disputation and contentious reasoning, and their fleshly heates growing
of ease, the first idle wooings, and their songs made to their mates or
paramours either upon sorrow or iolity of courage, the first amorous musicks,
sometime also they sang and played on their pipes for wagers, striving who
should get the best game, and be counted cunningest. All this I do agree unto,
for no doubt the shepherds life was the first example of honest fellowship,
their trade the first art of lawful acquisition or purchase, for at those
days robbery was a manner of purchase. So says Aristotle in his books of the
Politiques, and that pasturage was before tillage, or fishing or fowling, or
any other predatory art or cheuisance. And all this may be true, for before
there was a shepherd keeper of his own, or of some other bodies flock, there
was none owner in the world, quick cattle being the first property of any
foreign possession. I say foreign, because always men claimed property in
their apparel and armor, and other like things made by their own travel and
industry, nor thereby was there yet any good town or city or Kings palace,
where pageants and pompes might be showed by Comedies or Tragedies. But for all
this, I do deny that the Eglogue should be the first and most ancient form of
artificial Poesy, being persuaded that the Poet devised the Eglogue long
after the other drammatick poems, not of purpose to counterfeit or represent
the rusticall manner of loves and communication: but under the veil of homely
persons, and in rude speeches to insinuate and glaunce at greater matters, and
such as perchance had not been safe to have been disclosed in any other sort,
which may be perceived by the Eglogues of Virgill, in which are treated by
figure matters of greater importance then the loves of Titirus and Corydon.
These Eglogues came after to contain and inform moral discipline, for the
amendment of man's behavior, as be those of Mantuan and other modern Poets.

CHAP. XIX.
Of historical Poesy, by which the famous acts of Princes and the virtuous
and worthy lives of our forefathers were reported.

THere is nothing in man of all the potential parts of his mind (reason and
will except) more noble or more necessary to the active life the^ memory:
because it makes most to a sound judgment and perfect worldly wisdom,
examining and comparing the times past with the present, and by them both
considering the time to come, concludes with a steadfast resolution, what is
the best course to be taken in all his actions and aduices in this world: it
came upon this reason, experience to be so highly commended in all
consultations of importance, and preferred before any learning or science, and
yet experience is no more than a mass of memories assembled, that is, such
trials as man has made in time before. Right so no kind of argument in all
the Oratorie craft, does better persuade and more universally satisfy then
example, which is but the representation of old memories, and like successes
happened in times past. For these regards the Poesy historical is of all
other next the divine most honorable and worthy, as well for the common benefit
as for the special comfort every man receives by it. No one thing in the
world with more delectation reviving our spirits then to behold as it were in a
glass the lively image of our dear forefathers, their noble and virtuous
manner of life, with other things autentike, which because we are not able
otherwise to attain to the knowledge of, by any of our senses, we apprehend
them by memory, whereas the present time and things so swiftly pass away, as
they give us no leisure almost to look into them, and much less to know and
consider of them thoroughly. The things future, being also events very
uncertain, and such as can not possibly be known because they be not yet, can
not be used for example nor for delight otherwise the^ by hope. Though many
promise the contrary, by vain and deceitful arts taking upon them to reveal
the truth of accidents to come, which if it were so as they surmise, are yet
but sciences merely coniecturall, and not of any benefit to man or to the
common wealth, where they be used or professed. Therefore the good and
exemplarie things and actions of the former ages, were reserved only to the
historical reports of wise and grave men: those of the present time left to
the fruition and judgment of our senses: the future as hazards and incertaine
euentes utterly neglected and laid aside for Magicians and mockers to get their
livings by: such manner of men as by negligence of Magistrates and remisses of
laws every country breeds great store of. These historical men
nevertheless used not the matter so precisely to wish that al they wrote
should be accounted true, for that was not needful nor expedient to the
purpose, namely to be used either for example or for pleasure: considering that
many times it is seen a fained matter or altogether fabulous, besides that it
makes more mirth than any other, works no less good conclusions for example
then the most true and veritable: but often times more, because the Poet has
the handling of them to fashion at his pleasure, but not so of the other which
must go according to their verity and none otherwise without the writers great
blame. Again as ye know mo and more excellent examples may be fained in one
day by a good wit, then many ages through man's frailty are able to put in ure,
which made the learned and witty men of those times to devise many historical
matters of no verity at all, but with purpose to do good and no hurt, as using
them for a manner of discipline and president of commendable life. Such was the
common wealth of Plato, and Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, resting all in devise,
but never put in execution, and easier to be wished then to be performed. And
you shall perceive that histories were of three sorts, wholly true and wholly
false, and a third holding part of either, but for honest recreation, and good
example they were all of them. And this may be apparent to us not only by the
Poetical histories, but also by those that be written in prose: for as Homer
wrate a fabulous or mixed report of the siege of Troy, and another of Ulysses
errors or wanderings, so did Museus compile a true treatise of the life and
loves of Leander and Hero, both of them Heroic, and to none ill edification.
Also as Theucidides wrate a worthy and veritable history, of the wars
betwixt the Athenians and the Peloponeses: so did Zenophon, a most grave
Philosopher, and well trained courtier and counselor make another (but fained
and untrue) of the childhood of Cyrus king of Persia, nevertheless both to one
effect, that is for example and good information of the posterity. Now because
the actions of mean and base personages, tend in very few cases to any great
good example: for who passes to follow the steps, and manner of life of a
crafts man, shepherd or sailer, though he were his father or dearest friend?
yea how almost is it possible that such manner of men should be of any virtue
other then their profession requires? Therefore was nothing committed to
history, but matters of great and excellent persons and things that the same
by irritation of good courages (such as emulation causes) might work more
effectually, which occasioned the story writer to choose an higher style fit for
his subject, the Prosaicke in prose, the Poet in meetre, and the Poets was by
verse exameter for his gravity and stateliness most allowable: neither would
they intermingle him with any other shorter measure, unless it were in matters
of such quality, as became best to be song with the voice, and to some
musical instrument, as were with the Greeks, all your Hymns and Encomia of
Pindarus and Callimachus, not very histories but a manner of historical
reports in which cases they made those poemes in variable measures, and
coupled a short verse with a long to serve that purpose the better, and we our
selves who compiled this treatise have written for pleasure a little brief
Romance or historical ditty in the English tongue of the Isle of great Britain
in short and long meetres, and by breaches or divisions to be more commodiously
song to the harp in places of assembly, where the company shall be desirous to
hear of old adventures and valiaunces of noble knights in times past, as are
those of king Arthur and his knights of the round table, Sir Beuys of
Southampton, Guy of Warvvicke and others like. Such as have not premonition
hereof, and consideration of the causes alleged, would peradventure reprove
and disgrace every Romance, or short historical ditty for that they be not
written in long meeters or verses Alexandrins, according to the nature and
style of large histories, wherein they should do wrong for they be sundry forms
of poems and not all one.

CHAP. XX.
In what form of Poesy virtue in the inferior sort was commended.

IN every degree and sort of men virtue is commendable, but not egally: not
only because men's estates are unequal, but for that also virtue it self is
not in every respect of egall value and estimation. For continence in a king is
of greater merit, then in a carter, the one having all oportunities to allure
him to lusts, and ability to serve his appetites, the other partly, for the
baseness of his estate wanting such means and occasions, partly by dread of
laws more inhibited, and not so vehemently carried away with unbridled
affections, and therefore deserve not in the one and the other like praise nor
equal reward, by the very ordinary course of distributive justice. Even so
parsimonie and illiberalitie are greater vices in a Prince then in a private
person, and pusillanimitie and injustice likewise: for to the one, fortune has
supplied enough to maintain them in the contrary virtues, I mean, fortitude,
justice, liberality, and magnanimity: the Prince having all plenty to use
largess by, and no want or need to drive him to do wrong. Also all the aides
that may be to lift up his courage, and to make him stout and fearelesse
(augent animos fortunae) says the Mimist, and very truly, for nothing pulls
down a man's heart so much as adversity and lack. Again in a mean man
prodigality and pride are faults more reprehensible then in Princes, whose
high estates do require in their countenance, speech and expense, a certain
extraordinary, and their functions enforce them sometime to exceed the limits
of mediocritie not excusable in a private person, whose manner of life and
calling has no such exigence. Besides the good and bad of Princes is more
exemplarie, and thereby of greater moment then the private persons. Therefore it
is that the inferior persons, with their inferior virtues have a certain
inferior praise, to guerdon their good with, and to comfort them to continue a
laudable course in the modest and honest life and behavior. But this lies not
in written lauds so much as in ordinary reward and commendation to be given
them by the mouth of the superior magistrate. For histories were not intended
to so general and base a purpose, albeit many a mean soldier and other
obscure persons were spoken of and made famous in stories, as we find of Irus
the beggar, and Thersites the glorious noddie, whom Homer makes mention of.
But that happened (and so did many like memories of mean men) by reason of
some greater personage or matter that it was long of, which therefore could not
be an universal case nor chance to every other good and virtuous person of
the meaner sort. Wherefore the Poet in praising the manner of life or death of
any mean person, did it by some little dittie or Epigram or Epitaph in few
verses and mean style conformable to his subject. So have you how the
immortal gods were praised by hymns, the great Princes and heroicke
personages by ballades of praise called Encomia, both of them by historical
reports of great gravity and majesty, the inferior persons by other slight
poemes.

CHAP. XXI.
The form wherein honest and profitable Arts and sciences were treated.

THe profitable sciences were no less meet to be imported to the greater
number of civil men for instruction of the people and increase of knowledge,
then to be reserved and kept for clerks and great men only. So as next unto
the things historical such doctrines and arts as the common wealth fared the
better by, were esteemed and allowed. And the same were treated by Poets in
verse Exameter sauouring the Heroical, and for the gravity and comeliness of
the meetre most used with the Greeks and Latins to sad purposes, Such were
the Philosophical works of Lucretius Carus among the Romans, the
Astronomicall of Aratus and Manilius, one Greek the other Latin, the
Medicinal of Nicander, and that of Oprianus of hunting and fishes, and many
more that were too long to recite in this place.

CHAP. XXII.
In what form of Poesy the amorous affections and allurements were uttered.

THe first founder of all good affections is honest love, as the mother of all
the vicious is hatred. It was not therefore without reason that so commendable,
yea honorable a thing as love well meant, were it in Princely estate or
private, might in all civil common wealths be uttered in good form and order
as other laudable things are. And because love is of all other humane
affections the most puissant and passionate, and most general to all sorts
and ages of men and women, so as whether it be of the young or old or wise or
holy, or high estate or low, none ever could truly brag of any exemptio^ in
that case: it requires a form of Poesy variable, inconstant, affected,
curious and most witty of any others, whereof the joys were to be uttered in
one sort, the sorrows in an other, and by the many forms of Poesy, the many
moodes and pangs of lovers, thoroughly to be discovered: the poor souls
sometimes praying, beseeching, sometime honoring, auancing, praising: an other
while railing, reuiling, and cursing: then sorrowing, weeping, lamenting: in
the end laughing, rejoicing and solacing the beloved again, with a thousand
delicate devises, odes, songs, elegies, ballads, sonets and other ditties,
moving one way and another to great compassion.

CHAP. XXIII.
The form of Poetical reioysings.

PLeasure is the chief part of man's felicity in this world, and also (as our
Theologians say) in the world to come. Therefore while we may (yea always if
it could be) to rejoice and take our pleasures in virtuous and honest sort, it
is not only allowable, but also necessary and very natural to man. And many be
the joys and consolations of the heart: but none greater, than such as he may
utter and discover by some convenient means: even as to suppress and hide a
man's mirth, and not to have therein a partaker, or at least wise a witness, is
no little grief and infelicity. Therefore nature and ciuility have ordained
(besides the private solaces) public reioisings for the comfort and recreation
of many. And they be of diverse sorts and upon diverse occasions grown: one
and the chief was for the public peace of a country the greatest of any
other civil good. And wherein your Majesty (my most gracious Sovereign) have
showed your self to all the world for this one and thirty years space of your
glorious reign, above all other Princes of Christendom, not only fortunate,
but also most sufficient virtuous and worthy of Empire. An other is for just
and honorable victory achieved against the foreign enemy. A third at solemn
feasts and pompes of coronations and enstallments of honorable orders. An
other for iollity at weddings and marriages. An other at the births of Princes
children. An other for private entertainements in Court, or other secret
disports in chamber, and such solitary places. And as these reioysings tend to
diverse effects, so do they also carry diverse forms and nominations: for those
of victory and peace are called Triumphall, whereof we our selves have
heretofore given some example by our Triumphals written in honor of her
Majesty's long peace. And they were used by the ancients in like manner, as we
do our general processions or Letanies with bankets and bonefires and all
manner of joys. Those that were to honor the persons of great Princes or to
solemnise the pompes of any installment were called Encomia, we may call them
carols of honor. Those to celebrate marriages were called songs nuptial or
Epithalamies, but in a certain mystical sense as shall be said hereafter.
Others for magnificence at the natiuities of Princes children, or by custom
used yearly upon the same days, are called songs natall or Genethliaca.
Others for secret recreation and pastime in chambers with company or alone were
the ordinary Musickes amorous, such as might be song with voice or to the Lute,
Citheron or Harp, or daunced by measures as the Italian Pauan and galliard are
at these days in Princes Courts and other places of honorable or civil
assembly, and of all these we will speak in order and very briefly.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The form of Poetical lamentations.

LAmenting is altogether contrary to reioising, every man says so, and yet is
it a piece of joy to be able to lament with ease, and freely to pour forth a
man's inward sorrows and the greefs wherewith his mind is surcharged. This was
a very necessary devise of the Poet and a fine, besides his poetry to play
also the Physician, and not only by applying a medicine to the ordinary
sickness of mankind, but by making the very greef it self (in part) cure of the
disease. Now are the causes of man's sorrows many: the death of his parents,
friends, allies, and children: (though many of the barbarous nations do rejoice
at their burials and sorrow at their birthes) the overthrows and discomforts
in battle, the subuersions of towns and cities, the desolations of countries,
the loss of goods and worldly promotions, honor and good renown: finally the
trauails and torments of love forlorn or ill bestowed, either by disgrace,
denial, delay, and twenty other ways, that well experienced lovers could
recite. Such of these greefs as might be refrained or helped by wisdom, and
the parties own good endeavor, the Poet gave none order to sorrow them: for
first as to the good renown it is lost, for the more part by some default of
the owner, and may be by his well doings recovered again. And if it be
unjustly taken away, as by untrue and famous libels, the offenders recantation
may suffice for his amends: so did the Poet Stesichorus, as it is written of
him in his Pallinodie upon the disprayse of Helena, and recovered his eye
sight. Also for worldly goods they come and go, as things not long proprietary
to any body, and are not yet subject unto fortunes dominion so, but that we our
selves are in great part accessarie to our own losses and hinderaunces, by
oversight and misguiding of our selves and our things, therefore why should we
bewail our such voluntary detriment? But death the irrecouerable loss, death
the doleful departure of friends, that can never be recontinued by any other
meeting or new acquaintance. Besides our uncertainty and suspicion of their
estates and welfare in the places of their new abode, seems to carry a
reasonable pretext of just sorrow. Likewise the great overthrows in battle
and desolations of countries by wars, as well for the loss of many lives and
much liberty as for that it touches the whole state, and every private man
has his portion in the damage: Finally for love, there is no frailty in flesh
and blood so excusable as it, no comfort or discomfort greater then the good
and bad success thereof, nothing more natural to man, nothing of more force
to vanquish his will and to inuegle his judgment. Therefore of death and
burials, of th'aduersities by wars, and of true love lost or ill bestowed,
are the only sorrows that the noble Poets sought by their art to remove or
appease, not with any medicament of a contrary temper, as the Galemstes use to
cure [contraria contrarijs] but as the Paracelsians, who cure [similia
similibus] making one dolor to expel another, and in this case, one short
sorrowing the remedy of a long and grievous sorrow. And the lamenting of
deaths was chiefly at the very burialls of the dead, also at months minds
and longer times, by custom continued yearly, when as they used many offices
of service and love toward the dead, and thereupon are called Obsequies in
our vulgar, which was done not only by cladding the mourners their friends
and servants in black vestures, of shape doleful and sad, but also by
woeful countenaunces and voices, and besides by Poetical mournings in verse.
Such funeral songs were called Epicedia if they were song by many, and Monodia
if they were uttered by one alone, and this was used at the enterment of
Princes and others of great account, and it was reckoned a great civility to
use such ceremonies, as at this day is also in some country used. In Rome they
accustomed to make orations funeral and commendatorie of the dead parties in
the public place called Procostris: and our Theologians, in stead thereof use
to make sermons, both teaching the people some good learning, and also saying
well of the departed. Those songs of the dolorous discomfits in battle, and
other desolations in war, or of towns saccaged and subverted, were song by
the remnant of the army overthrown, with great skrikings and outcries, holding
the wrong end of their weapon upwards in sign of sorrow and despair. The
cities also made general mournings and offered sacrifices with Poetical songs
to appease the wrath of the martial gods and goddesses. The third sorrowing
was of loves, by long lamentation in Elegy: so was their song called, and it
was in a pitious manner of meetre, placing a limping Pentameter, after a lusty
Exameter, which made it go dolourously more then any other meeter.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the solemn reioysings at the nativity of Princes children.

TO return from sorrow to rejoicing it is a very good hap and no unwise part
for him that can do it, I say therefore, that the comfort of issue and
procreation of children is so natural and so great, not only to all men but
specially to Princes, as duty and civility have made it a common custom to
rejoice at the birth of their noble children, and to keep those days hallowed
and festival for ever once in the year, during the parents or childrens
lives: and that by public order and consent. Of which reioysings and mirthes
the Poet ministered the first occasion honorable, by presenting of joyful songs
and ballades, praising the parents by proof, the child by hope, the whole
kindred by report, and the day it self with wishes of all good success, long
life, health and prosperity for ever to the newborn. These poemes were
called in Greek Genetliaca, with us they may be called natall or birth songs.

CHAP. XXVI.
The manner of reioysings at marriages and vveddings.

AS the consolation of children well begotten is great, no less but rather
greater ought to be that which is occasion of children, that is honorable
matrimony, a love by all laws allowed, not mutable nor encombred with such
vain cares and passions, as that other love, whereof there is no assurance,
but loose and fickle affection occasioned for the most part by sudden sights
and acquaintance of no long trial or experience, nor upon any other good
ground wherein any surety may be conceived: wherefore the Civil Poet could do
no less in conscience and credit, then as he had before done to the ballade of
birth: now with much better devotion to celebrate by his poem the cheerful
day of marriages as well Princely as others, for that has always been accounted
with every country and nation of never so barbarous people, the highest and
holiest, of any ceremony appertaining to man: a match forsooth made for ever
and not for a day, a solace provided for youth, a comfort for age, a knot of
alliance and amity indissoluble: great rejoicing was therefore due to such a
matter and to so gladsome a time. This was done in ballade wise as the natall
song, and was song very sweetly by Musicians at the chamber door of the
Bridegroom and Bride at such times as shall be hereafter declared and they were
called Epithalamies as much to say as ballades at the bedding of the bride: for
such as were song at the board at dinner or supper were other Musickes and not
properly Epithalamies. Here, if I shall say that which apperteineth to th'arte,
and disclose the mystery of the whole matter, I must and do with all humble
reverence bespeake pardon of the chaste and honorable ears, least I should
either offend them with licentious speech, or leave them ignorant of the
ancient guise in old times used at weddings (in my simple opinion) nothing
reproueable. This Epithalamie was divided by breaches into three parts to
serve for three several fits or times to be song. The first breach was song at
the first part of the night when the spouse and her husband were brought to
their bed and at the very chamber door, where in a large utter room used to be
(besides the musitie^s) good store of ladies or ge^tlewomen of their
kinsefolkes, and others who came to honor the marriage, and the tunes of the
songs were very loud and shrill, to the intent there might no noise be hard
out of the bed chamber by the skreeking and outcry of the young damsel
feeling the first forces of her stiff and rigorous young man, she being as all
virgins tender and weak, and inexpert in those manner of affairs. For which
purpose also they used by old nurses (appointed to that service) to suppress
the noise by casting of pottes full of nuttes round about the chamber upon the
hard floor or paueme^t, for they used no mattes nor rushes as we do now. So
as the Ladies and gentlewomen should have their ears so occupied what with
Music, and what with their hands wantonly scambling and catching after the
nuttes, that they could not intend to harken after any other thing. This was as
I said to diminish the noise of the laughing lamenting spouse. The tenor of
that part of the song was to congratulate the first acquaintance and meeting of
the young couple, allowing of their parents good discretions in making the
match, the^ afterward to sound cherfully to the onset and first encounters of
that amorous battle, to declare the comfort of children, and increase of love
by that mean chiefly caused: the bride showing her self every ways well
disposed and still supplying occasions of new lusts and love to her husband,
by her obedience and amorous embracings and all other allurementes. About
midnight or one of the clock, the Musicians came again to the chamber door
(all the Ladies and other women as they were of degree, having taken their
leave, and being gone to their rest.) This part of the ballade was to refresh
the faint and weried bodies and spirits, and to animate new appetites with
cherefull words, encoraging the^ to the recontinuance of the same
entertainments, praising and comme^ding (by supposall) the good conformities of
them both, and their desire one to vanquish the other by such fre^dly
conflictes: alleging that the first embracementes never bred barnes, by reason
of their overmuch affection and heat, but only made passage for children and
enforced greater liking to the late made match. That the second assaults, were
less rigorous, but more vigorous and apt to auance the purpose of procreation,
that therefore they should persist in all good appetite with an invincible
courage to the end. This was the second part of the Epithalamie. In the morning
when it was fair broad day, and that by liklyhood all tournes were
sufficiently served, the last acts of the interlude being ended, and that the
bride must within few hours arise and apparel her self, no more as a
virgin, but as a wife, and about dinner time must by order come forth Sicut
sponsade thalamo, very demurely and stately to be seen and acknowledged of her
parents and kinsfolks whether she were the same woman or a changeling, or dead
or alive, or maimed by any accident nocturnall. The same Musicians came again
with this last part, and greeted them both with a Psalm of new applausions,
for that they had either of them so well behaved them selves that night, the
husband to rob his spouse of her maidenhead and save her life, the bride so
lustely to satisfy her husbands love and escape with so little danger of her
person, for which good chance that they should make a lovely truce and
abstinence of that war till next night sealing the placard of that lovely
league, with twenty manner of sweet kisses, then by good admonitions informed
them to the frugall and thriftie life all the rest of their days. The good man
getting and bringing home, the wife saving that which her husband should get,
therewith to be the better able to keep good hospitality, according to their
estates, and to bring up their children, (if God sent any) virtuously, and the
better by their own good example. Finally to persevere all the rest of their
life in true and inviolable wedlock. This ceremony was omitted when men married
widows or such as had tasted the fruits of love before, (we call them well
experienced young women) in whom there was no fear of danger to their
persons, or of any outcry at all, at the time of those terrible approches. Thus
much touching the usage of Epithalamie or bedding ballad of the ancient times,
in which if there were any wanton or lascivious matter more then ordinary
which they called Ficenina lice^tia it was borne withal for that time because
of the matter no less requiring. Catullus has made of the^ one or two very
artificial and civil: but none more excellent then of late years a young
noble man of Germany as I take it Ioha^nes secundus who in that and in his
poem Debasis, passes any of the ancient or modern Poets in my judgment.

CHAP. XXVII.
The manner of Poesy by which they uttered their bitter taunts, and privy
nips, or witty scoffs and other merry conceits.

But all the world could not keep, nor any civil ordinance to the contrary so
prevail, but that men would and must needs utter their splenes in all
ordinary matters also: or else it seemed their bowels would burst, therefore
the poet devised a pretty fashioned poem short and sweet (as we are wont to
say) and called it Epigramma in which every merry conceited man might without
any long study or tedious ambage, make his friend sport, and anger his foe, and
give a pretty nip, or show a sharp conceit in few verses: for this Epigramme
is but an inscription or writting made as it were upon a table, or in a
window, or upon the wall or mantell of a chimney in some place of common
resort, where it was allowed every man might come, or be sitting to chat and
prate, as now in our tauernes and common tabling houses, where many merry
heads meet, and scrible with ynke with chalk, or with a cole such matters as
they would every man should know, and descant upon. Afterward the same came to
be put in paper and in books, and used as ordinary missiues, some of
friendship, some of defiaunce, or as other messages of mirth: Martial was the
chief of this skill among the Latins, and at ahese days the best Epigra^mes we
find, and of the sharpest conceit are those that have been gathered among the
relics of the two muet Satyrs in Rome, Pasquill and Marphorir, which in time
of Sede vacant, when merry conceited men listed to gibe and jest at the dead
Pope, or any of his Cardinales, they fastened them upon those Images which now
lie in the open streets, and were tolerated, but after that term expired they
were inhibited again. These inscriptions or Epigrammes at their beginning had
no certain author that would avouch them, some for fear of blame, if they
were over saucy or sharp, others for modesty of the writer as was that
disticke of Virgil which he set upon the palace gate of the emperor Augustus,
which I will recite for the breifnes and quicknes of it, and also for another
euente that fell out upon the matter worthy to be remembered. These were the
verses.

Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane
Diuisum imperium cum love Caesar habet.
Which I have thus Englished, It raines all night, early the shows return
God and Caesar, do reign and rule by turn.


As much to say, God shows his power by the night raines. Caesar his
magnificence by the pompes of the day.

These two verses were very well liked, and brought to The Emperors Majesty,
who took great pleasure in them, and willed the author should be known. A
sausie courtier proffered him self to be the man, and had a good reward given
him: for the Emperor him self was not only learned, but of much munificence
toward all learned men: whereupon Virgill seeing him self by his overmuch
modesty defrauded of the reward, that an impudent had gotten by abuse of his
merit, came the next night, and fastened upon the same place this half meter,
four times iterated. Thus.

Sic vos non vobis
Sic vos non vobis
Sic vos non vobis
Sic vos non vobis
And there it remained a great while because no man wist what it meant, till
Virgill opened the whole fraud by this devise. He wrote above the fame half
metres this whole verse Exameter.

Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter honores.
And then finished the four half metres, thus.

Sic vos non vobis Fertis aratra boues
Sic vos non vobis Vellera fertis oues
Sic vos non vobis Mellificatis apes
Sic vos non vobis Indificatis aues.
And put to his name Publius Virgilius Maro. This matter came by and by to
The Emperors ear, who taking great pleasure in the devise called for Virgill,
and gave him not only a present reward, with a good allowance of diet a bonche
in court as we use to call it: but also held him for ever after upon larger
trial he had made of his learning and virtue in so great reputation, as he
vouchsafed to give him the name of a friend (amicus) which among the Romans was
so great an honor and special favor, as all such persons were allowed to the
Emperors table, or to the Senators who had received them (as friends) and
they were the only men that came ordinarily to their boords, and solaced with
them in their chambers, and gardins when none other could be admitted.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the poem called Epitaph used for memorial of the dead.

AN Epitaph is but a kind of Epigram only applied to the report of the dead
persons estate and degree, or of his other good or bad parts, to his
commendation or reproach: and is an inscription such as a man may commodiously
write or engraue upon a tomb in few verses, pithie, quick and sententious for
the passer by to peruse, and judge upon without any long tariaunce: So as if it
exceed the measure of an Epigram, it is then (if the verse be correspondent)
rather an Elegy then an Epitaph which error many of these bastard rimers
commit, because they be not learned, nor (as we are wont to say) their catftes
masters, for they make long and tedious discourses, and write them in large
tables to be hanged up in Churches and chauncells over the tombs of great men
and others, which be so exceeding long as one must have half a days leisure
to read one of them, and must be called away before he come half to the end,
or else be locked into the Church by the Sexten as I my self was once served
reading an Epitaph in a certain cathedral Church of England. They be ignorant
of poesy that call such long tales by the name of Epitaphes, they might better
call them Elegies, as I said before, and then ought neither to be engraven nor
hanged up in tables. I have seen them nevertheless upon many honorable tombs
of these late times erected, which do rather disgrace then honor either the
matter or maker.

CHAP. XXIX.
A certain ancient form of poesy by which men did use to reproach their
enemies.

AS friends be a rich and joyful possession, so be foes a continual torment
and canker to the mind of man, and yet there is no possible mean to avoid
this inconvenience, for the best of us all, and he that thinks he lives most
blameless, lives not without enemies, that envy him for his good parts, or
hate him for his evil. There be wise men, and of them the great learned man
Plutarch that took upon them to persuade the benefit that men receive by
their enemies, which though it may be true in manner of Paradoxe, yet I find
man's frailty to be naturally such, and always has been, that he cannot
conceive it in his own case, nor show that patience and moderation in such
greifs, as becomes the man perfect and accomplished in all virtue: but either
in deed or by word, he will seek revenge against them that malice him, or
practice his harms, specially such foes as oppose themselves to a man's loves.
This made the ancient Poets to invent a mean to rid the gall of all such
Vindicatiue men: so as they might be a wrecked of their wrong, and never belly
their enemy with slanderous untruths. And this was done by a manner of
imprecation, or as we call it by cursing and banning of the parties, and
wishing all evil to a light upon them, and though it never the sooner
happened, yet was it great easment to the boiling stomach: They were called
Dirae, such as Virgill made aginst Battarus, and Ouide against Ibis: we
Christians are forbidden to use such uncharitable fashions, and willed to
refer all our reuenges to God alone

CHAP. XXX
Of short Epigrames called Posies.

THere be also other like Epigrammes that were sent usually for new years
gifts or to be Printed or put upon their banketting dishes of sugar plate, or
of march pains, and such other dainty meats as by the courtesy and custom
every gest might carry from a common feast home with him to his own house, and
were made for the nonce, they were called Nenia or apophoreta, and never
contained above one verse, or two at the most, but the shorter the better, we
call them Posies, and do paint them now a days upon the back sides of our
fruit trenchers of wood, or use them as devises in rings and arms and about
such courtly purposes. So have we remembered and set forth to your Majesty very
briefly, all the commended fourmes of the ancient Poesy, which we in our
vulgar makings do imitate and use under these common names: interlude, song,
ballade, carroll and ditty: borrowing them also from the French al saving this
word (song) which is our natural Saxon English word. The rest, such as time
and usurpation by custom have allowed us out of the primitive Greek and
Latin, as Comedy, Tragedy, Ode, Epitaphe, Elegy, Epigramme, and other more.
And we have purposely omitted all nice or scholasticall curiosities not meet
for your Majesty's contemplation in this our vulgar art, and what we have
written of the ancient forms of Poemes, we have taken from the best clerks
writing in the same art. The part that next follows to wit of proportion,
because the Greeks nor Latins never had it in use, nor made any observation,
no more then we do of their feet, we may truly affirm, to have been the
first deuisers thereof our selves, as (...), and not to have borrowed it of any
other by learning or imitation, and thereby trusting to be holden the more
excusable if any thing in this our labors happen either to mislike, or to come
short of the authors purpose, because commonly the first attempt in any art or
engine artificial is amendable, and in time by often experiences reformed. And
so no doubt may this devise of ours be, by others that shall take the pen in
hand after us.

CHAP. XXXI.
Who in any age have been the most commended writers in our English Poesy, and
the Authors censure given upon them.

IT appears by sundry records of books both printed and written, that many
of our countrymen have painfully traveled in this part: of whose works some
appear to be but bare translatio^s, other some matters of their own invention
and very commendable, whereof some recital shall be made in this place, to
the intent chiefly that their names should not be defrauded of such honor as
seems due to them for having by their thankful studies so much beautified
our English tongue (as at this day it will be found our nation is in nothing
inferior to the French or Italian for copy of language, subtlety of device,
good method and proportion in any form of poem, but that they may compare
with the most, and perchance pass a great many of them. And I will not reach
above the time of king Edward the third, and Richard the second for any that
wrote in English meeter: because before their times by reason of the late
Normane conquest, which had brought into this Realm much alteration both of
our langage and laws, and there withal a certain martial barbarousnes,
whereby the study of all good learning was so much decayed, as long time after
no man or very few intended to write in any laudable science: so as beyond that
time there is little or nothing worth commendation to be found written in this
art. And those of the first age were Chaucer and Gower both of them as I
suppose Knights. After whom followed John Lydgate the monk of Bury, and that
nameles, who wrote the Satyr called Piers Plowman, next him followed Harding
the Chronicler, then in king Henry the eighth times Skeleton, (I wot not for what
great worthiness) surnamed the Poet Laureat. In the latter end of the same kings
reign spro^g up a new company of courtly makers, of whom Sir Thomas Wyat
the elder and Henry Earl of Surrey were the two chieftaines, who having
travailed into Italy, and there tasted the sweet and stately measures and
style of the Italia^ Poesy as nouices newly crept out of the schools of Dante
Arioste and Petrarch, they greatly pollished our rude and homely manner of
vulgar Poesy, from that it had been before, and for that cause may justly be
said the first reformers of our English meetre and style. In the same time or
not long after was the Lord Nicholas Vaux, a man of much facility in vulgar
makings. Afterward in king Edward the sixths time came to be in reputation for
the same faculty Thomas Sternehold, who first translated into English certain
Psalms of David, and John Hoywood the Epigrammatist who for the mirth and
quickness of his conceits more then for any good learning was in him came to
be well benefited by the king. But the principal man in this profession at the
same time was Master Edward Ferrys a man of no less mirth and felicity that
way, but of much more skill, and magnificence in his meeter, and therefore wrate
for the most part to the stage, in Tragedy and sometimes in Comedy or
Interlude, wherein he gave the king so much good recreation, as he had thereby
many good rewards. In Queens Mary's time flourished above any other Doctor
Phaer one that was well learned and excellently well translated into English
verse Heroical certain books of Virgils Aeneidos. Since him followed Master
Arthure Golding, who with no less commendation turned into English meetre the
Metamorphosis of Ouide, and that other Doctor, who made the supplement to
those books of Virgils Aeneidos, which Master Phaer left undone. And in her
Majesty's time that now is are sprung up an other crew of Courtly makers Noble
men and Gentlemen of her Majesty's own servants, who have written
excellently well as it would appear if their doings could be found out and
made public with the rest, of which number is first that noble Gentleman
Edward Earl of Oxford. Thomas Lord of Bukhurst, when he was young, Henry Lord
Paget, Sir Philip Sydney, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Master Edward Dyar, Master
Fulke Greuell, Gascon, Britton, Turberuille and a great many other learned
Gentlemen, whose names I do not omit for envy, but to avoid tediousness, and
who have deserved no little commendation. But of them all particularly this is
mine opinion, that Chaucer, with Gower, Lidgat and Harding for their antiquity
ought to have the first place, and Chaucer as the most renowned of them all,
for the much learning appears to be in him above any of the rest. And though
many of his books be but bare translations out of the Latin and French, yet
are they well handled, as his books of Troilus and Cresseid, and the Romant of
the Rose, whereof he translated but one half, the device was John de Mehunes a
French Poet, the Canterbury tales were Chaucers own invention as I suppose,
and where he shows more the natural of his pleasant wit, then in any other
of his works, his similitudes comparisons and all other descriptions are such
as can not be amended. His meetre Heroical of Troilus and Cresseid is very
grave and stately, keeping the the staff of seven, and the verse of ten, his
other verses of the Canterbury tales be but riding ryme, nevertheless very
well becoming the matter of that pleasant pilgrimage in which every man's part
is played with much decency. Gower saving for his good and grave moralities, had
nothing in him highly to be commended, for his verse was homely and without
good measure, his words strained much deal out of the French writers, his
ryme wrested, and in his inventions small subtillitie: the applications of his
moralities are the best in him, and yet those many times very grossly
bestowed, neither does the substance of his works sufficiently answer the
subtilitie of his titles. Lydgat a translatour only and no deviser of that
which he wrate, but one that wrate in good verse. Harding a Poet Epick or
Historical, handled himself well according to the time and manner of his
subject. He that wrote the Satyr of Piers Ploughman, seemed to have been a
malcontent of that time, and therefore bent himself wholly to tax the
disorders of that age, and specially the pride of the Roman Clergy, of whose
fall he seems to be a very true Prophet, his verse is but loose meetre, and
his terms hard and obscure, so as in them is little pleasure to be taken.
Skeleton a sharp Satirist, but with more railing and scoffery then became a
Poet Lawreat, such among the Greeks were called Pantomimi, with us Buffons,
altogether applying their wits to Scurrillities and other ridiculous matters.
Henry Earl of Surrey and Sir Thomas Wyat, between whom I find very little
difference, I repute them (as before) for the two chief la^ternes of light to
all others that have since employed their pens upon English Poesy, their
conceits were lofty, their styles stately, their conueyance cleanely, their
terms proper, their meetre sweet and well proportioned, in all imitating very
naturally and studiously their Master Francis Petrarcha. The Lord Vaux his
commendatio^ lies chiefly in the facillitie of his meetre, and the aptness of
his descriptions such as he takes upon him to make, namely in sundry of his
Songs, wherein he shows the counterfeit actio^ very lively and pleasantly. Of
the later sort I think thus. That for Tragedy, the Lord of Buckhurst, and
Master Edward Ferrys for such doings as I have seen of theirs do deserve the
highest price: The Earl of Oxford and Master Edwardes of her Majesty's Chapel
for Comedy and Interlude. For Eglogue and pastoral Poesy, Sir Philip Sydney
and Master Challenner, and that other Gentleman who wrate the late shepheardes
Callender. For dittie and amourous Ode I find Sir Walter Rawleyghs vain most
lofty, insolent, and passionate. Master Edward Dyar, for Elegy most sweet,
solemn and of high conceit. Gascon for a good meeter and for a plentiful
vain. Phaer and Golding for a learned and well corrected verse, specially in
translation clear and very faithfully answering their authors intent. Others
have also written with much facillitie, but more commendably perchance if they
had not written so much nor so popularly. But last in recital and first in
degree is the Queen our sovereign Lady, whose learned, delicate, noble Muse,
easily surmounteth all the rest that have written before her time or since, for
sense, sweetness and subtillitie, be it in Ode, Elegy, Epigram, or any other
kind of poem Heroic or Lyricke, wherein it shall please her Majesty to
employ her pen, even by as much odds as her own excellent estate and degree
exceeds all the rest of her most humble vassalls.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF PROPORTION POETICAL.
CHAP. I.
Of Proportion Poetical.

IT is said by such as profess the Mathematical sciences, that all things
stand by proportion, and that without it nothing could stand to be good or
beautiful. The Doctors of our Theology to the same effect, but in other
terms, say: that God made the world by number, measure and weight: some for
weight say tune, and peradventure better. For weight is a kind of measure or of
much conueniencie with it: and therefore in their descriptions be always
coupled together (statica and metrica) weight and measures. Hereupon it seems
the Philosopher gathers a triple proportion, to wit, the Arithmeticall, the
Geometrical, and the Musical. And by one of these three is every other
proportion guided of the things that have conueniencie by relation, as the
visible by light color and shadow: the audible by stirs, times and accents:
the odorable by smelles of sundry temperaments: the tastible by savors to the
rate: the tangible by his obiectes in this or that regard. Of all which we
leave to speak, returning to our poetical proportion, which holds of the
Musical, because as we said before Poesy is a skill to speak and write
harmonically: and verses or rhyme be a kind of Musical utterance, by reason of
a certain congruitie in sounds pleasing the ear, though not perchance so
exquisitely as the harmonicall concents of the artificial Music, consisting
in strained tunes, as is the vocal Music, or that of melodious instruments,
as Lutes, Harpes, Regals, Records and such like. And this our proportion
Poetical rests in five points: Staff, Measure, Concord, Situation and
figure all which shall be spoken of in their places.

CHAP. II.
Of proportion in Staff.

Staff in our vulgar Poesy I know not why it should be so called, unless it
be for that we understand it for a bearer or supporter of a song or ballad, not
unlike the old weak body, that is stayed up by his staff, and were not
otherwise able to walk or to stand upright. The Italian called it Stanza, as
if we should say a resting place: and if we consider well the form of this
Poetical staff, we shall find it to be a certain number of verses allowed
to go altogether and join without any intermission, and do or should finish
up all the sentences of the same with a full period, unless it be in some
special cases, and there to stay till another staff follow of like sort: and
the shortest staff contains not under four verses, nor the longest above
ten, if it pass that number it is rather a whole ditty then properly a staff.
Also for the more part the staves stand rather upon the even number of verses
then the odd, though there be of both sorts. The first proportion then of a
staff is by quadrien or four verses. The second of five verses, and is
seldom used. The third by sizeine or six verses, and is not only most usual,
but also very pleasant to the ear. The fourth is in seven verses, and is the
chief of our ancient proportions used by any rimer writing any thing of
historical or grave poem, as ye may see in Chaucer and Lidgate the one writing
the loves of Troylus and Cresseida, the other of the fall of Princes: both by
them translated not devised. The first proportion is of eight verses very
stately and Heroicke, and which I like better then that of seven, because it
receaueth better band. The sixth is of nine verses, rare but very grave. The
seventh proportion is of ten verses, very stately, but in many men's opinion
too long: nevertheless of very good grace and much gravity. Of eleven and
twelve I find none ordinary staves used in any vulgar language, neither does it
serve well to continue any historical report or ballade, or other song: but is
a dittie of it self, and no staff, yet some modern waiters have used it but
very seldom. Then last of all have ye a proportion to be used in the number of
your staves, as to a caroll and a ballade, to a song, and a round, or virelay.
For to an historical poem no certain number is limited, but as the matter
falls out: also a distick or couple of verses is not to be accounted a staff,
but serves for a continuance as we see in Elegy, Epitaph, Epigramme or such
meetres, of plain concord not harmonically entertangled, as some other songs
of more delicate music be.

A staff of four verses contains in it self matter sufficient to make a
full periode or complement of sense, though it do not always so, and
therefore may go by divisions.

A staff of five verses, is not much used because he that can not comprehend
his periode in four verses, will rather drive it into six then leave it in
five, for that the even number is more agreeable to the ear then the odd is.

A staff of six verses, is very pleasant to the ear, and also serves for a
greater complement then the inferior staves, which makes him more commonly to
be used.

A staff of seven verses, most usual with our ancient makers, also the
staff of eight, nine and ten of larger complement then the rest, are only
used by the later makers, and unless they go with very good band, do not so
well as the inferior staves. Therefore if ye make your staff of eight, by two
fowers not entertangled, it is not a huitaine or a staff of eight, but two
quadreins, so is it in ten verses, not being entertangled they be but two
staves of five.

CHAP. III.
Of proportion in measure.

MEeter and measure is all one, for what the Greeks call (...), the Latins
call Mensura, and is but the quantity of a verse, either long or short. This
quantity with them consists in the number of their feet: and with us in the
number of sillables, which are comprehended in every verse, not regarding his
feet, otherwise then that we allow in scanning our verse, two sillables to
make one short portion (suppose it a foot) in every verse. And after that sort
ye may say, we have feet in our vulgar rymes, but that is improperly: for a
foot by his sense natural is a member of office and function, and serves to
three purposes, that is to say, to go, to run, and to stand still so: as he
must be sometimes swift, sometimes slow, sometime vnegally marching or
peradventure steady. And if our feet Poetical want these qualities it can not
be said a foot in sense translatiue as here. And this comes to pass, by
reason of the evident motion and stir, which is perceived in the sounding of
our words not always egall: for some ask longer, some shorter time to be
uttered in, and so by the Philosophers definition, stir is the true measure
of time. The Greeks and Latins because their words happened to be of many
sillables, and very few of one syllable, it fell out right with them to
conceive and also to perceive, a notable diversity of motion and times in the
pronuntiation of their words, and therefore to every bissillable they allowed
two times, and to a trissillable three times, and to every polisillable more,
according to his quantity, and their times were some long, some short
according as their motions were slow or swift. For the sound of some syllable
stayed the ear a great while, and others slid away so quickly, as if they had
not been pronounced, then every syllable being allowed one time, either short
or long, it fell out that every tetrasillable had four times, every
trissillable three, and the bissillable two, by which observation every word,
not under that sise, as he ran or stood in a verse, was called by them a
foot of such and so many times, namely the bissillable was either of two long
times as the spondeus, or two short, as the pirchius, or of a long and a short
as the trocheus, or of a short and a long as the iambus: the like rule did they
set upon the word trissillable, calling him a foot of three times: as the
dactilus of a long and two short: the mollossus of three long, the tribracchus
of three short, the amphibracchus of two long and a short the amphimacer of two
short and a long. The word of four sillables they called a foot of four
times, some or all of them, either long or short: and yet not so content they
mounted higher, and because their words served well thereto, they made feet
of six times: but this proceeded more of curiosity, then otherwise: for
whatsoever foot pass the trissillable is compounded of his inferior as every
number Arithmeticall above three, is co^pounded of the inferior numbers as
twice two make four, but the three is made of one number, videl. of two and an
unity. Now because our natural and primitive language of the Saxon English,
bears not any words (at least very few) of more sillables then one (for
whatsoever we see exceed, comes to us by the alterations of our language
grown upon many conquestes and otherwise) there could be no such observation
of times in the sound of our words, and for that cause we could not have the
feet which the Greeks and Latins have in their meetres: but of this stir
and motion of their devised feet, nothing can better show the quality the^
these runners at common games, who setting forth from the first goal, one
gives the start speedely and perhaps before he come half way to the other
goal, decays his pace, as a man weary and fainting: another is slow at the
start, but by amending his pace keeps even with his fellow or perchance gets
before him: another one while gets ground, another while loses it again,
either in the beginning, or middle of his race, and so proceeds vnegally
sometimes swift sometimes slow as his breath or forces serve him: another sort
there be that plod on, and will never change their pace, whether they win or
lose the game: in this manner does the Greek dactilus begin slowly and keep on
swifter till the end, for his race being divided into three parts, he spends
one, and that is the first slowly, the other twain swiftly: the anapestus his
two first parts swiftly, his last slowly: the Molossus spends all three parts
of his race slowly and egally Bacchius his first part swiftly, and two last
parts slowly. The tribrachus all his three parts swiftly: the antibacchius his
two first parts slowly, his last and third swiftly: the amphimacer, his first
and last part slowly and his middle part swiftly: the amphibracus his first and
last parts swiftly but his middle part slowly, and so of others by like
proportion. This was a pretty fantastical observation of them, and yet
brought their meetres to have a marvelous good grace, which was in Greek
called (...): whence we have derived this word ryme, but improperly and not well
because we have no such feet or times or stirs in our meeters, by whose
simpathie, or pleasant co^uenie^cie with the ear, we could take any delight:
this rithmus of theirs, is not therefore our rhyme, but a certain musical
numerositie in utterance, and not a bare number as that of the Arithmeticall
co^putation is, which therefore is not called rithmus but arithmus. Take this
away from them, I mean the running of their feet, there is nothing of
curiosity among them more then with us nor yet so much.

CHAP. III.
How many sorts of measures we use in our vulgar.

TO return from rhyme to our measure again, it has been said that according
to the number of the sillables contained in every verse, the same is said a
long or short meeter, and his shortest proportion is of four sillables, and
his longest of twelve, they that use it above, pass the bounds of good
proportion. And every meeter may be as well in the odd as in the even syllable,
but better in the even, and one verse may begin in the even, and another follow
in the odd, and so keep a commendable proportion. The verse that contains
but two silables, which may be in one word, is not usual: therefore many do
deny him to be a verse, saying that it is but a foot, and that a meeter can
have no less then two feet at the least, but I find it otherwise as well among
the best Italian Poets, as also with our vulgar makers, and that two sillables
serve well for a short measure in the first place, and middle, and end of a
staff: and also in diverse scituations and by sundry distances, and is very
passionate and of good grace, as shall be declared more at large in the Chapter
of proportion by situation.

The next measure is of two feet or of four sillables, and then one word
tetrasillable divided in the midst makes up the whole meeter, as thus Re^ue^
re^ntli^e
Or a trissillable and one monosillable thus. Sovereign God, or two
bissillables and that is pleasant thus, Restore again, or with four
monossillables, and that is best of all thus, When I do think, I find no
savor in a meetre of three sillables nor in effect in any odd, but they may
be used for variety sake, and specially being enterlaced with others the
meetre of six sillables is very sweet and dilicate as thus.

O God when I behold
This bright heaven so hye
By thine own hands of old
Contriud so cunningly.
The meter of seven sillables is not usual, no more is that of nine and eleven,
yet if they be well composed, that is, their Cesure well appointed, and their
last accent which makes the concord, they are commendable enough, as in this
ditty where one verse is of eight an other is of seven, and in the one the
accent upon the last, in the other upon the last save on.

The smoakie sighs, the bitter tears
That I in vain have wasted
The broken sleeps, the woe and fears
That long in me have lasted
Will be my death, all by thy guilt
And not by my deserving
Since so inconstantly thou will
Not love but still be sweruing.
And all the reason why these meeters in all syllable are alowable is, for that
the sharp accent falls upon the penultima or last save one syllable of the
verse, which does so drown the last, as he seems to pass away in manner
vnpronounced, and so make the verse seem even: but if the accent fall upon the
last and leave two flat to finish the verse, it will not seem so: for the
odnes will more notoriously appear, as for example in the last verse before
recited Not love but still be sweruing, say thus Love it is a marvelous thing.
Both verses be of egall quantity, vidz. seven sillables a piece, and yet the
first seems shorter then the later, who shows a more odnesse then the former
by reason of his sharp accent which is upon the last syllable, and makes him
more audible then if he had slid away with a flat accent, as the word sweruing.

Your ordinary rimers use very much their measures in the odd as nine and
eleven, and the sharp accent upon the last syllable, which therefore makes him
go ill fauouredly and like a minstrels music. Thus said one in a meeter of
eleven very harshly in mine ear, whether it be for lack of good rhyme or of
good reason, or of both I wot not.

Now suck child and sleep child, thy mothers own joy
Her only sweet comfort, to drown all annoy
For beauty surpassing the azured sky
I love thee my darling, as ball of mine eye.
This sort of compotition in the odd I like not, unless it be helped by the
Cesure or by the accent as I said before.

The meeter of eight is no less pleasant then that of six, and the Cesure
falls just in the middle, as this of the Earl of Surreyes.

When raging love, with extreme pain.
The meeeter of ten sillables is very stately and Heroical, and must have his
Cesure fall upon the fourth syllable, and leave six behind him thus.

I serve at ease, and govern all with woe.
This meeter of twelve sillables the French man calls a verse Alexandrine,
and is with our modern rimers most usual: with the ancient makers it was not
so. For before Sir Thomas Wiats time they were not used in our vulgar, they be
for grave and stately matters fitter than for any other ditty of pleasure. Some
makers write in verses of fourteen sillables giving the Cesure at the first
eight, which proportion is tedious, for the length of the verse keeps the ear
too long from his delight, which is to hear the cadence or the tuneable accent
in the end of the verse. Nevertheless that of twelve if his Cesure be just in
the middle, and that ye suffer him to run at full length, and do not as the
common rimers do, or their Printer for sparing of paper, cut them of in the
midst, wherein they make in two verses but half rhyme. They do very well as
wrote the Earl of Surrey translating the book of the preacher.

Solomon David's son, king of Jerusalem.
This verse is a very good Alexandrine, but perchance would have sounded more
musically, if the first word had been a dissillable, or two monosillables and
not a trissillable: having his sharp accent upon the Antepenultima as it
has, by which occasion it runs like a Dactill, and carries the two later
sillables away so speedily as it seems but one foot in our vulgar measure,
and by that means makes the verse seem but of eleven sillables, which odnesse
is nothing pleasant to the ear. Judge some body whether it would have done
better (if it might) have been said thus, Roboham David's son king of
Jerusalem.
Letting the sharp accent fall upon bo, or thus Restore king David's son unto
Jerusalem
For now the sharp accent falls upon bo, and so does it upon the last in
restore, which was not in the other verse. But because we have seemed to make
mention of Cesure, and to appoint his place in every measure, it shall not be
amiss to say somewhat more of it, and also of such pauses as are used in
utterance, and what commodity or delectation they bring either to the speakers
or to the hearers.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Cesure.

THere is no greater difference betwixt a civil and brutish vtteraunce then
clear distinction of voices: and the most laudable languages are always most
plain and distinct, and the barbarous most confuse and indistinct: it is
therefore requisite that leisure be taken in pronuntiation, such as may make our
words plain and most audible and agreeable to the ear: also the breath asks
to be now and then relieved with some pause or stay more or less: besides that
the very nature of speech (because it goes by clauses of several construction
and sense) requires some space betwixt the^ with intermissio^ of sound, to
the end they may not huddle one upon another so rudly and so fast that the ear
may not perceive their difference. For these respects the ancient reformers
of language, invented, three manner of pauses, one of less leisure then
another, and such several intermissions of sound to serve (besides easme^t to
the breath) for a treble distinction of sentences or parts of speech, as they
happened to be more or less perfect in sense. The shortest pause or
intermissio^ they called comma as who would say a piece of a speech cut of. The
second they called colon, not a piece but as it were a member for his larger
length, because it occupied twice as much time as the comma. The third they
called periodus, for a co^plement or full pause, and as a resting place and
perfection of so much former speech as had been uttered, and from whence they
needed not to pass any further unless it were to renew more matter to enlarge
the tale. This cannot be better represented then by example of these common
trauailers by the hie ways, where they seem to allow themselves three manner of
stays or easements: one a horseback calling perchance for a cup of beer or
wine, and having dronken it up rides away and never lights: about noone he
comes to his Inn, and there baits him self and his horse an hour or more:
at night when he can conveniently travail no further, he takes up his
lodging, and rests him self till the morrow: from whence he follows the
course of a further voyage, if his business be such. Even so our Poet when he
has made one verse, has as it were finished one days journey, and the while
eases him self with one bait at the least, which is a Comma or Cesure in the
mid way, if the verse be even and not odd, otherwise in some other place, and
not just in the middle. If there be no Cesure at all, and the verse long, the
less is the makers skill and hearers delight. Therefore in a verse of twelve
sillables the Cesure ought to fall right upon the sixth syllable: in a verse of
eleven upon the sixth also leaving five to follow. In a verse often upon the
fourth, leaving six to follow. In a verse of nine upon the fourth, leaving
five to follow. In a verse of eight just in the midst, that is, upon the
fourth. In a verse of seven, either upon the fourth or none at all, the meeter
very ill brooking any pause. In a verse of six sillables and under is
needful no Cesure at all, because the breath asks no relief: yet if ye
give any Comma, it is to make distinction of sense more then for any thing
else: and such Cesure must never be made in the midst of any word, if it be
well appointed. So may you see that the use of these pawses or distinctions is
not generally with the vulgar Poet as it is with the Prose writer because the
Poets chief Music lying in his rhyme or concord to hear the Simphonie, he
makes all the have he can to be at an end of his verse, and delights not in
many stays by the way, and therefore gives but one Cesure to any verse: and
thus much for the sounding of a meetre. Nevertheless he may use in any verse
both his comma, colon, and interrogatiue point, as well as in prose. But our
ancient rymers, as Chaucer, Lydgate and others, used these Cesures either very
seldom, or not at all, or else very licentiously, and many times made their
meetres (they called them riding ryme) of such vnshapely words as would allow
no convenient Cesure, and therefore did let their rymes run out at length,
and never stayed till they came to the end: which manner though it were not to be
misliked in some sort of meetre, yet in every long verse the Cesure ought to be
kept precisely, if it were but to serve as a law to correct the licentiousness
of rymers, besides that it pleases the ear better, and shows more cunning
in the maker by following the rule of his restraint. For a rymer that will be
tied to no rules at all, but range as he list, may easily utter what he will:
but such manner of Poesy is called id our vulgar, ryme dogrell, with which
rebuke we will in no case our maker should be touched. Therefore before all
other things let his ryme and concordes be true, clear and audible with no
less delight, then almost the strayned note of a Musicians mouth, and not
dark or wrenched by wrong writing as many do to patch up their meetres, and
so follow in their art neither rule, reason, nor ryme. Much more might be said
for the use of your three pauses, comma, colon, and periode, for perchance it
be not all a matter to use many commas, and few, nor colons likewise, or long
or short periodes, for it is diversely used, by diverse good writers. But because
it apperteineth more to the orator or writer in prose then in verse, I will
say no more in it, then thus, that they be used for a commodious and sensible
distinction of clauses in prose, since every verse is as it were a clause of it
self, and limited with a Cesure howsoever the sense bear, perfect or
imperfect, which difference is obseruable betwixt the prose and the meeter.

CHAP. V.
Of Proportion in Concord, called Symphonie or rhyme.

BEcause we use the word rhyme (though by manner of abusion) yet to help that
fault again we apply it in our vulgar Poesy another way very commendably and
curiously. For wanting the currantnesse of the Greek and Latin feet, in
stead thereof we make in th'ends of our verses a certain tunable sound: which
anon after with another verse reasonably distant we accord together in the last
fall or cadence: the ear taking pleasure to hear the like tune reported, and
to feel his return. And for this purpose serve the monosillables of our
English Saxons excellently well, because they do naturally and indifferently
receive any accent, and in them if they finish the verse, rests the shrill
accent of necessity, and so does it not in the last of every bissillable, nor
of every polisillable word: but to the purpose, ryme is a borrowed word from
the Greeks by the Latins and French, from them by us Saxon angles and by
abusion as has been said, and therefore it shall not do amiss to tell what
this rithmos was with the Greeks, for what is it with us has been already
said. There is an acco^ptable number which we call arithmeticall (arithmos) as
one, two, three. There is also a musical or audible number, fashioned by
stirring of tunes and their sundry times in the utterance of our words, as
when the voice goes high or low, or sharp or flat, or swift or slow: and this
is called rithmos or numerositie, that is to say, a certain flowing vtteraunce
by slipper words and sillables such as the tongue easily vtters, and the ear
with pleasure receives, and which flowing of words with much volubilitie
smoothly proceeding from the mouth is in some sort harmonicall and breeds to
the ear a great compassion. This point grew by the smooth and delicate running
of their feet, which we have not in our vulgar, though we use as much as may
be the most flowing words and slippery sillables, that we can pick out: yet do
not we call that by the name of ryme, as the Greeks did: but do give the name
of ryme only to our concordes, or tunable consentes in the latter end of our
verses, and which concordes the Greeks nor Latins never used in their Poesy
till by the barbarous soldiers out of the camp, it was brought into the Court
and thence to the school, as has been before remembered: and yet the Greeks
and Latins both used a manner of speech, by clauses of like termination, which
they called (...), and was the nearest that they approached to our ryme: but is
not our right concord: so as we in abusing this term (ryme) be nevertheless
excusable applying it to another point in Poesy no less curious then their
rithme or numerositie which in deed passed the whole verse throughout, whereas
our concordes keep but the latter end of every verse, or perchance the middle
and the end in meetres that be long.

CHAP. VI.
Of accent, time and stir perceived evidently in the distinction of man's voice,
and which makes the flowing of a meeter.

Now because we have spoken of accent, time and stir or motion in words, we
will set you down more at large what they be. The ancient Greeks and Latins
by reason their speech fell out originally to be fashioned with words of many
sillables for the most part, it was of necessity that they could not utter
every syllable with one like and egall sound, nor in like space of time, nor
with like motion or agility: but that one must be more suddenly and quickly
forsaken, or longer pawsed upon then another: or sounded with a higher note and
clearer voice then another, and of necessity this diversity of sound, must
fall either upon the last syllable, or upon the last save one, or upon the
third and could not reach higher to make any notable difference, it caused them
to give unto three different sounds, three several names: to that which was
highest lift up and most eleuate or shrillest in the ear, they gave the name
of the sharp accent, to the lowest and most base because it seemed to fall
down rather then to rise up, they gave the name of the heavy accent, and that
other which seemed in part to lift up and in part to fall down, they called
the circumflex, or compast accent: and if new terms were not odious, we might
very properly call him the (windabout) for so is the Greek word. The^ because
every thing that by nature falls down is said heavy, and whatsoever naturally
mounts upward is said light, it gave occasion to say that there were
diversities in the motion of the voice, as swift and slow, which motion also
presupposes time, because time is mensura motus, by the Philosopher: so have
you the causes of their primitive invention and use in our art of Poesy, all
this by good observation we may perceive in our vulgar words if they be of mo
sillables the^ one, but specially if they be trissillables, as for example in
these words [altitude] and [heauinesse] the sharp accent falls upon [al] and
[he] which be the antepenultimaes: the other two fall away speedily as if they
were scarce sounded in this trissilable [forsaken] the sharp accent falls upon
[sa] which is the penultima, and in the other two is heavy and obscure. Again
in these bissillables, endure, unsure, demure: aspire, desire, retire, your
sharp accent falls upon the last syllable: but in words monosillable which be
for the more part our natural Saxon English, the accent is indifferent, and
may be used for sharp or flat and heavy at our pleasure. I say Saxon English,
for our Normane English allows us very many bissillables, and also
trissillables as, reverence, diligence, amorous, desirous, and such like.

CHAP. VII.
Of your Cadences by which your meeter is made Symphonicall when they be
sweetest and most solemn in a verse.

AS the smoothness of your words and sillables running upon feet of sundry
quantities, make with the Greeks and Latins the body of their verses numerous
or Rithmicall, so in our vulgar Poesy, and of all other nations at this day,
your verses answering each other by couples, or at larger distances in good
[cadence] is it that makes your meeter symphonicall. This cadence is the fall
of a verse in every last word with a certain tunable sound which being matched
with another of like sound, do make a [concord.] And the whole cadence is
contained sometime in one syllable, sometime in two, or in three at the most:
for above the antepenultima there reaches no accent (which is chief cause of
the cadence) unless it be by vsurpatio^ in some English words, to which we
give a sharp accent upon the fourth as, Honorable, matrimony, patrimony,
miserable, and such other as would neither make a sweet cadence, nor easily
find any word of like quantity to match them. And the accented syllable with
all the rest under him make the cadence, and no syllable above, as in these
words, Agillitie, facillitie, subjection, direction, and these bissilables,
Tender, slender, trusty, lusty, but always the cadence which falls upon
the last syllable of a verse is sweetest and most commendable: that upon the
penultima more light, and not so pleasant: but falling upon the antepenultima
is most unpleasant of all, because they make your meeter too light and
triuiall, and are fitter for the Epigrammatist or Comicall Poet then for the
Lyrick and Elegiack, which are accounted the sweeter Musickes. But though we
have said that (to make good concord) your several verses should have their
cadences like, yet must there be some difference in their orthographie, though
not in their sound, as if one cadence be [constraine] the next [restraine] or
one [aspire] another [respire] this makes no good concord, because they are
all one, but if ye will exchange both these consonants of the accented
syllable, or void but one of them away, then will your cadences be good and
your concord to, as to say, restrain, refrain, remain: aspire, desire,
retire: which rule nevertheless is not well observed by many makers for lack
of good judgment and a delicate ear. And this may suffice to show the use and
nature of your cadences, which are in effect all the sweetness and cunning in
our vulgar Poesy.

CHAP. VIII.
How the good maker will not wrench his word to help his rhyme, either by
falsifying his accent, or by untrue orthographie.

NOw there can not be in a maker a fowler fault, then to falsify his accent to
serve his cadence, or by untrue orthographie to wrench his words to help his
rhyme, for it is a sign that such a maker it not copious in his own language,
or (as they are wont to say) not half his crafts master: as for example, if
one should rhyme to this word [Restore] he may not match him with [Doore] or
[Poore] for neither of both are of like terminant, either by good orthography
or in natural sound, therefore such rhyme is strained, so is it to this word
[Ram] to say [came] or to [Beane [Den] for they sound not nor be written a
like, and many other like cadences which were superfluous to recite, and are
usual with rude rimers who observe not precisely the rules of [prosodie]
nevertheless in all such cases (if necessity constrained) it is somewhat more
tolerable to help the rhyme by false orthographie, then to leave an unpleasant
dissonance to the ear, by keeping true orthographie and loosing the rhyme, as
for example it is better to rhyme [Dore] with [Restore] then in his truer
orthographie, which is [Doore] and to this word [Desire] to say [Fier] then
fire though it be otherwise better written fire. For since the chief grace of
our vulgar Poesy consists in the Symphonie, as has been already said, our
maker must not be too licentious in his concords, but see that they go even,
just and melodious in the ear, and right so in the numerositie or currantnesse
of the whole body of his verse, and in every other of his proportions. For a
licentious maker is in truth but a bungler and not a Poet. Such men were in
effect the most part of all your old rimers and specially Gower, who to make up
his rhyme would for the most part write his terminant syllable with false
orthographie, and many times not stick to put in a plain French word for an
English, and so by your leave do many of our common rimers at this day: as he
that by all likelihood, having no word at hand to rhyme to this word [ioy] he
made his other verse end in [Roy] saying very impudently thus, O mighty Lord
of love, dame Venus only joy
Who art the highest God of any heavenly Roy.
Which word was never yet received in our language for an English word. Such
extreme licentiousness is utterly to be banished from our school, and better
it might have been borne with in old riming writers, because they lived in a
barbarous age, and were grave moral men but very homely Poets, such also as
made most of their works by translation out of the Latin and French tongue,
and few or none of their own engine as may easily be known to them that list
to look upon the Poemes of both languages.

Finally as ye may ryme with words of all sorts, be they of many sillables or
few, so nevertheless is there a choice by which to make your cadence (before
remembered) most commendable, for some words of exceeding great length, which
have been fetched from the Latin inkhorne or borrowed of strangers, the use of
them in ryme is nothing pleasant, saving perchance to the common people, who
rejoice much to be at plays and enterludes, and besides their natural
ignorance, have at all such times their ears so attentive to the matter, and
their eyes upon the shows of the stage, that they take little heed to the
cunning of the rhyme, and therefore be as well satisfied with that which is
gross, as with any other finer and more delicate.

CHAP. IX.
Of concord in long and short measures, and by near or far distaunces, and
which of them is most commendable.

But this ye must observe withal, that because your concordes contain the
chief part of Music in your meetre, their distaunces may not be too wide or
far a sunder, lest the ear should loose the tune, and be defrauded of his
delight, and whenever ye see any maker use large and extraordinary
distaunces, ye must think he does intend to show himself more artificial
then popular, and yet therein is not to be discommended, for respects that
shall be remembered in some other place of this book.

Note also that rhyme or concord is not commendably used both in the end and
middle of a verse, unless it be in toys and trifling Poesies, for it shows
a certain lightness either of the matter or of the makers head, albeit these
common rimers use it much, for as I said before, like as the Symphonie in a
verse of great length, is (as it were) lost by looking after him, and yet may
the meetre be very grave and stately: so on the other side does the over busy
and too speedy return of one manner of tune, too much annoy and as it were glut
the ear, unless it be in small and popular Musickes song by these Cantabanqui
upon benches and barrels heads where they have none other audience then boys or
country fellows that pass by them in the street, or else by blind harpers
or such like tavern minstrels that give a fit of mirth for a groat, and their
matters being for the most part stories of old time, as the tale of Sir Topas,
the reports of Beuis of Southampton, Guy of Warwick, Adam Bell, and Clymme of
the Clough and such other old Romances or historical rimes, made purposely for
recreation of the common people at Christmasse diners and brideales, and in
tauernes and alehouses and such other places of base resort, also they be used
in Carols and rounds and such light or lascivious Poemes, which are commonly
more commodiously uttered by these buffons or vices in plays then by any other
person. Such were the rimes of Skeleton (usurping the name of a Poet Laureat)
being in deed but a rude railing rimer and all his doings ridiculous, he used
both short distaunces and short measures pleasing only the popular ear: in
our courtly maker we banish them utterly. Now also have ye in every song or
ditty concord by compass and concord entertangled and a mixed of both, what
that is and how they be used shall be declared in the chapter of proportion by
situation.

CHAP. X.
Of proportion by situation.

THis proportion consists in placing of every verse in a staff or ditty by
such reasonable distaunces, as may best serve the ear for delight, and also to
show the Poets art and variety of Music, and the proportion is double. One by
marshalling the meetres, and limiting their distaunces having regard to the
rhyme or concord how they go and return: another by placing every verse,
having a regard to his measure and quantity only, and not to his concord as
to set one short meetre to three long, or four short and two long, or a short
measure and a long, or of diverse lengthes with relation one to another, which
manner of Situation, even without respect of the rhyme, does alter the nature of
the Poesy, and make it either lighter or grauer, or more merry, or mournful,
and many ways passionate to the ear and heart of the hearer, seeming for this
point that our maker by his measures and concordes of sundry proportions does
counterfeit the harmonicall tunes of the vocal and isntrumental Musickes. As
the Dorien because his falls, sallyes and compass be diverse from those of the
Phrigien, the Phrigien likewise from the Lydien, and all three from the Eolien,
Miolidien and Ionien, mounting and falling from note to note such as be to them
peculiar, and with more or less leisure or precipation. Even so by diversity
of placing and situation of your measures and concords, a short with a long,
and by narrow or wide distances, or thicker or thinner bestowing of them your
proportions differ, and breeds a variable and strange harmony not only in
the ear, but also in the conceit of them that hear it: whereof this may be an
ocular example.

Situation in Concord Measure





Where ye see the concord or rhyme in the third distance, and the measure in the
fourth, sixth or second distaunces, whereof ye may devise as many other as ye
list, so the staff be able to bear it. And I set you down an occular
example: because ye may the better conceive it. Likewise it so falls out most
times your occular proportion does declare the nature of the audible: for if
it please the ear well, the same represented by delineation to the view
pleases the eye well and e conuerso: and this is by a natural simpathie,
between the ear and the eye, and between tunes and colors, even as there is
the like between the other senses and their objects of which it apperteineth
not here to speak. Now for the distances usually observed in our vulgar
Poesy, they be in the first second third and fourth verse, or if the verse be
very short in the fifth and sixth and in some manner of Musickes far above.

And the first distance for the most part goes all by distick or couples of
verses agreeing in one cadence, and do pass so speedily away and so often
return again, as their tunes are never lost, nor out of the ear, one couple
supplying another so nigh and so suddenly, and this is the most vulgar
proportion of distance or situation, such as used Chaucer in his Canterbury
tales, and Govver in all his works.

Second distance is, when ye pass over one verse, and join the first and the
third, and so continue on till an other like distance fall in, and this is also
usual and common, as

Third distaunce is, when your rhyme falls upon the first and fourth verse
ouerleaping two, this manner is not so common but pleasant and allowable enough.

In which case the two verses ye leave out are ready to receive their concordes
by the same distaunce or any other ye like better. The fourth distaunce is by
ouerskipping three verses and lighting upon the fifth, this manner is rare and
more artificial then popular, unless it be in some special case, as when the
meetres be so little and short as they make no show of any great delay before
they return, ye shall have example of both.

And these ten little meeters make but one Exameter at length.

--, --, --, --, --, --, --, --, --, --,

There be larger distances also, as when the first concord falls upon the
sixth verse, and is very pleasant if they be joined with other distances not so
large, as

There be also, of the seventh, eight, tenth, and twefth distance, but then
they may not go thick, but two or three such dista^ces serve to proportion a
whole song, and all between must be of other less distances, and these wide
distaunces serve for coupling of staves, or for to declare high and passionate
or grave matter, and also for art: Petrarch has given us examples hereof in
his Canzoni, and we by lines of sundry lengths and and distances as follows,

And all that can be objected against this wide distance is to say that the
ear by loosing his concord is not satisfied. So is in deed the rude and
popular ear but not the learned, and therefore the Poet must know to whose
ear he makes his rhyme, and accommodate himself thereto, and not give such
music to the rude and barbarous, as he would to the learned and delicate ear.

There is another sort of proportion used by Petrarche called the Seizino, not
riming as other songs do, but by choosing six words out of which all the whole
dittie is made, every of those six commencing and ending his verse by course,
which restraint to make the dittie sensible will try the makers cunning, as
thus.

Besides all this there is in Situation of the concords two other points one
that it go by plain and clear compass not entangled: another by enterweauing
one with another by knots, or as it were by band, which is more or less busy
and curious, all as the maker will double or redouble his rhyme or concords, and
set his distances far or nigh, of all which I will give you ocular examples,
as thus.

Concord in Plain compass Entertangle.





And first in a Quadreine there are but two proportions, for four verses in
this last sort coupled, are but two Disticks, and not a staff quadreine or of
four.

The staff of five has seven proportions as, whereof some of them be harsher
and vnpleasaunter to the ear then other some be.

The Sixaine or staff of six has ten proportions, whereof some be usual,
some not usual, and not so sweet one as another.



The staff of seven verses has seven proportions, whereof one only is the
usual of our vulgar, and kept by our old Poets Chaucer and other in their
historical reports and other ditties: as in the last part of them that follow
next.



The huitain or staff of eight verses, has eight proportions such as the
former staff, and because he is longer, he has one more then the settaine.

The staff of nine verses has yet more then the eight, and the staff often
more then the ninth and the twelfth, if such were allowable in ditties, more
then any of them all, by reason of his largeness receiving more compasses and
enterweauings, always considered that the very large distances be more
artificial, then popularly pleasant, and yet do give great grace and gravity,
and move passion and affections more vehemently, as it is well to be observed
by Petrarcha his Canzoni.

Now ye may perceive by these proportions before described, that there is a
band to be given every verse in a staff, so as none fall out alone or
uncoupled, and this band makes that the staff is said fast and not loose:
even as ye see in buildings of stone or brick the mason gives a band, that is
a length to two breadths, and upon necessity diverse other sorts of bands to
hold in the work fast and maintain the perpendicularitie of the wall: so in
any staff of seven or eight or more verses, the coupling of the more meeters by
rhyme or concord, is the faster band: the fewer the looser band, and therefore in
a huiteine he that puts four verses in one concord and four in another
concord, and in a dizaine five, shows him self more cunning, and also more
copious in his own language. For he that can find two words of concord, can
not find four or five or six, unless he have his own language at will.
Sometime also ye are driven of necessity to close and make band more then ye
would, lest otherwise the staff should fall asunder and seem two staves: and
this is in a staff of eight and ten verses: whereas without a band in the
middle, it would seem two quadriens or two quintaines, which is an error that
many makers slide away with. Yet Chaucer and others in the staff of seven and
six do almost as much a miss, for they shut up the staff with a disticke,
concording with none other verse that went before, and makes but a loose rhyme,
and yet because of the double cadence in the last two verses serve the ear
well enough. And as there is in every staff, band, given to the verses by
concord more or less busy: so is there in some cases a band given to every
staff, and that is by one whole verse running alone throughout the ditty or
ballade, either in the middle or end of every staff. The Greeks called such
uncoupled verse Epimonie, the Latins Versus intercalaris. Now touching the
situation of measures, there are as many or more proportions of them which I
refer to the makers fantasy and choice, contented with two or three ocular
examples and no more.



Which manner of proportion by situatio^ of measures gives more efficacy to
the matter oftentimes then the concords them selves, and both proportions
concurring together as they needs must, it is of much more beauty and force
to the hearers mind.

To finish the learning of this division, I will set you down one example of a
dittie written extempore with this devise, showing not only much promptness
of wit in the maker, but also great art and a notable memory. Make me says
this writer to one of the company, so many strokes or lines with your pen as
ye would have your song contain verses: and let every line bear his several
length, even as ye would have your verse of measure. Suppose of four, five,
six or eight or more sillables, and set a figure of every number at the end of
the line, whereby ye may know his measure. Then where you will have your rhyme
or concord to fall, mark it with a compast stroke or semicircle passing over
those lines, be they far or near in distance, as ye have seen before
described. And because ye shall not think the maker has premeditated
beforehand any such fashioned ditty, do ye your self make one verse whether it
be of perfect or imperfect sense, and give it him for a theme to make all the
rest upon: if ye shall perceive the maker do keep the measures and rhyme as ye
have appointed him, and besides do make his dittie sensible and ensuant to the
first verse in good reason, then may ye say he is his crafts master. For if he
were not of a plentiful discourse, he could not upon the sudden shape an entire
dittie upon your imperfect theme or proposition in one verse. And if he were
not copious in his language, he could not have such store of words at
commandment, as should supply your concords. And if he were not of a
marvelous good memory he could not observe the rhyme and measures after the
distances of your limitation, keeping with all gravity and good sense in the
whole dittie.

CHAP. XI.
Of Proportion in figure.

YOur last proportion is that of figure, so called for that it yelds an ocular
representation, your meeters being by good symmetrie reduced into certain
Geometrical figures, whereby the maker is restrained to keep him within his
bounds, and shows not only more art, but serves also much better for
briefness and subtlety of device. And for the same respect are also fittest
for the pretty amourets in Court to entertain their servants and the time
withal, their delicate wits requiring some commendable exercise to keep them
from idleness. I find not of this proportion used by any of the Greek or
Latin Poets, or in any vulgar writer, saving of that one form which they call
Anacreens egg. But being in Italy conversant with a certain gentleman, who
had long travailed the Oriental parts of the world, and seen the Courts of
the great Princes of China and Tartarie. I being very inquisitiue to know of
the subtillities of those countries, and especially in matter of learning and
of their vulgar Poesy, he told me that they are in all their inventions most
witty, and have the use of Poesy or riming, but do not delight so much as we
do in long tedious descriptions, and therefore when they will utter any pretty
conceit, they reduce it into metricall feet, and put it in form of a Lozange
or square, or such other figure, and so engraven in gold, silver or iuorie, and
sometimes with letters of ametist, rubie, emeralde or topas curiousely cemented
and peeced together, they send them in chains, bracelets, collars and girdles
to their mistresses to wear for a remembrance. Some few measures composed in
this sort this gentleman gave me, which I translated word for word and as near
as I could followed both the phrase and the figure, which is somewhat hard to
perform, because of the restraint of the figure from which ye may not
digress. At the beginning they will seem nothing pleasant to an English ear,
but time and usage will make them acceptable enough, as it does in all other new
guises, be it for wearing of apparel or otherwise. The forms of your
Geometrical figures be hereunder represented.

The Lozange called Rombus


The Fuzie or spindle, called Romboides


The Triangle, or Tricquet


The Square or quadrangle


The Pillaster, or Cillinder


The Spire or taper, called piramis


The Rondel or Sphere


The egg or figure ouall


The Tricquet reuerst


The Tricquet displayed


The Taper reuersed


The Ro^del displayed


The Lozange reuersed


The egg displayed


The Lozange rabbated


Of the Lozange.
The Lozange is a most beautiful figure, and fit for this purpose, being in
his kind a quadrangle reuerst, with his point upward like to a quarrel of
glass the Greeks and Latins both call it Rombus which may be the cause as I
suppose why they also gave that name to the fish commonly called the Turbot,
who bears justly that figure, it ought not to contain above thirteen or
fifteen or one and twenty meetres, and the longest furnishes the middle
angle, the rest pass upward and downward, still abating their lengthes by one
or two sillables till they come to the point: the Fuzie is of the same nature
but that he is sharper and slenderer. I will give you an example or two of
those which my Italian friend bestowed upon me, which as near as I could I
translated into the same figure observing the phrase of the Oriental speech
word for word.

A great Emperor in Tartary who^ they call Can, for his good fortune in the wars
and many notable conquests he had made, was surnamed Temir Cutzclewe, this man
loved the Lady Kermesine, who presented him returning from the conquest of
Corasoon (a great kingdom adjoining) with this Lozange made in letters of
rubies and diamants entermingled, thus

Sound
O Harp
Shril lie out
Temir the stout
Rider who with sharp
Trenching blade of bright steel
Has made his fiercest foes to feel
All such as wrought him shame or harm
The strength of his brave right arm,
Cleaving hard down unto the eyes
The raw skulles of his enemies,
Much honor has he won
By doughtie deeds done
In Cora soon
And all the
World
Round.
To which Can Temir answered in Fuzie, with letters of Emeralds and Ametists
artificially cut and entermingled, thus

Five
Sore batailes
Manfully fought
In blouddy field
With bright blade in hand
Has Temir won and forced to yield
Many a Captain strong and stout
And many a king his Crown to veil,
Conquering large countries and land,
Yet ne uer wanne I vi cto rye,
I speak it to my great glo rye,
So dear and joy full un to me,
As when I did first con quere thee
O Kerme sine, of all mine foes
The most cruel, of all mine woes
The smartest, the sweetest
My proud Con quest
My vi chest pray
O once a day
Lend me thy sight
Whose only light
Keeps me
Alive.
Of the Triangle or Triquet.
The Triangle is an half square, Lozange or Fuzie parted upon the cross
angles: and so his base being broad and his top narrow, it receaueth meetres of
many sizes one shorter then another: and ye may use this figure standing or
reuersed, as thus.

A certain great Sultan of Persia called Ribuska, entertaynes in love the Lady
Selamour, sent her this triquet reuest pitiously bemoning his estate, all set
in merquetry with letters of blew Sapphire and Topas artificially cut and
entermingled.

Selamour dearer than his own life,
To thy di stressed wretch cap tiue,
Re buska whom late ly cast
Most cru el ly thou perst
With thy dead ly dart,
That pair of stars
Shi ning a far
Turn from me, to me
That I may and may not see
The smile, the loure
That lead and drive
Me to die to live
Tw^se yea thrice
In -- one
hour.
To which Selamour to make the match egall, and the figure entire, answered in
a standing Triquet richly engraven with letters of like stuff.

Power
Of death
Nor of life
Has Selamour,
With Gods it is rife
To give and bereue breath,
I may for pity perchance
Thy lost liberty re store,
Upon thine oath with this penance,
That while thou live thou never love no more.
This condition seeming to Sultan Ribuska very hard to perform, and cruel to
be enjoined him, does by another figure in Taper, signifying hope, answer the
Lady Selamour, which dittie for lack of time I translated not.

Of the Spire or Taper called Pyramid.
The Taper is the longest and sharpest triangle that is, and while he mounts
upward he waxes continually more slender, taking both his figure and name of
the fire, whose flame if ye mark it, is always pointed, and naturally by his
form couets to clymbe: the Greeks call him Pyramid of (...). The Latins in
use of Architecture call him Obeliscus, it holds the altitude of six ordinary
triangles, and in metrifying his base can not well be larger then a meetre of
six, therefore in his altitude he will require diverse rabates to hold so many
sizes of meetres as shall serve for his composition, for near the top there
will be room little enough for a meetre of two sillables, and sometimes of one to
finish the point. I have set you down one or two examples to try how ye can
digest the manner of the devise.

Her Majesty, for many parts in her most noble and virtuous nature to be
found, resembled to the spire. Ye must begin beneath according to the nature of
the device
Sky.
Azurd
in the
assurde,
And better,
And richer,
Much greter,
Crown and empir
After an hier
For to aspire
Like stame of fire
In form of spire
To mount on hie,
Con ti nu al ly
With travel and teen
Most gracious queen
Ye have made a vow
Shows us plainly how
Not fained but true,
To every man's view,
Shining clear in you
Of so bright an hew,
Even thus vertewe
Vanish out of our sight
Till his fine top be quite
To Taper in the air
Endeavors soft and fair
By his kindly nature
Of tall comely stature
Like as this fair figure
From God the fountain of all good, are derived into the world all good
things: and upon her majesty all the good fortunes any worldly creature can be
furnished with. Read downward according to the nature of the device.
God
On
Hie
From
Above
Sends love,
Wisdom,
Justice
Courage,
Bounty,
And does give
All that live,
Life and breath
Hearts ese health
Children, wealth
Beauty strength
Restfull age,
And at length
A mild death.
He does bestow
All men's fortunes
Both high and low
And the best things
That earth ca^ have
Or mankind crave,
Good queens and kings
Fi nally is the same
Who gave you (mada^)
Seyson of this Crown
With pour sovereign
Impug nable right,
Redoubtable might,
Most prosperous reign
Eternal re nowme,
And that your chiefest is
Sure hope of heavens blis.
The Pillar, Pillaster or Cillinder.
The Pillar is a figure among all the rest of the Geometrical most beawtifull,
in respect that he is tall and upright and of one bigness from the bottom to
the top. In Architecture he is considered with two accessarie parts, a
pedestall or base, and a chapter or head, the body is the shaft. By this figure
is signified stay, support, rest, state and magnificence, your dittie then
being reduced into the form of a Pillar, his base will require to bear the
breath of a meetre of six or seven or eight sillables: the shaft of four: the
chapter egall with the base, of this proportion I will give you one or two
examples which may suffice.

Her Majesty resembled to the crowned pillar. Ye must read upward.
Is bliss with immortality.
Her trymest top of all ye see,
Garnish the crown
Her just renown
Chapter and head,
Parts that maintain
And womanhead
Her maiden reign
Integrity:
In honor and
With verity:
Her roundnes stand
Stre^gthen the state.
By their increase
Without debate
Concord and peace
Of her support,
They be the base
With steadfastness
Virtue and grace
Stay and comfort
Of Albions rest,
The sound Pillar
And seen a far
Is plainly expressed
Tall stately and strayt
By this noble pourtrays
Philo to the Lady Calia, sends this Odolet of her praise in form of a
Pillar, which ye must read downward.
Thy Princely port and Majesty
Is my terrene deity,
Thy wit and sense
The stream and source
Of eloquence
And deep discourse,
Thy fair eyes are
My bright loadstarre,
Thy speech a darte
Percing my heart,
Thy face alas,
My looking glass,
Thy lovely looks
My prayer books,
Thy pleasant cheer
My sunshine clear,
Thy rufull sight
My dark midnight,
Thy will the stent
Of my content,
Thy glory flou^
Of mine honor,
Thy love does give
The life I live,
Thy life it is
Mine earthly bliss:
But grace and favor in thine eyes
My bodies soul and souls paradise.
The Roundell or Sphere.
The most excellent of all the figures Geometrical is the round for his many
perfections. First because he is even and smooth, without any angle, or
interruption, most voluble and apt to turn, and to continue motion, which is
the author of life: he conteyneth in him the commodious description of every
other figure, and for his ample capacity does resemble the world or universe,
and for his indefinitenesse having no special place of beginning nor end,
bears a similitude with God and eternity. This figure has three principal
parts in his nature and use much considerable: the circle, the beam, and the
center. The circle is his largest compass or circumference: the center is his
middle and indivisible point: the beam is a line stretching directly from the
circle to the center, and contrariwise from the center to the circle. By this
description our maker may fashion his meetre in Roundel, either with the
circumference, and that is circlewise, or from the circu^ference, that is, like
a beam, or by the circumference, and that is overthwart and dyametrally from
one side of the circle to the other.

A general resemblance of the Roundell to God, the world and the Queen.
All and whole, and ever, and one,
Single, simple, each where, alone,
These be counted as Clerks can tell,
True properties, of the Roundell.
His still turning by consequence
And change, do breed both life and sense.
Time, measure of stir and rest,
Is also by his course expressed.
How swift the circle stir above,
His center point does never move:
All things that ever were or be,
Are closde in his concauitie.
And though he be, still turnde and tossed,
No room there wants nor none is lost.
The Roundell has no bonch or angle,
Which may his course stay or entangle.
The furthest part of all his sphere,
Is equally both far and near.
So does none other figure fare
Where natures chattels closed are:
And beyond his wide compass,
There is no body nor no place,
Nor any wit that comprehends,
Where it begins, or where it ends:
And therefore all men do agree,
That it purports eternity.
God above the heavens so hie
Is this Roundell, in world the sky,
Upon earth she, who bears the bell
Of maids and Queens, is this Roundell:
All and whole and ever alone,
Single, sans peer, simple, and one.
A special and particular resemblance of her Majesty to the Roundell.
FIrst her authority regal
Is the circle compassing all:
The dominion great and large
Which God has given to her charge:
Within which most spacious bound
She enuirons her people round,
Retaining them by oath and liegeance.
Within the pale of true obeisance:
Holding imparked as it were,
Her people like to herds of dear.
Sitting among them in the mids
Where she allows and bannes and bids
In what fashion she list and when,
The services of all her men.
Out of her breast as from an eye,
Issue the rays incessantly
Of her justice, bounty and might
Spreading abroad their beams so bright,
And reflect not, till they attain
The fardest part of her domaine.
And makes each subject clearly see,
What he is bounden for to be
To God his Prince and common wealth,
His neighbor, kindred and to himself.
The same center and middle prick,
Whereto our deeds are dressed so thick,
From all the parts and outmost side
Of her Monarchy large and wide,
Also fro whence reflect these rays,
Twenty hundred manner of ways
Where her will is them to convey
Within the circle of her survey.
So is the Queen of Briton ground,
Beam, circle, center of all my round.
Of the square or quadrangle equilater.
The square is of all other accounted the figure of most solliditie and
steadfastness, and for his own stay and firmitie requires none other base
then himself, and therefore as the roundell or Sphere is appropriat to the
heavens, the Spire to the element of the fire: the Triangle to the air; and
the Lozange to the water: so is the square for his inconcussable steadiness
likened to the earth, which perchance might be the reason that the Prince of
Philosophers in his first book of the Ethics, terms a constant minded man,
even egal and direct on all sides, and not easily overthrown by every little
adversity, hominem quadratu^, a square man. Into this figure may ye reduce
your ditties by using no more verses then your verse is of sillables, which will
make him fall out square, if ye go above it will grow into the figure Trapezion,
which is some portion longer then square. I need not give you any example,
because in good art all your ditties, Odes and Epigrammes should keep and not
exceed the number of twelve verses, and the longest verse to be of twelve
sillables and not above, but under that number as much as ye will.

The figure Ouall.
This figure takes his name of an egg, and also as it is thought his first
origin, and is as it were a bastard or imperfect round declining toward a
longitude, and yet keeping within one line for his periferie or compass as the
round, and it seems that he receives this form not as an imperfection by
any impediment unnaturally hindering his rotunditie, but by the wisdom and
providence of nature for the commodity of generation, in such of her creatures
as bring not forth a lively body (as do four footed beasts) but in stead
thereof a certain quantity of shapelesse matter contained in a vessel, which
after it is sequestered from the dames body receives life and perfection, as in
the eggs of birds, fishes, and serpents: for the matter being of some
quantity, and to issue out at a narrow place, for the easy passage thereof,
it must of necessity bear such shape as might not be sharp and grievous to
pass as an angle, nor so large or obtuse as might not essay some issue out
with one part more then other as the round, therefore it must be slenderer in
some part, and yet not without a rotunditie and smoothness to give the rest an
easy delivery. Such is the figure Ouall whom for his antiquity, dignity and
use, I place among the rest of the figures to embellish our proportions: of
this sort are diverse of Anacreons ditties, and those other of the Grecian
Liricks, who wrate wanton amorous devises, to solace their wits with all, and
many times they would (to give it right shape of an egg) divide a word in the
midst, and piece out the next verse with the other half, as ye may see by
perusing their meetres.

Of the device or emblem, and that other which the Greeks call Anagramma, and
we the Posie transposed.
ANd besides all the remembered points of Metricall proportion, ye have yet two
other sorts of some affinity with them, which also first issued out of the
Poets head, and whereof the Courtly maker was the principal artificer, having
many high conceits and curious imaginations, with leisure enough to attend his
idle inventions: and these be the short, quick and sententious propositions,
such as be at these days all your devices of arms and other amorous
inscriptions which courtiers use to give and also to wear in liuerie for the
honor of their ladies, and commonly contain but two or three words of witty
sentence or secret conceit till they unfolded or explaned by some
interpretation. For which cause they be commonly accompanied with a figure or
purtraict of ocular representation, the words so aptly corresponding to the
subtilitie of the figure, that as well the eye is therewith recreated as the ear
or the mind. The Greeks call it Emblema, the Italiens Impresa, and we, a
Device, such as a man may put into letters of gold and send to his mistresses
for a token, or cause to be embrodered in scutchions of arms, or in any
bordure of a rich garment to give by his novelty marvel to the beholder. Such
were the figures and inscriptions the Roman Emperors gave in their money and
coignes of largess, and in other great medailles of silver and gold, as that
of the Emperor Augustus, an arrow entangled by the fish Remora, with these
words, Festina lento, signifying that celeritie is to be used with
deliberation: all great enterprises being for the most part either overthrown
with have, or hindered by delay, in which case leisure in th'aduice, and speed
in the execution make a very good match for a glorious success.

The Emperor Heliogabalus by his name alluding to the sun, which in Greek is
Helios, gave for his device, the celestial sun, with these words
[Solimuicto] the subtilitie lies in the word [soli] which has a double sense,
viz. to the Sun, and to him only.

We our selves attributing that most excellent figure, for his incomparable
beauty and light, to the person of our Sovereign lady altring the mot, made it
far pass that of The Emperor Heliogabalus both for subtilitie and
multiplicitie of sense, thus, [Soli nunquam deficienti] to her only that never
fails, viz. in bounty and munificence toward all hers that deserve, or else
thus, To her only (whose glory and good fortune may never decay or wane. And
so it inureth as a wish by way of resemblaunce in [Simile dissimile] which is
also a subtillitie, likening her Majesty to the Sun for his brightness, but
not to him for his passion, which is ordinarily to go to glade, and sometime to
suffer eclypse.

King Edward the third, her Majesty's most noble progenitour, first founder
of the famous order of the Garter, gave this posie with it. Honey soit qui mal y
pense, commonly thus Englished, Ill be to him that thinks ill, but in mine
opinion better thus, Dishonored be he, who means vnhonorably. There can not be
a more excellent devise, nor that could contain larger intendment, nor greater
subtilitie, nor (as a man may say) more virtue or Princely generosite. For
first he did by it mildly and gravely reprove the peruers construction of such
noble men in his court, as imputed the kings wearing about his neck the garter
of the lady with whom he danced, to some amorous alliance betwixt them, which
was not true. He also justly defended his own integrity, saved the noble
woman's good renown, which by lice^tious speeches might have been empaired, and
liberally recompensed her injury with an honor, such as none could have bin
devised greater nor more glorious or permanent upon her and all the posterity
of her house. It inureth also as a worthy lesson and discipline for all
Princely personages, whose actions, imaginations, cou^tenances and speeches,
should evermore correspond in all truth and honorable simplicity.

Charles the fifth Emperor, even in his young years showing his valor and
honorable ambition, gave for his new order, the golden Fleece, usurping it upon
Prince Jason and his Argonants rich spoil brought from Cholcos. But for his
device two pillars with this mot Plus vltra, as one not content to be
restrained within the limits that Hercules had set for an uttermost bound to
all his travails, viz. two pillars in the mouth of the straight Gibraltare,
but would go further: which came fortunately to pass, and whereof the good
success gave great commendation to his device: for by the valiancy of his
Captains before he died he conquered great part of the west Indias, never
known to Hercules or any of our world before.

In the same time (seeming that the heavens and stars had conspired to
replenish the earth with Princes and governors of great courage, and most
famous conquerous) Selim Emperor of Turkey gave for his device a croissant or
new moon, promising to him self increase of glory and enlargeme^t of empire,
til he had brought all Asia under his subjection, which he reasonably well
accomplished. For in less then eight years which he reigned, he conquered all
Syria and Egypt, and laid it to his dominion. This device afterward was usurped
by Henry the second French king, with this mot Donec totum complete orbem, till
he be at his full: meaning it not so largely as did Selim, but only that his
friends should know how unable he was to do them good, and to show
benificence until he attained the crown of France unto which he aspired as
next successor.

King Lewis the twelfth, a valiant and magnanimous prince, who because he was
on every side environed with mighty neighbors, and most of them his enemies,
to let them perceive that they should not find him unable or unfurnished
(incase they should offer any unlawful hostillitie) of suffificient forces of
his own, as well to offend as to defend, and to revenge an injury as to
repulse it. He gave for his device the Porkespick with this posie pres and
loign, both far and near. For the Purpentines nature is, to such as stand
aloof, to dart her prickles from her, and if they come near her, with the
same as they stick fast to wound them that hurt her.

But of late years in the ransacke of the Cities of Cartagena and S. Dominico
in the West Indias, manfully put in execution by the prowess of her Majesty's
men, there was found a device made peradventure without King Philips knowledge,
wrought al in massiue copper, a king sitting on horseback upon a monde or
world, the horse prauncing forward with his forelegges as if he would leap of,
with this inscription, Non sufficit orbis, meaning, as it is to be conceived,
that one whole world could not content him. This immeasurable ambition of the
Spaniards, if her Majesty by Gods providence, had not with her forces,
prouidently stayed and retranched, no man knows what inconvenience might in
time have insued to all the Princes and common wealths in Christendom, who
have found them selves long annoyed with his excessive greatness.

Atila king of the Huns, inuading France with an army of 300000. fighting men,
as it is reported, thinking utterly to abbase the glory of the Roman Empire,
gave for his device of arms, a sword with a fiery point and these words, Ferro
and flamma, with sword and fire. This very device being as ye see only
accommodate to a king or conqueror and not a coillen or any mean soldier, a
certain base man of England being known even at that time a bricklayer or
mason by his science, gave for his crest: whom it had better become to bear a
truell full of mortar then a sword and fire, which is only the revenge of a
Prince, and lies not in any other man's ability to perform, unless ye will
allow it to every poor knave that is able to set fire on a thacht house. The
heraldes ought to use great discretion in such matters: for neither any rule of
their art does warrant such absurdities, nor though such a coat or crest were
gained by a prisoner taken in the field, or by a flag found in some ditch and
never fought for (as many times happens) yet is it no more allowable then it
were to bear the device of Tamerlan an Emperor in Tartary, who gave the
lightning of heaven, with a posie in that language purporting these words, Ira
Dei, which also appeared well to answer his fortune. For from a sturdie
shepeheard he became a most mighty Emperor, and with his innumerable great
armies desolated so many countries and people, as he might justly be called
[the wrath of God.] It appeared also by his strange end: for in the midst of
his greatness and prosperity he died suddenly, and left no child or kindred
for a successor to so large an Empire, nor any memory after him more then of
his great puissance and cruelty.

But that of the king of China in the fardest part of the Orient, though it be
not so terrible is no less admirable, and of much sharpness and good
implication, worthy for the greatest king and conqueror: and it is, two
strange serpents entertangled in their amorous congresse, the lesser creeping
with his head into the greaters mouth, with words purporting [ama and time]
love and fear. Which posie with marvelous much reason and subtillity implies
the duty of every subject to his Prince, and of every Prince to his subject,
and that without either of them both, no subject could be said entirely to
perform his liegeance, nor the Prince his part of lawful government. For
without fear and love the sovereign authority could not be vpholden, nor
without justice and mercy the Prince be renowned and honored of his subject.
All which parts are discovered in this figure: love by the serpents amorous
entertangling: obedience and fear by putting the inferiors head into the
others mouth having puissance to destroy. On the other side, justice in the
greater to prepare and manace death and destruction to offenders. And if he
spare it, then betokens it mercy, and a grateful recompense of the love and
obedience which the sovereign receaueth.

It is also worth the telling, how the king uses the same in policy, he
gives it in his ordinary liueries to be worn in every upper garment of all
his noblest men and greatest Magistrates and the rest of his officers and
servants, which are either embrodered upon the breast and the back with silver
or gold or pearl or stone more or less richly, according to every man's
dignity and calling, and they may not presume to be seen in public without
them: nor also in any place where by the kings commission they use to sit in
justice, or any other public affair, whereby the king is highly both honored
and served, the common people retained in duty and admiration of his
greatness: the noblemen, magistrates and officers every one in his degree so
much esteemed and reverenced, as in their good and loyal service they want
unto their persons little less honor for the kings sake, then can be almost
due or exhibited to the king him self.

I could not forbear to add this foreign example to accomplish our discourse
touching devices. For the beauty and gallantnesse of it, besides the
subtillitie of the conceit, and princely policy in the use, more exact then
can be remembered in any other of any European Prince, whose devises I will not
say but many of them be lofty and ingenious, many of them lovely and
beautiful, many other ambitious and arrogant, and the chiefest of them
terrible and full of horror to the nature of man, but that any of them be
comparable with it, for wit, virtue, gravity, and if ye list bravery, honor
and magnificence, not usurping upon the peculiars of the gods. In my conceit
there is none to be found.

This may suffice for devices, a term which includes in his generality all
those other, viz. liueries, cogniza^ces, emblemes, enseigns and impreses. For
though the terms be diverse, the use and intent is but one whether they rest in
color or figure or both, or in word or in muet show, and that is to insinuat
some secret, witty, moral and brave purpose presented to the beholder, either
to recreate his eye, or please his fantasy, or examine his judgment, or
occupy his brain or to manage his will either by hope or by dread, every of
which respects be of no little moment to the interest and ornament of the
civil life: and therefore give them no little commendation. Then having
produced so many worthy and wise founders of these devices, and so many
puissant patrons and protectours of them, I fear no reproach in this discourse,
which otherwise the venomous appetite of envy by detraction or scorn would
peradventure not stick to offer me.

Of the Anagrame, or posie transposed.
ONe other pretty conceit we will impart unto you and then trouble you with no
more, and is also borrowed primitiuely of the Poet, or courtly maker, we may
term him, the [posie transposed] or in one word [a transpose] a thing if it be
done for pastime and exercise of the wit without superstition commendable
enough and a meet study for Ladies, neither bringing them any great gain nor
any great loss unless it be of idle time. They that use it for pleasure is to
breed one word out of another not altering any letter nor the number of them,
but only transposing of the same, whereupon many times is produced some
grateful news or matter to them for whose pleasure and service it was
intended: and because there is much difficulty in it, and altogether stands
upon hap hazard, it is compted for a courtly conceit no less then the device
before remembered. Lycophron one of the seven Greek Lyrickes, who when they met
together (as many times they did) for their excellency and lovely concord,
were called the seven stars [pleiades] this man was very perfect and fortunat
in these transposes, and for his delicate wit and other good parts was greatly
favored by Ptolome king of Egypt and Queen Arsinoe his wife. He after such
sort called the king (...), which is letter for letter Ptolomaeus and Queen
Arsinoe he called (...), which is Arsinoe, now the subtillitie lies not in the
conversion but in the sense in this that Apomelitos, signifies in Greek [hony
sweet] so was Ptolome the sweetest natured man in the world both for
countenance and conditions, and Ioneras, signifies the violet or flower of
Juno a style among the Greeks for a woman endued with all beauty and
magnificence, which construction falling out grateful and so truly, exceedingly
well pleased the King and the Queen, and got Lycophron no little thank and
benefit at both their hands.

The French Gentlemen have very sharp wits and withal a delicate language,
which may very easily be wrested to any alteration of words sententious, and
they of late years have taken this pastime up among them many times gratifying
their Ladies, and often times the Princes of the Realm, with some such
thankful novelty. Whereof one made by Francois de Vallois, thus De facon suis
Roy, who in deed was of fashion countenance and stature, besides his regal
virtues a very king, for in a world there could not be seen a goodlier man of
person. Another found this by Henry de Vallois [Roy de nulz hay] a king hated
of no man, and was apparent in his conditions and nature, for there was not a
Prince of greater affability and mansuetude then he.

I my self seeing this conceit so well allowed of in France and Italy, and
being informed that her Majesty took pleasure sometimes in desciphring of
names, and hearing how diverse Gentlemen of her Court had essayed but with no
great felicity to make some delectable transpose of her Majesty's name, I
would needs try my luck, for cunning I know not why I should call it, unless
it be for the many and variable applications of sense, which requires
peradventure some wit and discretion more then of every unlearned man and for
the purpose I took me these three words (if any other in the world)
containing in my conceit greatest mystery, and most importing good to all them
that now be alive, under her noble government.

Elissabet Anglorum Regina.
Which orthographie (because ye shall not be abused) is true and not mistaken,
for the letter zeta, of the Hebrews and Greek and of all other toungs is in
truth but a double ss. hardly uttered, and H. is but a note of aspiration only
and no letter, which therefore is the by Greeks omitted. Upon the transposition
I found this to redound.

Multa regnabis ense gloria.
By thy sword shall thou reign in great renown.
Then transposing the word [ense] it came to be

Multa regnabis seen gloria.
Aged and in much glory shall ye reign.
Both which resultes falling out upon the very first marshalling of the
letters, without any darkness or difficulty, and so sensibly and well
appropriat to her Majesty's person and estate, and finally so effectually to
mine own wish (which is a matter of much moment in such cases) I took them
both for a good boding, and very fatallitie to her Majesty appointed by Gods
providence for all our comfortes. Also I imputed it for no little good luck and
glory to my self, to have pronounced to her so good and prosperous a fortune,
and so thankful news to all England, which though it cannot be said by this
event any destiny or fatal necessity, yet surely is it by all probabillitie
of reason, so likely to come to pass, as any other worldly event of things
that be uncertain, her Majesty continuing the course of her most regal
proceedings and virtuous life in all earnest zeal and godly contemplation of
his word, and in the sincere administration of his terrene justice, assigned
over to her execution as his Lieutenant upon earth within the compass of her
dominions.

This also is worth the noting, and I will assure you of it, that afthe first
search whereupon this transpose was fashioned. The same letters being by me
tossed and tranlaced five hundredth times, I could never make any other, at
least of some sense and conformity to her Majesty's estate and the case. If
any other man by trial happen upon a better omination, or whatsoever else ye
will call it, I will rejoice to be ouermatched in my devise, and renounce him
all the thanks and profit of my travail.

When I wrate of these devices, I smiled with my self, thinking that the
readers would do so to, and many of them say, that such trifles as these might
well have been spared, considering the world is full enough of them, and that
it is pity men's heads should be fed with such vanities as are to none
edification nor instruction, either of moral virtue, or otherwise behooffull
for the common wealth, to whose service (say they) we are all borne, and not to
fill and replenish a whole world full of idle toys. To which sort of
reprehendours, being either all holy and mortified to the world, and therefore
esteeming nothing that sauoureth not of Theology, or altogether grave and
worldly, and therefore caring for nothing but matters of policy, and
discourses of estate, or all given to thrift and passing for none art that is
not gainefull and lucratiue, as the sciences of the Law, Physic and
marchaundise: to these I will give none other answer then refer them to the
many trifling poemes of Homer, Ovid, Virgill, Catullus and other notable
writers of former ages, which were not of any gravity or seriousness, and
many of them full of impudicitie and ribaudrie, as are not these of ours, nor
for any good in the world should have been: and yet those trifles are come from
many former siecles unto our times, uncontrolled or condemned or suppressed by
any Pope or Patriarch or other severe censor of the civil manners of men, but
have been in all ages permitted as the convenient solaces and recreations of
man's wit. And as I can not deny but these conceits of mine be trifles: no
less in very deed be all the most serious studies of man, if we shall measure
gravity and lightness by the wise man's balance who after he had considered
of all the profoundest arts and studies among men, in the end cried out with
this Epyphoneme, Vanitas vanitatum and omnia vanitas. Whose authority if it
were not sufficient to make me believe so, I could be content with Democritus
rather to condemn the vanities of our life by derision, then as Heraclitus
with tears, saying with that merry Greek thus, Omnia sunt risus, sunt
puluis, and omnia nil sunt.
Res hominum cunctae, nam ratione carent.
Thus Englished, All is but a test, all dust, all not vvorth two peason:
For why in man's matters is neither rhyme nor reason.


Now passing from these courtly trifles, let us talk of our scholastical
toys, that is of the Grammatical versifying of the Greeks and Latins and see
whether it might be reduced into our English art or no.

CHAP. XII.
How if all manner of sudden innouations were not very scandalous, specially in
the laws of any langage or art, the use of the Greek and Latin feet might
be brought into our vulgar Poesy, and with good grace enough.

NOw nevertheless albeit we have before alleged that our vulgar Saxon
English, standing most upon words monosillable, and little upon polysillables
does hardly admit the use of those fine invented feet of the Greeks and
Latins, and that for the most part wise and grave men do naturally mislike
with all sudden innouations specially of laws (and this the law of our
ancient English Poesy) and therefore lately before we imputed it to a nice
and scholasticall curiosity in such makers as have sought to bring into our
vulgar Poesy some of the ancient feet, to wit the Dactile into verses
exameters, as he that translated certain books of Virgils Eneydos in such
measures and not vncommendably: if I should now say otherwise it would make me
seem contradictorie to my self, yet for the information of our young makers,
and pleasure of all others who be delighted in novelty, and to the intent we
may not seem by ignorance or oversight to omit any point of subtillitie,
material or necessary to our vulgar art, we will in this present chapter and
by our own idle observations show how one may easily and commodiously lead all
those feet of the ancients into our vulgar langage. And if men's ears were
not perchance to dainty, or their judgments over partial, would
peradventure nothing at all misbecome our art, but make in our meetres a more
pleasant numerositie then now is. Thus far therefore we will adventure and
not beyond, to the intent to show some singularity in our art that every man
has not heretofore observed, and (her majesty good liking always had) whether
we make the common readers to laugh or to lowre, all is a matter, since our
intent is not so exactlie to prosecute the purpose, nor so earnestly, as to
think it should by authority of our own judgment be generally applauded at
to the discredit of our forefathers manner of vulgar Poesy, or to the
alteration or peradventure total destruction of the same, which could not
stand with any good discretion or courtesy in us to attempt, but thus much I
say, that by some leasurable travel it were no hard matter to induce all their
ancient feet into use with us, and that it should prove very agreeable to the
ear and well according with our ordinary times and pronunciation, which no man
could then justly mislike, and that is to allow every word polisillable one
long time of necessity, which should be where his sharp accent falls in our
own ydiome most aptly and naturally, wherein we would not follow the license
of the Greeks and Latins, who made not their sharp accent any necessary
prolongation of their times, but used such syllable sometimes long sometimes
short at their pleasure. The other sillables of any word where the sharp
accent fell not, to be accounted of such time and quantity as his ortographie
would best bear having regard to himself, or to his next neighbor, word,
bounding him on either side, namely to the smoothnes and hardness of the
syllable in his utterance, which is occasioned altogether by his ortographie
and situation as in this word [dayly] the first syllable for his usual and
sharp accentes sake to be always long, the second for his flat accents sake
to be always short, and the rather for his ortographie, because if he go
before another word commencing with a vowell not letting him to be eclipsed,
his utterance is easy and current, in this trissillable [daungrous] the first
to be long, the other two short for the same causes. In this word
[dangrousne^sse] the first and last to be both long, because they receive both
of them the sharp accent, and the two middlemost to be short, in these words
[remedie] and [remedilesse] the time to follow also the accent, so as if it
please better to set the sharp accent upon [re] then upon [dye] that syllable
should be made long and econuerso, but in this word [remedilesse] because many
like better to accent the syllable [me] the^ the syllable [les] therefore I
leave him for a common syllable to be able to receive both a long and a short
time as occasion shall serve. The like law I set in these words [reuocable]
[recouerable] [irreuocable] [irrecouerable] for sometime it sounds better to
say reuo cabl then r uocabl, re^cour abl the^ rcour abl for this one thing ye
must always mark that if your time fall either by reason of his sharp acce^t
or otherwise upon the penultima, ye shall find many other words to rhyme with
him, because such terminatio^s are not geazon, but if the long time fall upon
the antepenultima ye shall not find many words to match him in his
termination, which is the cause of his concord or rhyme, but if you would let
your long time by his sharp accent fall above the antepenultima as to say
[courabl] ye shall seldom or perchance never find one to make up rhyme with him
unless it be badly and by abuse, and therefore in all such long polisillables
ye do commonly give two sharp accents, and thereby reduce him into two feet
as in this word [re^mu nraton] which makes a couple of good Dactils, and in
this word [contributon] which makes a good spo^deus and a good dactill, and in
this word [recaptulaton] it makes two dactills and a syllable overplus to
annexe to the word precedent to help piece up another foot. But for words
monosillables (as be most of ours) because in pronouncing them they do of
necessity retain a sharp accent, ye may justly allow them to be all long if
they will so best serve your turn, and if they be tailed one to another, or
the one to a dissillable or polyssillable ye ought to allow them that time that
best serves your purpose and pleases your ear most, and truliest aunsweres
the nature of the ortographie in which I would as near as I could observe and
keep the laws of the Greek and Latin versifiers, that is to prolong the
syllable which is written with double consonants or by dipthong or with single
consonants that run hard and harshly upon the tongue: and to shorten all
sillables that stand upon vowels, if there were no cause of elision and single
consonants and such of them as are most flowing and flipper upon the tongue as.
n.r.t.d.l. and for this purpose to take away all aspirations, and many times
the last consonant of a word as the Latin Poets used to do, specially
Lucretius and Ennius as to say [finibu] for [finibus] and so would not I stick
to say thus [delite] for [delight] [hye] for [high] and such like, and does
nothing at all impugn the rule I gave before against the wresting of words by
false ortographie to make up rhyme, which may not be falsified. But this
omission of letters in the midst of a meetre to make him the more slipper,
helps the numerositie and hinders not the rhyme. But generally the shortning or
prolonging of the monosillables dependes much upon the nature of their
ortographie which the Latin Grammariens call the rule of position, as for
example if I shall say thus. Not mane daye^s past.
Twenty days after, This makes a good Dactill and a good spondeus, but if ye
turn them backward it would not do so, as. Many days, not past.
And the distick made all of monosillables. But none of us true me^n and fre^e,
Could find so great good luck as he.
Which words serve well to make the verse all spondiacke or iambicke, but not
in dactil, as other words or the same otherwise placed would do, for it were an
illfauored dactil to say.

But none of, us all trwe.
Therefore whenever your words will not make a smooth dactil, ye must alter
them or their situations, or else turn them to other feet that may better
bear their manner of sound and orthographie: or if the word be polysillable to
divide him, and to make him serve by pieces, that he could not do whole and
entierly. And no doubt by like consideration did the Greek and Latin
versifiers fashion all their feet at the first to be of sundry times, and the
self same syllable to be sometime long and sometime short for the ears better
satisfaction as has been before remembered. Now also whereas I said before that
our old Saxon English for his many monosillables did not naturally admit the
use of the ancient feet in our vulgar measures so aptly as in those languages
which stood most upon polisillables, I said it in a sort truly, but now I must
recant and confess that our Normane English which has grown since William
the Conqueror does admit any of the ancient feet, by reason of the many
polysillables even to six and seven in one word, which we at this day use in
our most ordinary language: and which corruption has been occasioned chiefly
by the peevish affectation not of the Normans them selves, but of clerks and
scholars or secretaries long since, who not content with the usual Normane or
Saxon word, would convert the very Latin and Greek word into vulgar French,
as to say innumerable for innombrable, reuocable, irreuocable, irradiation,
depopulatio^ and such like, which are not natural Normans nor yet French, but
altered Latins, and without any imitation at all: which therefore were long
time despised for inkehorne terms and now be reputed the best and most delicat
of any other. Of which and many other causes of corruption of our speech we
have in another place more amply discoursed, but by this mean we may at this
day very well receive the ancient feet metricall of the Greeks and Latins
saving those that be superflous as be all the feet above the trissillable,
which the old Grammarians idly invented and distinguished by special names,
whereas in deed the same do stand compounded with the inferior feet, and
therefore some of them were called by the names of didactilus, dispondeus and
disiambus: all which feet as I say we may be allowed to use with good
discretion and precise choice of words and with the favorable approbation of
readers, and so shall our plat in this one point be larger and much surmount
that which Stamhurst first took in hand by his exameters dactilicke and
spondaicke in the translation of Virgills Eneidos, and such as for a great
number of them my stomach can hardly digest for the ill shapen sound of many
of his words polisillable and also his copulation of monosillables supplying
the quantity of a trissillable to his intent. And right so in promoting this
devise of ours being (I fear me) much more nyce and affected, and therefore
more misliked then his, we are to bespeake favor, first of the delicate ears,
then of the rigorous and severe dispositions, lastly to crave pardon of the
learned and ancient makers in our vulgar, for if we should seek in every
point to egall our speech with the Greek and Latin in their metricall
observations it could not possible be by us performed, because their sillables
came to be timed some of them long, some of them short not by reason of any
evident or apparent cause in writing or sound remaining upon one more then
another, for many times they shortened the syllable of sharp accent and made
long that of the flat, and therefore we must needs say, it was in many of
their words done by preelection in the first Poets, not having regard
altogether to the ortographie, and hardness or softness of a syllable,
consonant, vowell or dipthong, but at their pleasure, or as it fell out: so as
he that first put in a verse this word [Penelope] which might be Homer or some
other of his antiquity, where he made [pe^] in both places long and [n] and
[lo] short, he might have made them otherwise and with as good reason, nothing
in the world appearing that might move them to make such (preelection) more in
the one syllable then in the other for pe. ne. and lo. being sillables vocals be
egally smoth and current upon the tongue, and might bear as well the long as the
short time, but it pleased the Poet otherwise: so he that first shortened, ca.
in this word cano, and made long tro, in troia, and o, in oris, might have
as well done the contrary, but because he that first put them into a verse,
found as it is to be supposed a more sweetness in his own ear to have them
so tymed, therefore all other Poets who followed, were feign to do the like,
which made that Virgill who came many years after the first reception of
words in their several times, was driven of necessiitie to accept them in
such quantities as they were left him and therefore said.

arma u rumque ca no tro ie^ qui
pri^mus ab ori^s.
Neither truly do I see any other reason in that law (though in other rules
of shortning and prolonging a syllable there may be reason) but that it stands
upon bare tradition. Such as the Cabalists avouch in their mystical
constructions Theological and others, saying that they received the same from
hand to hand from the first parent Adam, Abraham and others, which I will give
them leave alone both to say and believe for me, thinking rather that they have
been the idle occupations, or perchance the malicious and crafty
constructions of the Talmudists, and others of the Hebrew clerks to bring the
world into admiration of their laws and Religion. Now peradventure with us
Englishmen it be somewhat too late to admit a new invention of feet and times
that our forefathers never used nor never observed till this day, either in
their measures or in their pronuntiation, and perchance will seem in us a
presumptuous part to attempt, considering also it would be hard to find many
men to like of one man's choice in the limitation of times and quantities of
words, with which not one, but every ear is to be pleased and made a
particular judge, being most truly said, that a multitude or comminaltie is
hard to please and easy to offend, and therefore I intend not to proceed any
further in this curiosity then to show some small subtillitie that any other
has not yet done, and not by imitation but by observation, nor to the intent to
have it put in execution in our vulgar Poesy, but to be pleasantly scanned
upon, as are all novelties so frivolous and ridiculous as it.

CHAP. XIII.
A more particular declaration of the metricall feet of the ancient Poets
Greek and Latin and chiefly of the feet of two times.

THeir Grammarians made a great multitude of feet, I wot not to what huge
number, and of so many sizes as their words were of length, namely six sizes,
whereas in deed, the metricall feet are but twelve in number, whereof four
only be of two times, and eight of three times, the rest compounds of the
premised two sorts, even as the Arithmeticall numbers above three are made of
two and three. And if ye will know how many of these feet will be commodiously
received with us, I say all the whole twelve, for first for the foot spondeus
of two long times ye have these English words morni^ng, mi^dni^ght,
mi^schaunce, and a number more whose ortographie may direct your judgment in
this point: for your Trocheus of a long and short ye have these words manr,
brokn, takn, bodi, me^mbr, and a great many more if their last sillables abut
not upon the consonant in the beginning of another word, and in these whether
they do abut or no wi^tte, di^tte, sorrow, morrow, and such like, which end in
a vowell for your Iambus of a short and a long, ye have these words [rstore]
[rmorse] [dsi^re] [ndure] and a thousand besides. For your foot pirrichius or
of two short silables ye have these words [mane] [mony] [pne] [sli] and others
of that constitution or the like: for your feet of three times and first your
dactill, ye have these words and a number more patnce, te^mprance, vvomanhead,
iolte, daungrous, duetfull and others. For your molossus, of all three long, ye
have a member of words also and specially most of your participles active, as
pe^rsi^sti^ng, dspoili^ng, e^nde^nti^ng, and such like in ortographie: for your
anapestus of two short and a long ye have these words but not many more, as
manfold, monle^sse, rmane^nt, holne^sse. For your foot tribracchus of all
three short, ye have very few trissillables, because the sharp accent will
always make one of them long by pronunciation, which else would be by
ortographie short as, [mrly] [minion] and such like. For your foot bacchius of
a short and two long ye have these and the like words trissillables
[lame^nti^ng] [rque^sti^ng] [rnounci^ng] [rpe^ntance] [nuri^ng]. For your foot
antibacchius, of two long and a short ye have these words [forsakn] [i^mpugnd]
and others many: For your amphimacer that is a long a short and a long ye have
these words and many more [excellent] [i^mne^nt] and specially such as be
propre names of persons or towns or other things and namely Welsh words: for
your foot amphibracchus, of a short, a long and a short, ye have these words
and many like to these [rsi^std] [dli^ghtfull] [rpri^sall] [nauntr] [namll] so
as for want of English words if your ear be not to dainty and your rules to
precise, ye need not be without the metricall feet of the ancient Poets such
as be most pertinent and not superfluous. This is (ye will perchance say) my
singular opinion: then ye shall see how well I can maintain it. First the
quantity of a word comes either by (preelection) without reason or force as
has been alleged, and as the ancient Greeks and Latins did in many words,
but not in all, or by (election) with reason as they did in some, and not a
few. And a sound is drawn at length either by the infirmity of the tongue,
because the word or syllable is of such letters as hangs long in the palate or
lips ere he will come forth, or because he is accented and tuned hier and
sharper then another, whereby he somewhat obscureth the other sillables in the
same word that be not accented so high, in both these cases we will establish
our syllable long, contrariwise the shortning of a syllable is, when his sound
or accent happens to be heavy and flat, that is to fall away speedily, and as
it were inaudible, or when he is made of such letters as be by nature slipper
and voluble and smoothly pass from the mouth. And the vowell is always more
easily delivered then the consonant: and of consonants, the liquide more then
the mute, and a single consonant more then a double, and one more then twain
coupled together: all which points were observed by the Greeks and Latins,
and allowed for maxims in versifying. Now if ye will examine these four
bissillables [re^mnant] [rmaine] [re^nder] [rnt] for an example by which ye may
make a general rule, and ye shall find, that they answer our first
resolution. First in [remnant] [rem] bearing the sharp accent and having his
consonant abbut upon another, soundes long. The syllable [nant] being written
with two co^sonants must needs be accounted the same besides that [nant] by his
Latin original is long, viz. [remane^ns.] Take this word [remaine] because the
last syllable bears the sharp accent, he is long in the ear, and [re] being
the first syllable, passing obscurely away with a flat accent is short, besides
that [re] by his Latin original and also by his ortographie is short. This
word [render] bearing the sharp acce^t upon [ren] makes it long, the syllable
[der] falling away swiftly and being also written with a single co^sonant or
liquide is short and makes the trocheus. This word [rne^t] having both
sillables sliding and slipper make the foot Pirrichius, because if he be truly
uttered he bears in manner no sharper accent upon the one then the other
syllable, but be in effect egall in time and tune, as is also the Spondeus. And
because they be not written with any hard or harsh consonants, I do allow them
both for short sillables, or to be used for common, according as their
situation and place with other words shall be: and as I have named to you but
only four words for an example, so may ye find out by diligent observation
four hundred if ye will. But of all your words bissillables the most part
naturally do make the foot Iambus, many the Trocheus, fewer the Spondeus,
fewest of all the Pirrichius, because in him the sharp accent (if ye follow
the rules of your accent, as we have presupposed) does make a little odds: and
ye shall find verses made all of monosillables, and do very well, but lightly
they be Iambickes, because for the more part the accent falls sharp upon
every second word rather then contrariwise, as this of Sir Thomas Wiats.

I fi^nde no peace and ye^t me war s done,
I fear and hope, and burn and freese like ise.
And some verses where the sharp accent falls upon the first and third, and
so make the verse wholly Trochaicke, as thus, Work not, no nor, wish thy
friend or foes harm
Try but, trust not, all that speak thee so fair.


And some verses made of monosillables and bissillables enterlaced as this of
th'Earles, When raging love with extreme pain
And this A fairer beast of fresher hue beheld I never none.


And some verses made all of bissillables and others all of trissillables, and
others of polisillables egally increasing and of diverse quantities, and sundry
situations, as in this of our own, made to daunt the insolence of a beautiful
woman.

Brittle beauty blossom daily fading
Morn, noone, and eve in age and eke in eld
Dangerous disdainefull pleasantly persuading
Easy to gripe but combrous to weld
For slender bottom hard and heavy lading
Gay for a while, but little while durable
Suspicious, incertaine, irreuocable,
O since thou art by trial not to trust
Wisdom it is, and it is also just
To sound the stem before the tree be feld
That is, since death will drive us all to dust
To leave thy love ere that we be compeld.
In which ye have your first verse all of bissillables and of the foot
trocheus. The second all of monosillables, and all of the foot Iambus, the
third all of trissillables, and all of the foot dactilus, your fourth of one
bissillable, and two monosillables interlarded, the fifth of one monosillable
and two bissillables enterlaced, and the rest of other sorts and scituations,
some by degrees increasing, some diminishing: which example I have set down to
let you perceive what pleasant numerosity in the measure and disposition of
your words in a meetre may be contrived by curious wits and these with other
like were the observations of the Greek and Latin versifiers.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of your feet of three times, and first of the Dactil.

YOur feet of three times by prescription of the Latin Grammariens are of
eight sundry proportions, for some notable difference appearing in every
syllable of three falling in a word of that size: but because above the
antepenultima there was (among the Latins) none accent audible in any long
word, therefore to devise any foot of longer measure then of three times was to
them but superfluous: because all above the number of three are but compounded
of their inferiors. Omitting therefore to speak of these larger feet, we say
that of all your feet of three times the Dactill is most usual and fit for
our vulgar meeter, and most agreeable to the ear, specially if ye ouerlade not
your verse with too many of them but here and there enterlace a Iambus or some
other foot of two times to give him gravity and stay, as in this quadrein
Trimeter or of three measures.

Rendr agai^ne me li^brte
and sent your captue fre^e
Glorous i^s th vi^ctore
Conqurours use with le^nte
Where ye see every verse is all of a measure, and yet unequal in number of
sillables: for the second verse is but of six sillables, where the rest are of
eight. But the reason is for that in three of the same verses are two Dactils a
piece, which abridge two sillables in every verse: and so makes the longest
even with the shortest. Ye may note besides by the first verse, how much better
some bissillable becomes to piece out an other longer foot then another word
does: for in place of [render] if ye had said [restore] it had marred the
Dactil, and of necessity driven him out at length to be a verse Iambie of
four feet, because [render] is naturally a Trocheus and makes the first two
times of a dactil. [Restore] is naturally a Ia^bus, and in this place could not
possibly have made a pleasant dactil.

Now again if ye will say to me that these two words [libertie] and
[conquerours] be not precise Dactils by the Latin rule. So much will I
confess to, but since they go current enough upon the tongue and be so usually
pronounced, they may pass well enough for Dactils in our vulgar meeters, and
that is enough for me, seeking but to fashion an art, and not to finish it:
which time only and custom have authority to do, specially in all cases of
language as the Poet has wittily remembered in this verse -si volet vsus,
Quem penes arbitrium est and vis and norma loquendi.


The Earl of Surrey upon the death of Sir Thomas Wiat made among other this
verse Pentameter and of ten sillables, What holy grave (alas) what sepulcher


But if I had had the making of him, he should have been of eleven sillables
and kept his measure of five still, and would so have run more pleasantly a
great deal: for as he is now, though he be even he seems odd and defective,
for not well observing the natural accent of every word, and this would have
been soon helped by inserting one monosillable in the middle of the verse, and
drawing another syllable in the beginning into a Dactil, this word [holy] being
a good [Pirrichius] and very well serving the turn, thus, What hole grave a
las what fi^t spulchr.
Which verse if ye peruse throughout ye shall find him after the first dactil
all Trochaick and not Iambic, nor of any other foot of two times. But perchance
if ye would seem yet more curious, in place of these four Trocheus ye might
induce other feet of three times, as to make the three sillables next
following the dactil, the foot [amphimacer] the last word [Sepulcher] the
foot [amphibracus] leaving the other middle word for a [Iambus] thus. What hole
grave a las what fi^t spulchr.
If ye ask me further why I make [vvhat] first long and after short in one
verse, to that I satisfied you before, that it is by reason of his accent
sharp in one place and flat in another, being a common monosillable, that is,
apt to receive either accent, and so in the first place receiving aptly the
sharp accent he is made long: afterward receiving the flat accent more aptly
the^ the sharp, because the syllable precedent [las] utterly distaines him, he
is made short and not long, and that with very good melody, but to have given
him the sharp accent and plucked it from the syllable [las] it had been to any
man's ear a great discord: for evermore this word [alas] is acce^ted upon the
last, and that lowdly and notoriously as appears by all our exclamations used
under that term. The same Earl of Surrey and Sir Thomas Wyat the first
reformers and polishers of our vulgar Poesy much affecting the style and
measures of the Italian Petrarcha, used the foot dactil very often but not
many in one verse, as in these, Full mane that in presence of thy li^uele hd,
Shed Caesar's tears upon Pompuis hd.
Th'e^nme to life destroi er of all kind,
If amo rous faith in an heart un feigned,
Mine old dee^re n my my froward master.
The^ fur ous gone in his most ra ging ire.


And many more which if ye would not allow for dactils the verse would halt
unless ye would seem to help it contracting a syllable by virtue of the
figure Syneresis which I think was never their meaning, nor in deed would
have bred any pleasure to the ear, but hindered the flowing of the verse.
Howsoever ye take it the dactil is commendable enough in our vulgar meetres,
but most plausible of all when he is sounded upon the stage, as in these
comicall verses showing how well it becomes all noble men and great
personages to be temperat and modest, yea more then any meaner man, thus.

Le^t no nobi^lte ri^chs or he^rtage
Honor or e^mpre or earthle domi^non
Bre^ed n your head any pe^euish opi^non
That ye may safr avouch ane outrage.
And in this distiquetaxing the Prelate symoniake standing all upon perfect
dactils.

Now mani^e bi^e mone^y puruy promoton
For money mooues any heart to devotion.
But this advertisement I will give you withal, that if ye use too many
dactils together ye make your music too light and of no solemn gravity such
as the amorous Elegies in court naturally require, being always either very
doleful or passionate as the affections of love enforce, in which business ye
must make your choice of very few words dactilique, or them that ye can not
refuse, to dissolve and break them into other feet by such means as it shall
be taught hereafter: but chiefly in your courtly ditties take heed ye use not
these manner of long polisillables and specially that ye finish not your verse
with the^ as [retribution] restitution] remuneration [recapitulation] and such
like: for they smatch more the school of common players than of any delicate
Poet Lyricke or Elegiacke.

CHAP. XV.
Of all your other feet of three times and how well they would fashion a
meetre in our vulgar.

ALl your other feet of three times I find no use of them in our vulgar
meeters nor no sweetenes at all, and yet words enough to serve their
proportions. So as though they have not hitherto been made artificial, yet
now by more curious observation they might be. Since all arts grew first by
observation of natures proceedings and custom. And first your [Molossus] being
of all three long is evidently discovered by this word [pe^rmi^tti^ng] The
[Anapestus] of two short and a long by this word [furous] if the next word
begin with a consonant. The foot [Bacchius] of a short and two long by this
word [rsi^stance] the foot [Antibachius] of two long and a short by this word
[e^xampl] the foote] Amphimacer] of a long a short and a long by this word
[conquri^ng] the foot of [Amphibrachus] of a short a long and a short by this
word [rme^mber] if a vowell follow. The foot [Tribrachus] of three short times
is very hard to be made by any of our trissillables unless they be co^pounded of
the smoothest sort of consonants or sillables vocals, or of threesmooth
monosillables, or of some piece of a long polysillable and after that sort we
may with wresting of words shape the foot [Tribrachus] rather by usurpation
the^ by rule, which nevertheless is allowed in every primitive art and
invention: and so it was by the Greeks and Latins in their first versifying,
as if a rule should be set down that from henceforth these words should be
counted al Tribrachus. [nme] rmde] slns] monls] pnls] crulle] and such like, or
a piece of this long word [rcourabl] innumrable^ readle] and others. Of all
which manner of apt words to make these stranger feet of three times which go
not so current with our ear as the dactil, the maker should have a good
judgment to know them by their manner of orthographie and by their accent
which serve most fitly for every foot, or else he should have always a
little calender of them apart to use readily when he shall need them. But
because in very truth I think them but vain and superstitious observations
nothing at all furthering the pleasant melody of our English meeter, I leave to
speak any more of them and rather wish the continuance of our old manner of
Poesy, scanning our verse by sillables rather than by feet, and using most
commonly the word Iambique and sometime the Trochaike which ye shall discern
by their accents, and now and then a dactill keeping precisely our symphony or
rhyme without any other mincing measures, which an idle inuentiue head could
easily devise, as the former examples teach.

CHAP. XVI.
Of your verses perfect and defective, and that which the Graecians called the
half foot.

THe Greeks and Latins used verses in the odd syllable of two sorts, which
they called Catalecticke and Acatalecticke, that is odd under and odd over
the just measure of their verse, and we in our vulgar find many of the like,
and specially in the rimes of Sir Thomas Wiat, strained perchance out of their
original, made first by Francis Petrarcha: as these Like unto these,
immeasurable mountains,
So is my painful life the burden of ire:
For hie be they, and hie is my desire
And I of tears, and they are full of fountains.
Where in your first second and fourth verse, ye may find a syllable
superfluous, and though in the first ye will seem to help it, by drawing
these three sillables, [i^m m su] into a dactil, in the rest it can not be so
excused, wherefore we must think he did it of purpose, by the odd syllable to
give greater grace to his meetre, and we find in our old rimes, this odd
syllable, sometime placed in the beginning and sometimes in the middle of a
verse, and is allowed to go alone and to ha^g to any other syllable. But this
odd syllable in our meetres is not the half foot as the Greeks and Latins
used him in their verses, and called such measure pentimimeris and eptamimeris,
but rather is that, which they called the catalectik or maimed verse. Their
hemimeris or half foot served not by license Poetical or necessity of
words, but to bewtifie and exornate the verse by placing one such half foot
in the middle Cesure, and one other in the end of the verse, as they used all
their pentameters elegiack: and not by coupling them together, but by account
to make their verse of a just measure and not defective or superflous: our odd
syllable is not altogether of that nature, but is in a manner drowned and
suppressed by the flat accent, and shrinks away as it were inaudible and by that
mean the odd verse comes almost to be an even in every man's hearing. The
half foot of the ancients was reserved purposely to an use, and therefore
they gave such odd syllable, wheresoever he fell the sharper accent, and made
by him a notorious pause as in this pentameter.

Ni^l m h re^scri^bas attamn i^ps v ni.
Which in all make five whole feet, or the verse Pentameter. We in our vulgar
have not the use of the like half foot.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the breaking your bissillables and polysillables and when it is to be used.

But whether ye suffer your syllable to receive his quantity by his accent, or
by his ortography, or whether ye keep your bissillable whole or whether ye
break him, all is one to his quantity, and his time will appear the self
same still and ought not to be altered by our makers, unless it be when such
syllable is allowed to be common and to receive any of both times, as in the
dimeter, made of two sillables entier.

e^xtre^ame dsi^re
The first is a good spondeus, the second a good iambus, and if the same words
be broken thus it is not so pleasant.

n e^x tre^ame d sire
And yet the first makes a iambus, and the second a trocheus each syllable
retayning still his former quantities. And always ye must have regard to the
sweetenes of the meetre, so as if your word polysillable would not sound
pleasantly whole, ye should for the nonce break him, which ye may easily do
by inserting here and there one monosillable among your polysillables, or by
changing your word into another place then where he soundes unpleasantly, and
by breaking, turn a trocheus to a iambus, or contrariwise: as thus: Hollow
vallis undr hi^st mountanes
Cragge cliffes brng forth th fai^rst fountanes


These verses be trochaik, and in mine ear not so sweet and harmonicall as
the iambicque, thus: Th hollowst vals le undr hi^est mountains
Th craggst cli^fs bri^ng forth th fai^rst fountains.


All which verses be now become iambicque by breaking the first bissillables,
and yet alters not their quantities though the feet be altered: and thus,
Restless is the heart in his desires
Rauing after that reason does deny.


Which being turned thus makes a new harmony.

The restless heart, renues his old desires
Ayrauing after that reason does it deny.
And following this observation your meetres being builded with polysillables
will fall diversely out, that is some to be spondaick, some iambick, others
dactilick, others trochaick, and of one mingled with another, as in this verse.

He^aue i^s th burdn of Prncs i^re
The verse is trochaick, but being altered thus, is iambicque.

Full he^aue i^s th paise of Pri^ncs i^re
And as Sir Thomas Wiat song in a verse wholly trochaick, because the words do
best shape to that foot by their natural accent, thus, Farewll love and all
the laws for e^ur


And in this ditty of th'Erle of Surries, passing sweet and harmonicall: all
be Iambick.

When raging love with extreme pain
So cruelly does strain my heart,
And that the tears like fluds of rain
Bear witness of my woeful smart.
Which being disposed otherwise or not broken, would prove all trochaick, but
nothing pleasant.

Now furthermore ye are to note, that al your monosyllables may receive the
sharp accent, but not so aptly one as another, as in this verse where they
serve well to make him iambicque, but not trochaick.

God grant ths peace may long ndure
Where the sharp accent falls more tunably upon [graunt] [peace] [long]
[dure] then it would by conversion, as to accent them thus: God grant -- thi^s
peace -- may long -- e^ndure,


And yet if ye will ask me the reason, I can not tell it, but that it shapes
so to mine ear, and as I think to every other man's. And in this meeter where
ye have whole words bissillable unbroken, that maintain (by reason of their
accent) sundry feet, yet going one with another be very harmonicall.

Where ye see one to be a trocheus another the iambus, and so entermingled not
by election but by constraint of their several accents, which ought not to be
altered, yet comes it to pass that many times ye must of necessity alter the
accent of a syllable, and put him from his natural place, and then one
syllable, of a word polysillable, or one word monosillable, will abide to be
made sometimes long, sometimes short, as in this quadreyne of ours played in a
merry mood.

Give me mine own and when I do desire
Give others theirs, and nothing that is mine
Nor give me that, whereto all men aspire
Then neither gold, nor fair women nor wine.
Where in your first verse these two words [giue] and [me] are accented one
high the other low, in the third verse the same words are accented contrary, and
the reason of this exchange is manifest, because the maker plays with these
two clauses of sundry relations [giue me] and [giue others] so as the
monosillable [me] being respective to the word [others] and inferring a
subtilitie or witty implication, ought not to have the same accent, as when he
has no such respect, as in this distik of ours.

Prove m (Madame) ere ye re^proue
Meek minds should e^xcuse not accuse.
In which verse ye see this word [reprooue,] the syllable [prooue] alters his
sharp accent into a flat, for naturally it is long in all his singles and
compoundes [reprooue] [approoue] [disprooue] and so is the syllable [cuse] in
[excuse] [accuse] [recuse] yet in these verses by reason one of them does as it
were nicke another, and have a certain extraordinary sense with all, it
behooves to remove the sharp accents from whence they are most natural, to
place them where the nicke may be more expressly discovered, and therefore in
this verse where no such implication is, nor no relation it is otherwise, as
thus.

If ye re^proue my constancy
I will excuse you curtesly.
For in this word [reprooue] because there is no extraordinary sense to be
inferred, he keeps his sharp accent upon the syllable [prooue] but in the
former verses because they seem to encounter each other, they do thereby merit
an audible and pleasant alteration of their accents in those sillables that
cause the subtlety. Of these manner of nicetees ye shall find in many places of
our book, but specially where we treat of ornament, unto which we refer
you, saving that we thought good to set down one example more to solace your
minds with mirth after all these scholasticall precepts, which can not but
bring with them (specially to Courtiers) much tediousness, and so to end. In
our Comedy entitled Ginecocratia: the king was supposed to be a person very
amorous and effeminate, and therefore most ruled his ordinary affairs by the advice of women either for the love he bare to their persons or liking he had
to their pleasant ready wits and utterance. Comes me to the Court one Polemon
an honest plain man of the country, but rich: and having a suite to the king,
met by chance with one Philino, a lover of wine and a merry companion in
Court, and prayed him in that he was a stranger that he would vouchsafe to tell
him which way he were best to work to get his suite, and who were most in
credit and favor about the king, that he might seek to them to further his
attempt. Philino perceiving the plainness of the man, and that there would be
some good done with him, told Polemon that if he would well consider him for
his labor he would bring him where he should know the truth of all his
demaundes by the sentence of the Oracle. Polemon gave him twenty crowns,
Philino brings him into a place where behind an arras cloth he himself spoke
in manner of an Oracle in these meeters, for so did all the Sybils and
sothsaiers in old times give their answers.

Your best way to work -- and mark my words well,
Not money: nor many,
Nor any: but any,
Not weemen, but weemen bear the bell.
Polemon wist not what to make of this doubtful speech, and not being lawful
to importune the oracle more then once in one matter, conceived in his head the
pleasanter construction, and stacke to it: and having at home a fair young
damsel of eighteen years old to his daughter, that could very well behave
her self in countenance and also in her language, apparelled her as gay as he
could, and brought her to the Court, where Philino harkning daily after the
event of this matter, met him, and recommended his daughter to the Lords, who
perceiving her great beauty and other good parts, brought her to the King, to
whom she exhibited her fathers supplication, and found so great favor in his
eye, as without any long delay she obtained her suit at his hands. Polemon by
the diligent soliciting of his daughter, wanne his purpose: Philino gat a good
reward and used the matter so, as howsoever the oracle had been construed, he
could not have received blame nor discredit by the success, for every ways it
would have proved true, whether Polemons daughter had obtained the suit, or not
obtained it. And the subtlety lay in the accent and Ortographie of these two
words [any] and [weemen] for [any] being divided sounds [ a nie or near
person to the king: and [weemen] being divided soundes we men, and not
[weemen] and so by this mean Philino served all turns and shifted himself
from blame, not unlike the tale of the Rattlemouse who in the wars proclaimed
between the four footed beasts, and the birds, being sent for by the Lion to
be at his musters, excused himself for that he was a foul and flew with
wings: and being sent for by the Eagle to serve him, said that he was a four
footed beast, and by that crafty cavil escaped the danger of the wars, and
shunned the service of both Princes. And ever since sat at home by the fires
side, eating up the poor husbandmans baken, half lost for lack of a good
huswifes looking too.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK, OF ORNAMENT.
CHAP. I.
Of Ornament Poetical.

AS no doubt the good proportion of any thing does greatly adorn and commend
it and right so our late remembered proportions do to our vulgar Poesy: so is
there yet requisite to the perfection of this art, another manner of
exornation, which rests in the fashioning of our makers language and style,
to such purpose as it may delight and allure as well the mind as the ear of
the hearers with a certain novelty and strange manner of conueyance,
disguising it no little from the ordinary and accustomed: nevertheless making
it nothing the more unseemly or misbecomming, but rather decenter and more
agreeable to any civil ear and understanding. And as we see in these great
Madames of honor, be they for personage or otherwise never so comely and
bewtifull, yet if they want their courtly habillements or at leastwise such
other apparel as custom and civility have ordained to cover their naked
bodies, would be half ashamed or greatly out of countenance to be seen in
that sort, and perchance do then think themselves more amiable in every man's
eye, when they be in their richest attire, suppose of silks or tyssewes and
costly embroderies, then when they go in cloth or in any other plain and
simple apparel. Even so cannot our vulgar Poesy show it self either gallant
or gorgious, if any lymme be left naked and bare and not clad in his kindly
clothes and colors, such as may convey them somewhat out of sight, that is
from the common course of ordinary speech and capacity of the vulgar
judgment, and yet being artificially handled must needs yield it much more
beauty and commendation. This ornament we speak of is given to it by figures
and figurative speeches, which be the flowers as it were and colors that a
Poet sets upon his language by art, as the embroderer does his stone and
perle, or passements of gold upon the stuff of a Princely garment, or as
th'excellent painter bestows the rich Orient colors upon his table of
pourtraite: so nevertheless as if the same colors in our art of Poesy (as
well as in those other mechanical arts) be not well tempered, or not well
laid, or be used in excess, or never so little disordered or misplaced, they
not only give it no manner of grace at all, but rather do disfigure the stuff
and spill the whole workmanship taking away all beauty and good liking from it,
no less then if the crimson tainte, which should be laid upon a Ladies lips,
or right in the center of her cheeks should by some oversight or mishap be
applied to her forhead or chinne, it would make (ye would say) but a very
ridiculous beauty, wherefore the chief praise and cunning of our Poet is in the
discreet using of his figures, as the skillful painters is in the good
conueyance of his colors and shadowing traits of his pensill, with a
delectable variety, by all measure and just proportion, and in places most
aptly to be bestowed.

CHAP, II.
How our writing and speeches public ought to be figurative, and if they be
not do greatly disgrace the cause and purpose of the speaker and writer.

But as it has been always reputed a great fault to use figurative speeches
foolishly and indiscretly, so is it esteemed no less an imperfection in man's
utterance, to have none use of figure at all, specially in our writing and
speeches public, making them but as our ordinary talk, then which nothing can
be more unsavory and far from all civility. I remember in the first year
of Queens Mary's reign a Knight of Yorkshire was chosen speaker of the
Parliament, a good gentleman and wise, in the affairs of his shire, and not
unlearned in the laws of the Realm, but as well for some lack of his teeth,
as for want of language nothing thing well spoken, which at that time and
business was most behooffull for him to have been: this man after he had made
his Oration to the Queen; which ye know is of course to be done at the first
assembly of both houses; a bencher of the Temple both well learned and very
eloquent, returning from the Parliament house asked another gentleman his friend
how he liked M. Speakers Oration: mary quoth the other, me thinks I heard not a
better alehouse tale told this seven years. This happened because the good old
Knight made no difference between an Oration or public speech to be delivered
to the ear of a Princes Majesty and state of a Realm, then he would have done
of an ordinary tale to be told at his table in the country, wherein all men
know the odds is very great. And though grave and wise counselors in their
consultations do not use much superfluous eloquence, and also in their
judicial hearings do much mislike all scholasticall rhetoricks: yet in such a
case as it may be (and as this Parliament was) if the Lord Chancelour of
England or Archbishop of Canterbury himself were to speak, he ought to do it
cunningly and eloquently, which can not be without the use of figures: and
nevertheless none impeachment or blemish to the gravity of their persons or
of the cause: wherein I report me to the^ that knew Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord
keeper of the great Seal, or the now Lord Treasorer of England, and have been
conversant with their speeches made in the Parliament house and Starrechamber.
From whose lips I have seen to proceed more grave and natural eloquence,
then from all the Orators of Oxford or Cambridge, but all is as it is handled,
and makes no matter whether the same eloquence be natural to them or
artificial (though I, think rather natural) yet were they known to be
learned and not unskillful of th'arte, when they were younger men: and as
learning and art teaches a scholar to speak, so does it also teach a
counselor, and as well an old man as a young, and a man in authority, as well
as a private person, and a pleader as well as a preacher, every man after his
sort and calling as best becomes: and that speech which becomes one, does
not become another, for manners of speeches, some serve to work in excess, some
in mediocritie, some to grave purposes, some to light, some to be short and
brief, some to be long, some to stir up affections, some to pacify and
appease them, and these common despisers of good utterance, which rests
altogether in figurative speeches, being well used whether it come by nature or
by art or by exercise, they be but certain gross ignorance of whom it is
truly spoken scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. I have come to the
Lord Keeper Sir Nicholas Bacon, and found him sitting in his gallery alone with
the works of Quintilian before him, in deed he was a most eloquent man, and of
rare learning and wisdom, as ever I knew England to breed, and one that ioyed
as much in learned men and men of good wits. A Knight of the Queens privy
chamber, once entreated a noble woman of the Court, being in great favor about
her Majesty (to the intent to remove her from a certain displeasure, which by
sinister opinion she had conceived against a gentleman his friend) that it
would please her to hear him speak in his own cause and not to co^de^ne him
upon his adversaries report: God forbid said she, he is to wise for me to talk
with, let him go and satisfy such a man naming him: why quoth the Knight
again, had your Ladyship rather hear a man talk like a fool or like a wise
man? This was because the Lady was a little perverse, and not disposed to
reform her self by hearing reason, which none other can so well beat into
the ignorant head, as the well spoken and eloquent man. And because I am so
far waded into this discourse of eloquence and figurative speeches, I will
tell you what happened on a time my self being present when certain Doctors of
the civil law were heard in a litigious cause betwixt a man and his wife:
before a great Magistrate who (as they can tell that knew him) was a man very
well learned and grave, but somewhat sour, and of no plausible utterance: the
gentleman's chance, was to say: my Lord the simple woman is not so much to
blame as her lewd abbettours, who by violent persuasions have lead her into
this wilfulness. Quoth the judge, what need such eloquent terms in this
place, the gentleman replied, does your Lordship mislike the term, [violent]
and me thinks I speak it to great purpose: for I am sure she would never have
done it, but by force of persuasion: and if perswasio^s were not very violent,
to the mind of man it could not have wrought so sta^ge an effect as we read
that it did once in Egypt, and would have told the whole tale at large, if the
Magistrate had not passed it over very pleasantly. Now to tell you the whole
matter as the gentleman intended, thus it was. There came into Egypt a notable
Orator, whose name was Hegesias who inueyed so much against the inco^modities
of this transitory life, and so highly commended death the dispatcher of all
evils; as a great number of his hearers destroyed themselves, some with weapon,
some with poison, others by drowning and hanging themselves to be rid out of
this vale of misery, in so much as it was feared least many more of the people
would have miscarried by occasion of his persuasions, if king Ptolome had not
made a public proclamation, that the Orator should avoid the country, and
no more be allowed to speak in any matter. Whether now persuasions, may not be
said violent and forcible to simple minds in special, I refer it to all
men's judgments that hear the story. At least ways, I find this opinion,
confirmed by a pretty devise or emblem that Lucianus alleges he saw in the
pourtrait of Hercules within the City of Marseills in Prouence: where they had
figured a lusty old man with a long chain tied by one end at his tongue by the
other end at the peoples ears, who stood a far of and seemed to be drawn to
him by the force of that chain fastened to his tongue, as who would say, by force
of his persuasions. And to show more plainly that eloquence is of great force
(and not as many men think amiss) the property and gift of young men only,
but rather of old men, and a thing which better becomes hory hairs then
beardlesse boys, they seem to ground it upon this reason: age (say they and
most truly) brings experience, experience brings wisdom, long life yeldes
long use and much exercise of speech, exercise and custom with wisdom, make
an assured and volluble utterance: so is it that old men more then any other
sort speak most gravely, wisely, assuredly, and plausibly, which parts are
all that can be required in perfect eloquence, and so in all deliberations of
importance where counselors are allowed freely to opyne and show their
co^ceits, good persuasion is no less requisite then speech it self: for in
great purposes to speak and not to be able or likely to persuade, is a vain
thing: now let us return back to say more of this Poetical ornament.

CHAP. III.
How ornament Poetical is of two sorts according to the double virtue and
efficacy of figures.

THis ornament then is of two sorts, one to satisfy and delight the ear only
by a goodly outward show set upon the matter with words, and speeches smothly
and tunably running: another by certain intendments or sense of such words
and speeches inwardly working a stir to the mind: that first quality the
Greeks called Enargia, of this word argos, because it gives a glorious luster
and light. This latter they called Energia of ergon, because it wrought with a
strong and virtuous operation; and figure breeds them both, some serving to
give gloss only to a language, some to give it efficacy by sense, and so by
that means some of them serve the ear only, some serve the conceit only and
not the ear: there be of them also that serve both turns as common seruitours
appointed for the one and the other purpose, which shall be hereafter spoken of in
place: but because we have alleged before that ornament is but the good or
rather bewtifull habit of language and style, and figurative speeches the
instrument wherewith we burnish our language fashioning it to this or that
measure and proportion, whence finally resulteth a long and continual phrase
or manner of writing or speech, which we call by the name of style: we will first
speak of language, then of style, lastly of figure, and declare their virtue
and differences, and also their use and best application, and what portion in
exornation every of them brings to the bewtifying of this Art.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Language.

Speech is not natural to man saving for his only ability to speak, and
that he is by kind apt to utter all his conceits with sounds and voices
diuersified many manner of ways, by means of the many and fit instruments he
has by nature to that purpose, as a broad and voluble tongue, thin and mouable
lips, teeth eue^ and not shagged, thick ranged, a round vaulted palate, and
a long throat, besides an excellent capacity of wit that makes him more
disciplinable and imitatiue then any other creature: then as to the form and
action of his speech, it comes to him by art and teaching, and by use or
exercise. But after a speech is fully fashioned to the common understanding,
and accepted by consent of a whole country and nation, it is called a
language, and receaueth none allowed alteration, but by extraordinary occasions
by little and little, as it were insensibly bringing in of many corruptions
that creep along with the time: of all which matters, we have more largely
spoken in our books of the originals and pedigree of the English tongue. Then
when I say language, I mean the speech wherein the Poet or maker writes be it
Greek or Latin, or as our case is the vulgar English, and when it is peculiar
unto a country it is called the mother speech of that people: the Greeks
term it Idioma: so is ours at this day the Norman English. Before the Conquest
of the Normans it was the Anglesaxon, and before that the British, which as
some will, is at this day, the Walsh, or as others affirm the Cornish: I for
my part think neither of both, as they be now spoken and ponounced. This part
in our maker or Poet must be heedyly looked unto, that it be natural, pure,
and the most usual of all his country: and for the same purpose rather that
which is spoken in the kings Court, or in the good towns and Cities within the
land, then in the marches and frontiers, or in port towns, where strangers
haunt for traffike sake, or yet in Universities where Scholars use much
peevish affectation of words out of the primative languages, or finally, in any
vplandish village or corner of a Realm, where is no resort but of poor
rusticall or uncivil people: neither shall he follow the speech of a crafts
man or carter, or other of the inferior sort, though he be inhabitant or bred
in the best town and City in this Realm, for such persons do abuse good
speeches by strange accents or ill shapen soundes, and false ortographie. But
he shall follow generally the better brought up sort, such as the Greeks call
[charientes] men civil and graciously behauoured and bred. Our maker therefore
at these days shall not follow Piers plowman nor Gower nor Lydgate nor yet
Chaucer, for their language is now out of use with us: neither shall he take
the terms of Northern-men, such as they use in daily talk, whether they be
noble men or gentlemen, or of their best clerks all is a matter: nor in effect
any speech used beyond the river of Trent, though no man can deny but that
theirs is the purer English Saxon at this day, yet it is not so Courtly nor so
current as our Southern English is, no more is the far Western ma^s speech:
ye shall therefore take the usual speech of the Court, and that of London and
the shires lying about London within lx. miles, and not much above. I say not
this but that in every shyre of England there be gentlemen and others that
speak but specially write as good Southern as we of Middlesex or Surrey do,
but not the common people of every shire, to whom the gentlemen, and also their
learned clerks do for the most part condescend, but herein we are already
ruled by The English Dictionaries and other books written by learned men, and
therefore it needs none other direction in that behalf. Albeit peradventure
some small admonition be not impertinent, for we find in our English writers
many words and speeches amendable, and ye shall see in some many inkhorne
terms so ill affected brought in by men of learning as preachers and
schoolemasters: and many strange terms of other languages by Secretaries and
Marchaunts and trauailours, and many dark words and not usual nor well
sounding, though they be daily spoken in Court. Wherefore great heed must be
taken by our maker in this point that his choice be good. And peradventure the
writer hereof be in that behalf no less faulty then any other, using many
strange and unaccustomed words and borrowed from other languages: and in that
respect him self no meet Magistrate to reform the same errors in any other
person, but since he is not unwilling to acknowledge his own fault, and can
the better tell how to amend it, he may seem a more excusable correctour of
other men's: he intends therefore for an indifferent way and universal
benefit to tax him self first and before any others.

These be words used by the author in this present treatise, scie^tificke, but
with some reason, for it answers the word mechanical, which no other word
could have done so properly, for when he spoke of all artificers which rest
either in science or in handy craft, it followed necessarily that scientifique
should be coupled with mechanical: or else neither of both to have been
allowed, but in their places: a man of science liberal, and a handicrafts man,
which had not been so cleanly a speech as the other Maior-domo: in truth this
word is borrowed of the Spaniard and Italian, and therefore new and not usual,
but to them that are acquainted with the affairs of Court: and so for his
jolly magnificence (as this case is) may be accepted among Courtiers, for whom
this is specially written. A man might have said in stead of Maior-domo, the
French word (maistre d'hostell) but ilfauouredly, or the right English word
(Lord Steward.) But me thinks for my own opinion this word Maior-domo though
he be borrowed, is more acceptable tha^ any of the rest, other men may judge
otherwise. Politien, this word also is received from the Frenchmen, but at this
day usual in Court and with all good Secretaries: and cannot find an English
word to match him, for to have said a man politic, had not been so well:
because in truth that had been no more than to have said a civil person.
Politien is rather a surueyour of civility than civil, and a public minister
or Counselor in the state. Ye have also this word Conduict, a French word,
but well allowed of us, and long since usual, it soundes somewhat more than
this word (leading) for it is applied only to the leading of a Captain, and
not as a little boy should lead a blind man, therefore more proper to the
case when he said, conduict of whole armies: ye find also this word Idiome,
taken from the Greeks, yet serving aptly, when a man wants to express so
much unless it be in two words, which surplussage to avoid, we are allowed to
draw in other words single, and as much significatiue: this word significatiue
is borrowed of the Latin and French, but to us brought in first by some
Noble-mans Secretary, as I think, yet does so well serve the turn, as it
could not now be spared: and many more like usurped Latin and French words:
as, Method, methodicall, placation, function, assubtiling, refining,
compendious, prolixe, figurative, inueigle. A term borrowed of our common
Lawyers* impression, also a new term, but well expressing the matter, and more
than our English word. These words, Numerous, numerositee, metricall,
harmonicall, but they cannot be refused, specially in this place for
description of the art. Also ye find these words, penetrate, penetrable,
indignity, which I cannot see how we may spare them, whatsoever fault we
find with Ink-horne terms: for our speech wants words to such sense so
well to be used: yet in stead of indignity, ye have unworthiness: and for
penetrate, we may say peerce, and that a French term also, or broche, or enter
into with violence, but not so well sounding as penetrate. Item, savage, for
wild: obscure, for dark. Item these words, declination, delineation,
dimention, are scholasticall terms in deed, and yet very proper. But
peradventure (and I could bring a reason for it) many other like words borrowed
out of the Latin and French, were not so well to be allowed by us, as these
words, audacious, for bold: facunditie, for eloquence: egregious, for great or
notable: implete, for replenished: attemptat, for attempt: compatible, for
agreeable in nature, and many more. But herein the noble Poet Horace has said
enough to satisfy us all in these few verses.

Multa renascentur quae iam cecidere cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula si volet vsus
Quem penes arbitrium est and vis and norma loquendi.
Which I have thus englished, but nothing with so good grace, nor so briefly as
the Poet wrote.

Many a word yfalne shall eft arise
And such as now been held in hiest prise
Will fall as fast, when use and custom will
Only vmpiers of speech, for force and skill.
CHAP. V.
Of Style.

Style is a constant and continual phrase or tenor of speaking and writing,
extending to the whole tale or process of the poem or history, and not
properly to any piece or member of a tale: but is of words speeches and
sentences together, a certain contrived form and quality, many times
natural to the writer, many times his peculier by election and art, and such
as either he keeps by skill, or holds on by ignorance, and will not or
peradventure cannot easily alter into any other. So we say that Ciceroes style,
and Salusts were not one, nor Cesars and Liuies, nor Homers and Hesiodus, nor
Herodotus and Theucidides, nor Euripides and Aristophones, nor Erasmus and
Budeus styles. And because this continual course and manner of writing or
speech shows the matter and disposition of the writers mind, more than one
or few words or sentences can show, therefore there be that have called style,
the image of man [mentis character] for man is but his mind, and as his mind
is tempered and qualified, so are his speeches and language at large, and his
inward conceits be the metal of his mind and his manner of utterance the
very warp and woofe of his conceits, more plain, or busy and intricate, or
otherwise affected after the rate. Most men say that not any one point in all
Phisiognomy is so certain, as to judge a man's manners by his eye: but more
assuredly in mine opinion, by his daily manner of speech and ordinary writing.
For if the man be grave, his speech and style is grave: if lightheaded, his
style and language also light: if the mind be haughty and hoate, the speech
and style is also vehement and stirring: if it be cold and temperate, the
style is also very modest: if it be humble, or base and meek, so is also the
language and style. And yet peradventure not altogether so, but that every man's
style is for the most part according to the matter and subject of the writer,
or so ought to be, and conformable thereunto. The^ again may it be said as
well, that men do choose their subjects according to the metal of their minds,
and therefore a high minded man chooses him high and lofty matter to write of.
The base courage, matter base and low, the mean and modest mind, mean and
moderate matters after the rate. Howsoever it be, we find that under these
three principal co^plexio^s (if I may with leave so term the^) high, mean
and base style, there be contained many other humors or qualities of style, as
the plain and obscure, the rough and smoth, the facill and hard, the
plentiful and barraine, the rude and eloquent, the strong and feeble, the
vehement and cold styles, all which in their evil are to be reformed, and the
good to be kept and used. But generally to have the style decent and comely it
behooves the maker or Poet to follow the nature of his subject, that is if his
matter be high and lofty that the style be so to, if mean, the style also to
be mean, if base, the style humble and base accordingly: and they that do
otherwise use it, applying to mean matter, hie and lofty style, and to hie
matters, style either mean or base, and to the base matters, the mean or hie
style, do utterly disgrace their poesy and show themselves nothing skillful in
their art, nor having regard to the decency, which is the chief praise of
any writer. Therefore to rid all lovers of learning from that error, I will
as near as I can set down, which matters be hie and lofty, which be but
mean, and which be low and base, to the intent the styles may be fashioned to
the matters, and keep their decorum and good proportion in every respect: I am
not ignorant that many good clerks be contrary to mine opinion, and say that
the lofty style may be decently used in a mean and base subject and
contrariwise, which I do in part acknowledge, but with a reasonable
qualification. For Homer has so used it in his trifling work of
Batrachomyomachia: that is in his treatise of the war betwixt the frogs and
the mice. Virgill also in his bucolickes, and in his georgicks, whereof the one
is counted mean, the other base, that is the husbandmans discourses and the
shepherds, but hereunto serves a reason in my simple conceit: for first to
that trifling poem of Homer, though the frog and the mouse be but little and
ridiculous beasts, yet to treat of war is an high subject, and a thing in
every respect terrible and dangerous to them that it alights on: and therefore
of learned duty asks martial grandiloquence, if it be set forth in his
kind and nature of war, even betwixt the basest creatures that can be
imagined: so also is the Ante or pismire, and they be but little creeping
things, not perfect beasts, but insect, or worms: yet in describing their
nature and instinct, and their manner of life approaching to the form of a
common-welth, and their properties not unlike to the virtues of most excellent
governors and captains, it asks a more majesty of speech then would the
description of any other beasts life or nature, and perchance of many matters
perteyning unto the baser sort of men, because it resembles the history of a
civil regiment, and of them all the chief and most principal which is
Monarchy: so also in his bucolicks, which are but pastoral speeches and the
basest of any other poem in their own proper nature: Virgill used a somewhat
swelling style when he came to insinuate the birth of Marcellus heir apparent
to the Emperor Augustus, as child to his sister, aspiring by hope and greatness
of the house, to the succession of the Empire, and establishment thereof in
that family: whereupon Virgill could do no less then to use such manner of
style, whatsoever condition the poem were of and this was decent, and no fault
or blemish, to confound the tennors of the styles for that cause. But now when
I remember me again that this Eglogue, (for I have read it somewhere) was
conceived by Octauian The Emperor to be written to the honor of Pollio a
citizen of Rome, and of no great nobility, the same was misliked again as an
implicatiue, nothing decent nor proportionable to Pollio his fortunes and
calling, in which respect I might say likewise the style was not to be such as
if it had been for the Emperors own honor, and those of the blood imperial,
then which subject there could not be among the Roman writers an higher nor
grauer to treat upon: so can I not be removed from mine opinion, but still me
thinks that in all decency the style ought to conform with the nature of the
subject, otherwise if a writer will seem to observe no decorum at all, nor
pass how he fashion his tale to his matter, who doubts but he may in the
lightest cause speak like a Pope, and in the grauest matters prate like a
parrat, and find words and phrases enough to serve both turns, and neither
of them commendably, for neither is all that may be written of Kings and
Princes such as ought to keep a high style, nor all that may be written upon a
shepherd to keep the low, but according to the matter reported, if that be of
high or base nature: for every pety pleasure, and vain delight of a king are
not to accounted high matter for the height of his estate, but mean and
perchance very base and vile: nor so a Poet or historiographer, could decently
with a high style report the vanities of Nero, the ribaudries of Caligula, the
idleness of Domitian, and the riots of Heliogabalus. But well the magnanimity
and honorable ambition of Caesar, the prosperities of Augustus, the gravity of
Tiberius, the bounty of Traiane, the wisdom of Aurelius, and generally all
that which concerned the highest honors of Emperors, their birth, alliaunces,
government, exploits in war and peace, and other public affairs: for they
be matter stately and high, and require a style to be lift up and advanced by
choice of words, phrases, sentences, and figures, high, lofty, eloquent, and
magnifik in proportion: so be the mean matters, to be carried with all words
and speeches of smothnesse and pleasant moderation, and finally the base things
to be holden within their teder, by a low, myld, and simple manner of utterance,
creeping rather then clyming, and marching rather then mounting vpwardes, with
the wings of the stately subjects and style.

CHAP. VI.
Of the high, low, and mean subject.

THe matters therefore that concern the Gods and divine things are highest of
all other to be couched in writing, next to them the noble gests and great
fortunes of Princes, and the notable accide^ts of time, as the greatest
affairs of war and peace, these be all high subjects, and therefore are
delivered over to the Poets Hymnick and historical who be occupied either in
divine lauds, or in heroical reports: the mean matters be those that
concern mean men, their life and business, as lawyers, gentlemen, and
merchants, good householders and honest Citizens, and which sound neither to
matters of state nor of war, nor leagues, nor great alliances, but smatch all
the common conversation, as of the ciuiller and better sort of men: the base
and low matters be the doings of the common artificer, serving man, yeoman,
groom, husbandman, day-labourer, sailer, shepherd, swynard, and such like of
homely calling, degree and bringing up: so that in every of the said three
degrees, not the self same virtues be egally to be praised nor the same vices,
egally to be dispraised, nor their loves, marriages, quarrels, contracts and
other behauiours, be like high nor do require to be set fourth with the like
style: but every one in his degree and decency, which made that all hymns and
histories, and Tragedies, were written in the high style: all Comedies and
Enterludes and other common Poesies of loves, and such like in the mean style,
all Eglogues and pastoral poemes in the low and base style, otherwise they had
been utterly disproporcioned: likewise for the same cause some phrases and
figures be only peculiar to the high style, some to the base or mean, some
common to all three, as shall be declared more at large hereafter when we come to
speak of figure and phrase: also some words and speeches and sentences do
become the high style, that do not become the other two. And contrariwise, as
shall be said when we talk of words and sentences: finally some kind of measure
and concord, do not beseem the high style, that well become the mean and
low, as we have said speaking of concord and measure. But generally the high
style is disgraced and made foolish and ridiculous by all words affected,
counterfeit, and puffed up, as it were a windball carrying more countenance
then matter, and can not be better resembled then to these midsommer pageants
in London, where to make the people wonder are set forth great and ugly Giants
marching as if they were alive, and armed at all points, but within they are
stuffed full of brown paper and tow, which the shrewd boys vnderpeering, do
guilefully discover and turn to a great derision: also all dark and
unaccustomed words, or rusticall and homely, and sentences that hold too much
of the merry and light, or infamous and unshamefast are to be accounted of the
same sort, for such speeches become not Princes, nor great estates, nor them
that write of their doings to utter or report and intermingle with the grave
and weighty matters.

CHAP. VII.
Of Figures and figurative speeches.

AS figures be the instruments of ornament in every language, so be they also
in a sort abuses or rather trespasses in speech, because they pass the
ordinary limits of common utterance, and be occupied of purpose to deceive the
ear and also the mind, drawing it from plainness and simplicity to a
certain doubleness, whereby our talk is the more guilefull and abusing, for
what else is your Metaphor but an inuersion of sense by transport; your
allegory by a duplicitie of meaning or dissimulation under covert and dark
intendments: one while speaking obscurely and in riddle called Aenigma: another
while by common proverb or Adage called Paremia: then by merry skoffe called
Iroma: then by bitter tawnt called Sarcasmus: then by periphrase or
circumlocution when all might be said in a word or two: then by incredible
comparison giving credit, as by your Hyperbole, and many other ways seeking to
inueigle and appassionate the mind: which thing made the grave judges
Areopagites (as I find written) to forbid all manner of figurative speeches to
be used before them in their consistory of Justice, as mere illusions to the
mind, and wresters of upright judgment, saying that to allow such manner of
foreign and coulored talk to make the judges affectioned, were all one as if
the carpenter before he began to square his timber would make his squire
crooked: in so much as the strait and upright mind of a Judge is the very rule
of justice till it be perverted by affection. This no doubt is true and was by
them gravely considered: but in this case because our maker or Poet is
appointed not for a judge, but rather for a pleader, and that of pleasant and
lovely causes and nothing perilous, such as be those for the trial of life,
limme, or liuelyhood; and before judges neither sower nor severe, but in the
ear of princely dames, young ladies, gentlewomen and courtiers, being all for
the most part either meek of nature, or of pleasant humor, and that all his
abuses tend but to dispose the hearers to mirth and sollace by pleasant
conueyance and efficacy of speech, they are not in truth to be accounted vices
but for virtues in the poetical science very commendable. On the other side,
such trespasses in speech (whereof there be many) as give dolor and disliking
to the ear and mind, by any foul indecencie or disproportion of sound,
situation, or sense, they be called and not without cause the vicious parts or
rather heresies of language: wherefore the matter rests much in the
definition and acceptance of this word [decorum] for whatsoever is so, cannot
justly be misliked. In which respect it may come to pass that what the
Grammarian sets down for a viciositee in speech may become a virtue and no
vice, contrariwise his commended figure may fall into a reproachful fault: the
best and most assured remedy whereof is, generally to follow the saying of
Bias: ne quid nimis. So as in keeping measure, and not exceeding nor showing
any defect in the use of his figures, he cannot lightly do amiss, if he have
besides (as that must needs be) a special regard to all circumstances of the
person, place, time, cause and purpose he has in hand, which being well
observed it easily auoideth all the recited inconveniences, and makes now and
then very vice go for a formal virtue in the exercise of this Art.

CHAP. VIII.
Six points set down by our learned forefathers for a general regiment of
all good utterance be it by mouth or by writing.

But before there had been yet any precise observation made of figurative
speeches, the first learned artificers of language considered that the beauty
and good grace of utterance rested in no many points: and whatsoever
transgressed those lymits, they counted it for vicious; and thereupon did set
down a manner of regiment in all speech generally to be observed, consisting
in six points. First they said that there ought to be kept a decent
proportion in our writings and speech, which they termed Analogia. Secondly,
that it ought to be voluble upon the tongue, and tunable to the ear, which
they called Tasis. Thirdly, that it were not tediously long but brief and
compendious, as the matter might bear, which they called Syntomia. Fourthly,
that it should carry an orderly and good construction, which they called
Synthesis. Fifthly, that it should be a sound, proper and natural speech, which
they called Ciriologia. Sixthly, that it should be lively and stirring, which
they called Tropus. So as it appears by this order of theirs, that no vice
could be committed in speech, keeping within the bounds of that restraint. But
sir, all this being by them very well conceived, there remained a greater
difficulty to know what this proportion, volubilitie, good construction, and
the rest were, otherwise we could not be ever the more relieved. It was
therefore of necessity that a more curious and particular description should
be made of every manner of speech, either transgressing or agreeing with their
said general prescript. Whereupon it came to pass, that all the commendable
parts of speech were set forth by the name of figures, and all the illaudable
parts under the name of vices, or viciosities, of both which it shall be
spoken in their places.

CHAP. IX.
How the Greeks first, and afterward the Latins, invented new names for every
figure, which this Author is also enforced to do in his vulgar.

THe Greeks were a happy people for the freedom and liberty of their
language, because it was allowed the^ to inue^t any new name that they listed
and to piece many words together to make of them one entire, much more
significatiue than the single word. So among other things did they to their
figurative speeches devise certain names. The Latins came somewhat behind
them in that point, and for want of convenient single words to express that
which the Greeks could do by cobling many words together, they were feign to
use the Greeks still, till after many years that the learned Orators and
good Grammarians among the Romans, as Cicero, Varro, Quintilian, and others
strained themselves to give the Greek words Latin names, and yet nothing so
apt and fitty. The same course are we driven to follow in this description,
since we are enforced to cull out for the use of our Poet or maker all the most
commendable figures. Now to make them known (as behooves) either we must do it
by the original Greek name or by the Latin, or by our own. But when I
consider to what sort of Readers I write, and how ill faring the Greek term
would sound in the English ear, then also how short the Latins come to
express many of the Greek originals. Finally, how well our language serves
to supply the full signification of them both, I have thought it no less
lawful, yea peradventure under license of the learned, more laudable to use
our own natural, if they be well chosen, and of proper signification, than to
borrow theirs. So shall not our English Poets, though they be to seek of the
Greek and Latin languages, lament for lack of knowledge sufficient to the
purpose of this art. And in case any of these new English names given by me to
any figure, shall happen to offend. I pray that the learned will bear with me
and to think the strangeness thereof proceeds but of novelty and
disaquaintance with our ears, which in process of time, and by custom will
frame very well: and such others as are not learned in the primitive languages,
if they happen to hit upon any new name of mine (so ridiculous in their
opinion) as may move them to laughter, let such persons, yet assure themselves
that such names go as near as may be to their originals, or else serve better
to the purpose of the figure then the very original, reserving always, that
such new name should not be unpleasant in our vulgar nor harsh upon the tongue:
and where it shall happen otherwise, that it may please the reader to think
that hardly any other name in our English could be found to serve the turn
better. Again if to avoid the hazard of this blame I should have kept the
Greek or Latin still it would have appeared a little too scholasticall for our
makers, and a piece of work more fit for clerks then for Courtiers for whose
instruction this travail is taken: and if I should have left out both the
Greek and Latin name, and put in none of our own neither: well perchance
might the rule of the figure have been set down, but no convenient name to
hold him in memory. It was therefore expedient we devised for every figure of
importance his vulgar name, and to join the Greek or Latin original with
them; after that sort much better satisfying as well the vulgar as the learned
learner, and also the authors own purpose, which is to make of a ruderimer, a
learned and a Courtly Poet.

CHAP. X.
A division of figures, and how they serve in exornation of language.

ANd because our chief purpose herein is for the learning of Ladies and young
Gentlewomen, or idle Courtiers, desirous to become skilful in their own mother
tongue, and for their private recreation to make now and then ditties of
pleasure, thinking for our part none other science so fit for them and the
place as that which teaches beau semblant, the chief profession as well of
Courting as of poesy: since to such manner of minds nothing is more
combersome then tedious doctrines and schollarly methodes of discipline, we
have in our own conceit devised a new and strange model of this art, fitter
to please the Court then the school, and yet not unnecessary for all such as
be willing themselves to become good makers in the vulgar, or to be able to
judge of other men's makings: wherefore, intending to follow the course which we
have begun, thus we say: that though the language of our Poet or maker be pure
and clenly, and not disgraced by such vicious parts as have been before
remembered in the Chapter of language, be sufficiently pleasing and commendable
for the ordinary use of speech; yet is not the same so well appointed for all
purposes of the excellent Poet, as when it is galla^tly arrayed in all his
colors which figure can set upon it, therefore we are now further to determine
of figures and figurative speeches. Figurative speech is a novelty of language
evidently (and yet not absurdly) estranged from the ordinary habit and manner
of our daily talk and writing and figure it self is a certain lively or good
grace set upon words, speeches and sentences to some purpose and not in vain,
giving them ornament or efficacy by many manner of alterations in shape, in
sound, and also in sense, sometime by way of surplusage, sometime by defect,
sometime by disorder, or mutation, and also by putting into our speeches more
pithe and substance, subtilitie, quickness, efficacy or moderation, in this
or that sort tuning and tempring them, by amplification, abridgeme^t, opening,
closing, enforcing, meekening or otherwise disposing them to the best purpose:
whereupon the learned clerks who have written methodically of this Art in the
two master languages, Greek and Latin, have sorted all their figures into
three ranks, and the first they bestowed upon the Poet only: the second upon
the Poet and Orator indifferently: the third upon the Orator alone. And that
first sort of figures does serve the ear only and may be therefore called
Auricular: your second serves the conceit only and not the ear, and may be
called sensable, not sensible nor yet sententious: your third sort serves as
well the ear as the conceit and may be called sententious figures, because not
only they properly apperteine to full sentences, for bewtifying them with a
current and pleasant numerositie, but also giving them efficacy, and enlarging
the whole matter besides with copious amplifications. I doubt not but some
busy carpers will scorn at my new devised terms: auricular and sensable,
saying that I might with better warrant have used in their steads these words,
orthographicall or syntacticall, which the learned Grammarians left ready made
to our hands, and do importe as much as the other that I have brought, which
thing peradventure I deny not in part, and nevertheless for some causes
thought them not so necessary: but with these manner of men I do willingly
bear, in respect of their laudable endeavor to allow antiquity and fly
innovation: with like benevolence I trust they will bear with me writing in
the vulgar speech and seeking by my novelties to satisfy not the school but
the Court: whereas they know very well all old things soon wax stale and
loathsome, and the new devises are ever dainty and delicate, the vulgar
instruction requiring also vulgar and communicable terms, not clerkly or
uncouth as are all these of the Greek and Latin languages primitiuely
received, unless they be qualified or by much use and custom allowed and our
ears made acquainted with them. Thus then I say that auricular figures be
those which work alteration in the ear by sound, accent, time, and slipper
volubilitie in utterance such as for that respect was called by the ancients
numerositie of speech. And not only the whole body of a tale in poem or
history may be made in such sort pleasant and agreeable to the ear, but also
every clause by it self, and every single word carried in a clause, may have
their pleasant sweetness apart. And so long as this quality extends but to
the outward tuning of the speech reaching no higher then the ear and forcing
the mind little or nothing, it is that virtue which the Greeks call Enargia
and is the office of the auricular figures to perform. Therefore as the
members of language at large are whole sentences, and sentences are compact of
clauses, and clauses of words, and every word of letters and sillables, so is
the alteration (be it but of a syllable or letter) much material to the sound
and sweetness of utterance. Wherefore beginning first at the smallest
alterations which rest in letters and sillables, the first sort of our figures
auricular we do appoint to single words as they lie in language; the second to
clauses of speech; the third to perfect sentences and to the whole mass or body
of the tale be it poem or history written or reported.

CHAP. XI.
Of auricular figures apperteining to single words and working by their diverse
soundes and audible tunes alteration to the ear only and not the mind.

A Word as he lies in course of language is many ways figured and thereby not
a little altered in sound, which consequently alters the tune and harmony of a
meeter as to the ear. And this alteration is sometimes by adding sometimes by
rabbating of a syllable or letter to or from a word either in the beginning,
middle or ending joining or vnioyning of sillables and letters suppressing or
confounding their several soundes, or by misplacing of a letter, or by clear
exchange of one letter for another, or by wrong ranging of the accent. And
your figures of addition or surpluse be three, videl. In the beginning, as to
say: I-doen, for done, endanger, for danger, embolden, for bolden.

In the middle, as to say renuers, for reuers, meeterly, for meetly,
goldylockes, for goldlockes.

In the end, as to say [remembren] for [remembre [[spoken] for [spoke]. And your
figures of rabbate be as many, videl.

From the beginning, as to say [twixt for betwixt] [gainsay for againesay:]
[ill for evil:]

From the middle, as to say [paraunter for parauenture] poorety for pouertie]
souraigne for soueraigne] taken for taken.]

From the end, as to say [morne for morning] bet for better] and such like.

Your swallowing or eating up one letter by another is when two vowels meet,
whereof th'ones sound goes into other, as to say for to attain t'attaine] for
sorrow and smart sor' and smart.]

Your displacing of a fillable as to say [desier for desire.] fire for fire.]

By clear exchange of one letter or syllable for another, as to say euermare
for evermore, wrang for wrong: gould for gold: fright for freight and a hundred
more, which be commonly misused and strained to make rhyme.

By wrong ranging the accent of a syllable by which mean a short syllable is
made long and a long short as to say sovereign for sovereign: gracious for
gracious: endure for endure: Solomon for Solomon.

These many ways may our maker alter his words, and sometimes it is done for
pleasure to give a better sound, sometimes upon necessity, and to make up the
rhyme. But our maker must take heed that he be not to bold specially in exchange
of one letter for another, for unless usual speech and custom allow it, it
is a fault and no figure, and because these be figures of the smallest
importance, I forbear to give them any vulgar name.

CHAP. XII.
Of Auricular figures pertaining to clauses of speech and by them working no
little alteration to the care.

AS your single words may be many ways tra^sfigured to make the meetre or
verse more tunable and melodious, so also may your whole and entire clauses be
in such sort contrived by the order of their construction as the ear may
receive a certain recreation, although the mind for any novelty of sense be
little or nothing affected. And therefore al your figures of grammatical
construction, I account them but merely auricular in that they reach no further
then the ear. To which there will appear some sweet or unsavory point to
offer you dolor or delight, either by some evident defect, or surplusage, or
disorder, or immutation in the same speeches notably altering either the
congruitie grammatical, or the sense, or both. And first of those that work
by defect, if but one word or some little portion of speech be wanting, it may
be supplied by ordinary understanding and virtue of the figure Eclipsis,
Eclipsis or the Figure of default.
as to say, so early a man, for [are ye] so early a man: he is to be entreated,
for he is [easie] to be entreated: I thank God I am to live like a Gentleman,
for I am [able] to live, and the Spaniard said in his devise of arms acuerdo
oluido, I remember I forget whereas in right congruitie of speech it should be.
I remember [that I [doo] forget. And in a devise of our own [empechement pur a
choison] a let for a furderance whereas it should be said [vse] a let for a
furderance, and a number more like speeches defective, and supplied by common
understanding.

But if it be to mo clauses then one, that some such word be supplied to perfect
the congruitie or sense of them all, it is by the figure [Zeugma] we call him
the [single supplie] because by one word we serve many clauses of one
congruitie, Zeugma or the Single supply.
and may be likened to the man that serves many masters at once, but all of
one country or kindred: as to say.

Fellows and friends and kin forsook me quite.
Here this word forsook satisfies the congruitie and sense of all three
clauses, which would require every of them as much. And as we setting forth her
Majesty's regal petigree, said in this figure of [Single supply.]

Her graundsires Father and Brother was a King
Her mother a crowned Queen, her Sister and her self.
Whereas ye see this one word [was] serves them all in that they require but
one congruitie and sense.

Yet has this figure of [Single supply] another property, occasioning him to
change now and then his name: by the order of his supply, for if it be placed
in the forefront of all the several clauses whom he is to serve as a common
seruitour, then is he called by the Greeks Prozeugma, by us the Ringleader:
Prozeugma, or the Ringleader.
thus Her beauty perst mine eye, her speech mine woeful heart:
Her presence all the powers of my discourse. etc.


Where ye see this one word [perst] placed in the foreward, satisfies both in
sense and congruitie all those other clauses that follow him.

And if such word of supply be placed in the middle of all such clauses as he
serves: it is by the Greeks called Mezozeugma, Mezozeugma or the Middle marcher.
by us the [Middlemarcher] thus: Fair maids beauty (alack) with years it
wears away,
And with wether and sickness, and sorrow as they say.


Where ye see this word [weares] serves one clause before him, and two clauses
behind him, in one and the same sense and congruitie. And in this verse, Either
the troth or talk nothing at all.


Where this word [talke] serves the clause before and also behind. But if such
supply be placed after all the clauses, and not before nor in the middle,
Hypozeugma, or the Rerewarder.
then is he called by the Greeks Hypozeugma, and by us the [Rerewarder] thus:
My mates that wont, to keep me company,
And my neighbors, who dwelled next to my wall,
The friends that swore, they would not stick to die
In my quarrel: they are fled from me all.


Where ye see this word [fled from me] serve all the three clauses requiring
but one congruitie and sense. But if such want be in sundry clauses, and of
several congruities or sense, and the supply be made to serve them all, it is
by the figure Sillepsis, Sillepsis, or the Double supply.
whom for that respect we call the [double supplie] conceiving, and, as it
were, comprehending under one, a supply of two natures, and may be likened to
the man that serves many masters at once, being of strange Countries or
kinreds, as in these verses, where the lamenting widow showed the Pilgrim the
graves in which her husband and children lay buried.

Here my sweet sons and daughters all my bliss,
Yonder mine own dear husband buried is.
Where ye see one verb singular supplyeth the plural and singular, and thus
Judge ye lovers, if it be strange or no:
My Lady laughs for joy, and I for woe.


Where ye see a third person supply himself and a first person. And thus,
Madame ye never showed your self untrue,
Nor my deserts would ever suffer you.


Viz. to show. Where ye see the mood Indicative supply him self and an
Infinitive. And the like in these other.

I never yet failde you in constancy,
Nor never do intend until I die.
Viz. [to show.] Thus much for the congruitie, now for the sense. One wrote
thus of a young man, who slew a villain that had killed his father, and
ravished his mother.

Thus valiantly and with a manly mind,
And by one feate of everlasting fame,
This lusty lad fully requited kind,
His fathers death, and eke his mothers shame.
Where ye see this word [requite] serve a double sense: that is to say, to
revenge, and to satisfy. For the parents injury was revenged, and the duty
of nature performed or satisfied by the child. But if this supply be made to
sundry clauses, or to one clause sundry times iterated, and by several
words, so as every clause has his own supply: Hypozeuxis. or the Substitute.
then is it called by the Greeks Hypozeuxis, we call him the substitute after
his original, and is a supply with iteration, as thus: Unto the king she
went, and to the king she said,
Mine own liege Lord behold thy poor handmaid.


Here [went to the king] and [said to the king] be but one clause iterated with
words of sundry supply. Or as in these verses following.

My Lady gave me, my Lady wist not what,
Giving me leave to be her Sovereign:
For by such gift my Lady has done that,
Which vvhilest she lives she may not call again.
Here [my Lady gaue] and [my Lady vvist] be supplies with iteration, by
virtue of this figure.

Ye have another auricular figure of defect, and is when we begin to speak a
thing, and break of in the middle way, as if either it needed no further to be
spoken of, or that we were ashamed, or afraid to speak it out. It is also
sometimes done by way of threatening, and to show a moderation of anger. The
Greeks call him Aposiopesis. I, the figure of silence, or of interruption,
indifferently. Aposiopesis. or the Figure of silence


If we do interrupt our speech for fear, this may be an example, where as one
durst not make the true report as it was, but staid half way for fear of
offense, thus: He said you were, I dare not tell you plain:
For words once out, never return again.


If it be for shame, or that the speaker suppose it would be indecent to tell
all, then thus: as he that said to his sweet heart, whom he checked for
secretly whispering with a suspected person.

And did ye not come by his chamber door?
And tell him that: go to, I say no more.
If it be for anger or by way of manace or to show a moderation of wrath as the
grave and discreeter sort of men do, then thus.

If I take you with such another cast
I swear by God, but let this be the last.
Thinking to have said further viz. I will punish you.

If it be for none of all these causes but upon some sudden occasion that
moves a man to break of his tale, then thus.

He told me all at large: lo yonder is the man
Let himself tell the tale that best tell can.
This figure is fit for fantastical heads and such as be sudden or lack
memory. I know one of good learning that greatly blemisheth his discretion
with this manner of speech: for if he be in the grauest matter of the world
talking, he will upon the sudden for the flying of a bird overthwart the way,
or some other such slight cause, interrupt his tale and never return to it
again.

Ye have yet another manner of speech purporting at the first blush a defect
which afterward is supplied the, Greeks call him Prolepsis, we the Propounder,
or the Explaner which ye will: Prolepsis. or the Propounder.
because he works both effects, as thus, where in certain verses we describe
the triumphant enter-view of two great Princesses thus.

These two great Queens, came marching hand in hand,
Unto the hall, where store of Princes stand:
And people of all countries to be hold,
Coronis all clad, in purple cloth of gold:
Celiar in robes, of silver tissew white,
With rich rubies, and pearls all bedighte.
Here ye see the first proposition in a sort defective and of imperfect sense,
till ye come by division to explane and enlarge it, but if we should follow the
original right, we ought rather to call him the forestaller, for like as he
that stands in the market way, and takes all up before it come to the market
in gross and sells it by retaile, so by this manner of speech our maker setts
down before all the matter by a brief proposition, and afterward explanes it by
a division more particularly.

By this other example it appears also.

Then dear Lady I pray you let it be,
That our long love may lead us to agree:
Me since I may not wed you to my wife,
To serve you as a mistress all my life:
Ye that may not me for your husband have,
To claim me for your servant and your slave.
CHAP. XII.
Of your figures Auricular vvorking by disorder.

TO all their speeches which wrought by disorder the Greeks gave a general
name [Hiperbaton] as much to say as the [trespasser] and because such disorder
may be committed many ways it receives sundry particulars under him,
Hiperbaton, or the Trespasser.
whereof some are only proper to the Greeks and Latins and not to us, other
some ordinary in our manner of speeches, but so foul and intolerable as I will
not seem to place them among the figures, but do raunge the^ as they deserve
among the vicious or faulty speeches.

Parenthesis. or the Insertour.
Your first figure of tolerable disorder is [Parenthesis] or by an English name
the [Insertour] and is when ye will seem for larger information or some other
purpose, to piece or graffe in the midst of your tale an unnecessary parcel
of speech, which nevertheless may be thence without any detriment to the rest.
The figure is so common that it needs none example, nevertheless because we
are to teach Ladies and Gentlewomen to know their school points and terms
appertaining to the Art, we may not refuse to yield examples even in the
plainest cases, as that of master Diars very aptly.

But now my Dear (for so my love makes me to call you still)
That love I say, that lucklesse love, that works me all this ill.
Also in our Eglogue entitled Elpine, which we made being but eightene years
old, to king Edward the sixth a Prince of great hope, we surmised that the
Pilot of a ship answering the King, being inquisitiue and desirous to know all
the parts of the ship and tackle, what they were, and to what use they served,
using this insertion or Parenthesis.

Sovereign Lord (for why a greater name
To one on earth no mortal tongue can frame
No stately style can give the practisd pen:
To one on earth conversant among men.)
And so proceeds to answer the kings question?

The ship thou see sailing in sea so large, etc.
This insertion is very long and utterly impertinent to the principal matter,
and makes a great gappe in the tale, nevertheless is no disgrace but rather a
beauty and to very good purpose, but you must not use such insertions often nor
to thick, nor those that be very long as this of ours, for it will breed
great confusion to have the tale so much interrupted.

Ye have another manner of disordered speech, when ye misplace your words or
clauses and set that before which should be behind, and e conuerso, we call it
in English proverb, Histeron proteron, or the Preposterous.
the cart before the horse, the Greeks call it Histeron proteron, we name it
the Preposterous, and if it be not too much used is tolerable enough, and many
times scarce perceiueable, unless the sense be thereby made very absurd: as he
that described his manner of departure from his mistress, said thus not much
to be misliked.

I kissed her cherry lip and took my leave:
For I took my leave and kissed her: And yet I cannot well say whether a man use
to kiss before he take his leave, or take his leave before he kiss, or that
it be all one business. It seems the taking leave is by using some speech,
entreating license of departure: the kiss a knitting up of the farewell, and
as it were a testimonial of the license without which here in England one may
not presume of courtesy to depart, let young Courtiers decide this
controversy. One describing his landing upon a strange coast, said thus
preposterously.

When we had climbde the clifs, and were a shore,
Whereas he should have said by good order.

When we were come a shore and clymed had the cliffs
For one must be on land ere he can clime. And as another said: My dame that
bred me up and bare me in her womb.


Whereas the bearing is before the bringing up. All your other figures of
disorder because they rather seem deformities then bewties of language, for so
many of them as be notoriously indecent, and make no good harmony, I place them
in the Chapter of vices hereafter following.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of your figures Auricular that work by Surplusage.

YOur figures auricular that work by surplusage, such of them as be material
and of importance to the sense or beauty of your language, I refer them to
the harmonicall speeches of orators among the figures rhetorical, as be those
of repetition, and iteration or amplification. All other sorts of surplusage, I
account rather vicious then figurative, and therefore not melodious as shall be
remembered in the chapter of viciosities or faulty speeches.

CHAP. XV.
Of auricular figures vvorking by exchange.

Enallage. or the Figure of exchange.
YOur figures that work auricularly by exchange, were more obseruable to the
Greeks and Latins for the braveness of their language, over that ours is,
and for the multiplicitie of their Grammatical accidents, or verbal affects,
as I may term them, that is to say, their diverse cases, moodes, tenses,
genders, with variable terminations, by reason whereof, they changed not the
very word, but kept the word, and changed the shape of him only, using one
case for another, or tense, or person, or gender, or number, or mood. We,
having no such variety of accidents, have little or no use of this figure.
They called it Enallage.

But another sort of exchange which they had, and very pretty, Hipallage. or the
Changeling.
we do likewise use, not changing one word for another, by their accidents or
cases, as the Enallage: nor by the places, as the [Preposterous] but changing
their true construction and application, whereby the sense is quite perverted
and made very absurd: as, he that should say, for tell me troth and lie not,
lie me troth and tell not. For come dine with me and stay not, come stay with
me and dine not.

A certain piteous lover, to move his mistres to compassion, wrote among other
amorous verses, this one.

Madame, I set your eyes before mine vvoes.
For, mine woes before your eyes, spoken to the intent to win favor in her
sight.

But that was pretty of a certain sorry man of law, that gave his Client but
bad council, and yet found fault with his fee, and said: my fee, good friend,
has deserved better counsel. Good master, quoth the Client, if your self had
not said so, I would never have believed it: but now I think as you do. The
man of law perceiving his error, I tell thee (quoth he) my counsel has
deserved a better fee. Yet of all others was that a most ridiculous, but very
true exchange, which the yeoman of London used with his Sergeant at the Mace,
who said he would go into the country, and make merry a day or two, while his
man plied his business at home: an example of it you shall find in our
Interlude entitled Lusty London: the Sergeant, for sparing of hors-hire, said
he would go with the Carrier on foot. That is not for your worship, said his
yeoman, whereunto the Sergeant replied.

I vvot what I mean John, it is for to stay
And company the knave Carrier, for loosing my way.
The yeoman thinking it good manner to soothe his Sergeant, said again, I
mean what I vvot Sir, your best is to hie,
And carry a knave with you for company.


Ye see a notorious exchange of the construction, and application of the words
in this: I vvot what I mean; and I mean what I vvot, and in the other,
company the knave Carrier, and carry a knave in your company. The Greeks call
this figure [Hipallage] the Latins Submutatio, we in our vulgar may call him
the [vnderchange] but I had rather have him called the [Changeling] nothing at
all sweruing from his original, and much more aptly to the purpose, and
pleasanter to bear in memory: specially for our Ladies and pretty mistresses
in Court, for whose learning I write, because it is a term often in their
mouths, and alluding to the opinion of Nurses, who are wont to say, that the
Fayries use to steal the fairest children out of their cradles, and put other
ill favored in their places, which they called cha^gelings, or Elfs: so, if ye
mark, does our Poet, or maker play with his words, using a wrong construction
for a right, and an absurd for a sensible, by manner of exchange.

CHAP. XVI.
Of some other figures which because they serve chiefly to make the meeters
tunable and melodious, and affect not the mind but very little, be placed
among the auricular.

Omoioteleton, or the Like loose.
TThe Greeks used a manner of speech or writing in their proses, that went by
clauses, finishing in words of like tune, and might be by using like cases,
tenses, and other points of consonance, which they called Omoioteleton, and is
that wherein they nearest approached to our vulgar ryme, and may thus be
expressed.

Weeping creeping beseeching I won,
The love at length of Lady Lucian.
Or thus if we speak in prose and not in meetre.

Mischaunces ought not to be lamented,
But rather by wisdom in time prevented:
For such mishappes as be remediless,
To sorrovv them it is but foolishness:
Yet are we all so frail of nature,
As to be grieved with every displeasure.
The craking Scotts as the Cronicle reports at a certain time made this bald
rhyme upon the Englishmen.

Long beards hartlesse,
Painted hoodes vvitlesse:
Gay coats graceless,
Make all England thriftlesse.
Which is no perfect rhyme in deed, but clauses finishing in the self same tune:
for a rhyme of good simphonie should not conclude his concords with one and the
same terminant syllable, as less, less, less, but with diverse and like
terminants, as les, pres, mes, as was before declared in the chapter of your
cadences, and your clauses in prose should neither finish with the same nor
with the like terminants, but with the contrary as has been showed before in
the book of proportions; yet many use it otherwise, neglecting the Poetical
harmony and skill. And The Earl of Surrey with Sir Thomas Wyat the most
excellent makers of their time, more peradventure respecting the fitness and
ponderositie of their words then the true cadence or simphonie, were very
licencious in this point. We call this figure following the original, the
[like loose] alluding to th'Archers term who is not said to finish the feate
of his shot before he give the loose, and deliver his arrow from his bow, in
which respect we use to say mark the loose of a thing for mark the end of it.

Ye do by another figure notably affect the ear when ye make every word of the
verse to begin with a like letter, Parimion, or the Figure of like letter.
as for example in this verse written in an Epithaphe of our making.

Time tried his truth his travails and his trust,
And time to late tried his integrity.
It is a figure much used by our common rimers, and does well if it be not too
much used, for then it falls into the vice which shall be hereafter spoken of
called Tautologia.

Ye have another sort of speech in a manner defective because it wants good band
or coupling, Asyndeton, or the Loose langage.
and is the figure [Asyndeton] we call him [loose language] and does not a
little alter the ear as thus.

I savv it, I said it, I will swear it.
Caesar the Dictator upon the victory he obtained against Pharnax king of
Bithinia showing the celeritie of his conquest, wrate home to the Senate in
this tenor of speech no less swift and speedy then his victory.

Veni, vidi, vici,
I came, I savv, I overcame.
Meaning thus I was no sooner come and beheld them but the victory fell on my
side.

The Prince of Orange for his devise of Arms in banner displayed against the
Duke of Alua and the Spaniards in the Low Country used the like manner of
speech.

Pro Rege, pro lege, pro grege,
For the king, for the commons, for the country laws.
It is a figure to be used when we will seem to make have, or to be earnest,
and these examples with a number more be spoken by the figure of [lose
language.]

Polisindeton, or the Coople clause.
Quite contrary to this ye have another manner of construction which they called
[Polisindeton] we may call him the [couple clause] for that every clause is
knit and coupled together with a coniunctiue thus.

And I savv it, and I say it and I
Will swear it to be true.
So might the Poesy of Caesar have been altered thus.

I came, and I savv, and I overcame.
One wrote these verses after the same sort.

For in her mind no thought there is,
But how she may be true iwis:
And tenders thee and all thy heal,
And wishes both thy health and weal:
And is thine own, and so she says,
And cares for thee ten thousand vvayes.
Ye have another manner of speech drawn out at length and going all after one
tenure and with an imperfit sense till you come to the last word or verse which
co^cludes the whole premises with a perfect sense and full periode, Irmus, or
the Long loose.
the Greeks call it Irmus, I call him the [long loose] thus appearing in a
dittie of Sir Thomas Wyat where he describes the diverse distempers of his bed.

The restless state renuer of my smart,
The labors salve increasing my sorrow:
The bodies ease and troubles of my heart,
Quietour of mind mine unquiet foe:
Forgetter of pain remembrer of my woe,
The place of sleep wherein I do but wake:
Be sprent with tears my bed I thee forsake.
Ye see here how ye can gather no perfection of sense in all this dittie till
ye come to the last verse in these words my bed I thee forsake. And in another
Sonet of Petrarcha which was thus Englished by the same Sir Thomas Wyat.

If weaker care if sudden pale color,
If many sighs with little speech to plain:
Now joy now woe, if they my joys distaine,
For hope of small, if much to fear therefore,
Be sign of love then do I love again.
Here all the whole sense of the dittie is suspended till ye come to the last
three words, then do I love again, which finisheth the song with a full and
perfect sense.

When ye will speak giving every person or thing besides his proper name a
quality by way of addition whether it be of good or of bad it is a figurative
speech of audible alteration, Epitheton, or the Qualifier.
so is it also of sense as to say.

Fierce Achilles, wise Nestor wily Ulysses,
Diana the chaste and thou lovely Venus:
With thy blind boy that almost never misses,
But hits our hearts when he leuels at us.
Or thus commending the Isle of great Britain.

Albion hugest of Western Islands all,
Soil of sweet air and of good store:
God send we see thy glory never fall,
But rather daily to grow more and more.
Or as we sang of our Sovereign Lady giving her these Attributes besides her
proper name.

Elizabeth regent of the great Britain I Will,
Honor of all regents and of Queens.
But if we speak thus not expressing her proper name Elizabeth, videl.

The English Diana, the great Britton maid.
Then is it not by Epitheton or figure of Attribution but by the figures
Antonomasia, or Periphrasis.

Ye have yet another manner of speech when ye will seem to make two of one not
thereunto constrained, which therefore we call the figure of Twynnes, the
Greeks Endiadis thus. Endiadis, or the Figure of Twins.


Not you coy dame your lowrs nor your looks.
For [your lowering looks.] And as one of our ordinary rimers said.

Of fortune nor her frowning face,
I am nothing aghast.
In stead, of [fortunes frowning face.] One praising the Neapolitans for good
men at arms, said by the figure of Twynnes thus.

A proud people and wise and valiant,
Fiercely fighting with horses and with barbes:
By whose provves the Romain Prince did daunt,
Wild Affricanes and the lavvlesse Alarbes:
The Nubiens marching with their armed carts,
And sleaing a far with venim and with darts.
Where ye see this figure of Twynnes twice used, once when he said horses and
barbes for barbd horses: again when he says with venim and with darts for
venomous darts.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the figures which we call Sensable, because they alter and affect the mind
by alteration of sense, and first in single words.

THe ear having received his due satisfaction by the auricular figures, now
must the mind also be served, with his natural delight by figures sensible
such as by alteration of intendmentes affect the courage, and give a good
liking to the conceit. And first, single words have their sense and
understanding altered and figured many ways, to wit, by transport, abuse,
crosse-naming, new naming, change of name. This will seem very dark to you,
unless it be otherwise explaned more particularly: Metaphora, or the Figure of
transporte.
and first of Transport. There is a kind of wresting of a single word from his
own right signification, to another not so natural, but yet of some affinity
or conueniencie with it, as to say, I cannot digest your unkind words, for I
cannot take them in good part: or as the man of law said, I feel you not, for
I understand not your case, because he had not his fee in his hand. Or as
another said to a mouthy Advocate, why barkest thou at me so sore? Or to call
the top of a tree, or of a hill, the crown of a tree or of a hill: for in
deed crown is the highest ornament of a Princes head, made like a close
garland, or else the top of a man's head, where the hair winds about, and
because such term is not applied naturally to a tree, or to a hill, but is
transported from a man's head to a hill or tree, therefore it is called by
metaphore, or the figure of transport. And three causes moves us to use this
figure, one for necessity or want of a better word, thus: As the dry ground
that thirstes after a shower
Seems to rejoice when it is well iwet,
And speedely brings forth both grass and flowr,
If lack of sun or season do not let.


Here for want of an apter and more natural word to declare the dry temper of
the earth, it is said to thirst and to rejoice, which is only proper to living
creatures, and yet being so inuerted, does not so much swerue from the true
sense, but that every man can easily conceive the meaning thereof.

Again, we use it for pleasure and ornament of our speech, as thus in an
Epitaph of our own making, to the honorable memory of a dear friend, Sir
John Throgmorton, knight, Justice of Chester, and a man of many commendable
virtues.

Whom virtue rerde, envy has overthrown
And lodged full low, under this marble stone:
Ne never were his values so well known,
Whilst he lived here, as now that he is gone.
Here these words, rered, overthrown, and lodged, are inuerted, and
metaphorically applied, not upon necessity, but for ornament only, afterward
again in these verses.

No sun by day that ever saw him rest
Free from the toils of his so busy charge,
No night that harbourd rankor in his breast,
Nor merry mood, made reason run at large.
In these verses the inuersion or metaphore, lies in these words, saw,
harbourd, run: which naturally are applied to living things, and not to
insensible: as, the sun, or the night: and yet they approach so near, and so
conveniently, as the speech is thereby made more commendable. Again, in more
verses of the same Epitaph, thus.

His head a source of gravity and sense,
His memory a shop of civil art:
His tongue a stream of sugared eloquence,
Wisdom and meekenes lay mingled in his heart,
In which verses ye see that these words, source, shop, flud, sugared, are
inuerted from their own signification to another, not altogether so natural,
but of much affinity with it.

Then also do we it sometimes to enforce a sense and make the word more
significatiue: as thus, I burn in love, I freese in deadly hate
I swim in hope, and sink in deep despair.


These examples I have the willinger given you to set forth the nature and use
of your figure metaphore, which of any other being choisly made, is the most
commendable and most common.

Catachresis, or the Figure of abuse
But if for lack of natural and proper term or word we take another, neither
natural nor proper and do untruly apply it to the thing which we would seem
to express, and without any just inconvenience, it is not then spoken by this
figure Metaphore or of inuersion as before, but by plain abuse, as he that bad
his man go into his library and fet him his bow and arrows, for in deed
there was never a book there to be found, or as one should in reproach say to a
poor man, thou rascal knave, where rascal is properly the hunters term
given to young dear, lean and out of season, and not to people: or as one
said very pretily in this verse.

I lent my love to loss, and gaged my life in vain.
Whereas this word lent is properly of money or some such other thing, as men
do commonly borrow, for use to be repayed again, and being applied to love is
utterly abused, and yet very commendably spoken by virtue of this figure. For
he that loves and is not beloved again, has no less wrong, than he that
lends and is never repayde.

Metonimia, or the Misnamer.
Now does this understanding or secret conceyt reach many times to the only
nomination of persons or things in their names, as of men, or mountains, seas,
countries and such like, in which respect the wrong naming, or otherwise naming
of them then is due, carries not only an alteration of sense but a necessity
of intendment figuratively, as when we call love by the name of Venus, fleshly
lust by the name of Cupid, because they were supposed by the ancient poets to
be authors and kindlers of love and lust: Vulcane for fire, Ceres for bread:
Bacchus for wine by the same reason; also if one should say to a skillful
craftesman known for a glutton or common drunkard, that had spent all his
goods on riot and delicate fare.

Thy hands they made thee rich, thy pallat made thee poor.
It is meant, his travail and art made him wealthy, his riotous life had made
him a beggar: and as one that boasted of his housekeeping, said that never a
year passed over his head, that he drank not in his house every month four
tonnes of beer, and one hogshead of wine, meaning not the caskes or vessels,
but that quantity which they contained. These and such other speeches, where
ye take the name of the Author for the thing it self; or the thing co^teining,
for that which is contained, and in many other cases do as it were wrong name
the person or the thing. So nevertheless as it may be understood, it is by the
figure metonymia, or misnamer.

And if this manner of naming of persons or things be not by way of misnaming
as before, but by a convenient difference, Antonomasia, or the Surnamer.
and such as is true or esteemed and likely to be true, it is then called not
metonimia, but antonomasia, or the Surnamer, (not the misnamer, which might
extend to any other thing as well as to a person) as he that would say: not king
Philip of Spain, but the Western king, because his dominion lies the furdest
West of any Christen prince: and the French king the great Vallois, because so
is the name of his house, or the Queen of England, The maiden Queen, for that
is her hiest peculiar among all the Queens of the world, or as we said in one
of our Partheniades, the Bryton maid, because she is the most great and famous
maiden of all Brittayne: thus, But in chaste style, am borne as I ween
To blazon forth the Brytton maiden Queen.


So did our forefathers call Henry the first, Beauclerke, Edmund Ironside,
Richard coeur de lion: Edward the Confessor, and we of her Majesty Elisabeth
the peasible.

Then also is the sense figurative when we devise a new name to any thing
consonant, as near as we can to the nature thereof, Onomatopeia, or the New
namer.
as to say: flashing of lightning, clashing of blades, clinking of fetters,
chinking of money: and as the poet Virgil said of the sounding a trumpet,
ta-ra-tant, taratantara, or as we give special names to the voices of dombe
beasts, as to say, a horse neigheth, a lyo^ brayes, a swine grunts, a hen
cackleth, a dog howles, and a hundredth mo such new names as any man has
liberty to devise, so it be fittie for the thing which he couets to express.

Epitheton. or the Quallifier otherwise the figure of Attribation.
Your Epitheton or qualifier, whereof we spoke before, placing him among the
figures auricular, now because he serves also to alter and enforce the sense,
we will say somewhat more of him in this place, and do conclude that he must be
apt and proper for the thing he is added unto, and not disagreable or
repugnant, as one that said: dark disdain, and miserable pride, very
absurdly, for disdain or disdained things cannot be said dark, but rather
bright and clear, because they be beholden and much looked upon, and pride is
rather envied then pitied or miserable, unless it be in Christian charity,
which helps not the term in this case. Some of our vulgar writers take great
pleasure in giving Epithets and do it almost to every word which may receive
them, and should not be so, yea though they were never so propre and apt, for
sometimes words suffered to go single, do give greater sense and grace than
words quallified by attributions do.

But the sense is much altered and the hearers conceit strangly entangled by
the figure Metalepsis, Metalepsis. or the Farrefet.
which I call the farfet, as when we had rather fetch a word a great way off
the^ to use one nerer hand to express the matter as well and plainer. And it
seems the deviser of this figure, had a desire to please women rather then
men: for we use to say by manner of Proverb: things farrefet and dear bought
are good for Ladies: so in this manner of speech we use it, leaping over the
heads of a great many words, we take one that is furdest off, to utter our
matter by: as Medea cursing her first acquaintance with prince Jason, who had
very unkindly forsaken her, said: Woe worth the mountain that the maste bare
Which was the first causer of all my care.


Where she might as well have said, woe worth our first meeting, or woe worth
the time that Jason arrived with his ship at my fathers city in Colchos, when
he took me away with him, and not so far off as to curse the mountain that
bare the pinetree, that made the mast, that bare the sails, that the ship
sailed with, which carried her away. A pleasant Gentleman came into a Ladies
nursery, and saw her for her own pleasure rocking of her young child in the
cradle, and said to her: I speak it Madame without any mock,
Many a such cradell may I see you rock.


Gods passion hourson said she, would thou have me bear mo children yet, no
Madame quoth the Gentleman, but I would have you live long, that ye might the
better pleasure your friends, for his meaning was that as every cradle
signified a newborn child, and every child the leisure of one years birth,
and many years a long life: so by wishing her to rock many cradels of her
own, he wished her long life. Virgill said: Post multas mea regna videns
mirabor aristas.


Thus in English.

After many a stubble shall I come
And wonder at the sight of my kingdom.
By stubble the Poet understood years, for haruests come but once every
year, at least ways with us in Europe. This is spoken by the figure of
farre-fet. Metalepsis.

And one notable mean to affect the mind, Emphasis. or the Renforcer.
is to enforce the sense of any thing by a word of more than ordinary
efficacy, and nevertheless is not apparent, but as it were, secretly employed,
as he that said thus of a fair Lady.

O rare beauty, o grace, and courtesy.
And by a very evil man thus.

O sin it self, not wretch, but wretchedness.
Whereas if he had said thus, O gracious, courteous and beautiful woman: and,
O sinful and wretchedman, it had been all to one effect, yet not with such
force and efficacy, to speak by the denominatiue, as by the thing it self.

As by the former figure we use to enforce our sense, so by another we temper
our sense with words of such moderation, as in appearaunce it abateth it but
not in deed, and is by the figure Liptote, which therefore I call the
Moderator, Liptote. or the Moderatour.
and becomes us many times better to speak in that sort quallified, than if we
spoke it by more forcible terms, and nevertheless is equipolent in sense, thus.

I know you hate me not, nor wish me any ill.
Meaning in deed that he loved him very well and dearly, and yet the words
do not express so much, though they purport so much. Or if you would say, I
am not ignorant, for I know well enough. Such a man is no fool, meaning in
deed that he is a very wise man.

Paradiastole, or the Curry fauell.
But if such moderation of words tend to flattery, or soothing, or excusing, it
is by the figure Paradiastole, which therefore nothing improperly we call the
Curry-fauell, as when we make the best of a bad thing, or turn a signification
to the more plausible sense: as, to call an unthrift, a liberal Gentleman: the
foolish-hardy, valiant or courageous: the niggard, thriftie: a great riot, or
outrage, an youthful pranke, and such like terms: moderating and abating the
force of the matter by craft, and for a pleasing purpose, as appears by these
verses of ours, teaching in what cases it may commendably be used by Courtiers.

Meiosis, or the Disabler.
But if you diminish and abbase a thing by way of spite or malice, as it were
to deprave it, such speech is by the figure Meiosis or the disabler spoken of
hereafter in the place of sententious figures.

A great mountain as big as a molehill,
A heavy burden perdy, as a pound of feathers.
Tapinosis, or the Abbaser.
But if ye abase your thing or matter by ignorance or error in the choice of
your word, then is it by vicious manner of speech called Tapmosis, whereof ye
shall have examples in the chapter of vices hereafter following.

Synecdoche, or the Figure of quick conceit.
Then again if we use such a word (as many times we do) by which we drive the
hearer to conceive more or less or beyond or otherwise then the letter
expresses, and it be not by virtue of the former figures Metaphore and Abase
and the rest, the Greeks then call it Synecdoche, the Latins sub intellectio
or understanding, for by part we are enforced to understand the whole, by the
whole part, by many things one thing, by one, many, by a thing precedent, a
thing consequent, and generally one thing out of another by manner of
contrariety to the word which is spoken, aliudex alio, which because it seems
to ask a good, quick, and pregnant capacity, and is not for an ordinary or
dull wit so to do, I chose to call him the figure not only of conceit after
the Greek original, but also of quick conceit. As for example we will give
none because we will speak of him again in another place, where he is ranged
among the figures sensable apperteining to clauses.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of sensable figures altering and affecting the mind by alteration of sense or
intendements in whole clauses or speeches.

AS by the last remembered figures the sense of single words is altered, so by
these that follow is that of whole and entier speech: and first by the Courtly
figure Allegoria, which is when we speak one thing and think another, and
that our words and our meanings meet not. The use of this figure is so large,
and his virtue of so great efficacy as it is supposed no man can pleasantly
utter and persuade without it, but in effect is sure never or very seldom to
thrive and prosper in the world, that cannot skilfully put in ure, in so much as
not only every common Courtier, but also the grauest Counselor, yea and the
most noble and wisest Prince of them all are many times enforced to use it, by
example (say they) of the great Emperor who had it usually in his mouth to
say, Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare. Of this figure therefore which for
his duplicitie we call the figure of [false semblant or dissimulation] we will
speak first as of the chief ringleader and captain of all other figures,
either in the Poetical or oratorie science.

And ye shall know that we may dissemble, Allegoria, or the Figure of false
semblant.
I mean speak otherwise then we think, in earnest as well as in sport, under
covert and dark terms, and in learned and apparent speeches, in short
sentences, and by long ambage and circumstance of words, and finally as well
when we lie as when we tell truth. To be short every speech wrested from his
own natural signification to another not altogether so natural is a kind of
dissimulation, because the words bear contrary countenance to the intent. But
properly and in his principal virtue Allegoria is when we do speak in sense
translatiue and wrested from the own signification, nevertheless applied to
another not altogether contrary, but having much co^ueniencie with it as before
we said of the metaphore: as for example if we should call the common wealth, a
ship; the Prince a Pilot, the Counselors mariners, the storms wars, the
calm and [hauen] peace, this is spoken all in allegory: and because such
inuersion of sense in one single word is by the figure Metaphore, of whom we
spoke before, and this manner of inuersion extending to whole and large
speeches, it makes the figure allegory to be called a long and perpetual
Metaphore. A noble man after a whole years absence from his lady, sent to
know how she did, and whether she remained affected toward him as she was when
he left her.

Lovely Lady I long full sore to hear,
If ye remain the same, I left you the last year.
To whom she answered in allegory other two verses: My loving Lord I will
well that ye wist,
The thread is spon, that never shall untwist.


Meaning, that her love was so steadfast and constant toward him as no time or
occasion could alter it. Virgill in his shepeherdly poemes called Eglogues used
as rusticall but fit allegory for the purpose thus: Claudite iam riuos pueri
sat prata biberunt.


Which I English thus: Stop up your streams (my lads) the medes have drunk
there fill.


As much to say, leave of now, ye have talked of the matter enough: for the
shepherds guise in many places is by opening certain sluices to water their
pastures, so as when they are wet enough they shut them again: this
application is full Allegoricke.

Ye have another manner of Allegory not full, but mixed, as he that wrate thus:
The clouds of care have coured all my cost,
The storms of strife, do threaten to appear:
The waves of woe, wherein my ship is toste.
Have broke the banks, where lay my life so dear.
Chippes of ill chance, are fallen amidst my choice,
To mar the mind that meant for to rejoice.


I call him not a full Allegory, but mixed, because he discouers withal what
the cloud, storm, wave, and the rest are, which in a full allegory should not
be discovered, but left at large to the readers judgment and conjecture.

We dissemble again under covert and dark speeches, when we speak by way of
riddle (Enigma) of which the sense can hardly be picked out, but by the parties
own assoile, as he that said: Enigma. or the Riddle.
It is my mother well I wot,
And yet the daughter that I begot.


Meaning it by the ise which is made of frozen water, the same being molten by
the sun or fire, makes water again.

My mother had an old woman in her nurserie, who in the winter nights would put
us forth many pretty ridles, whereof this is one: I have a thing and rough it is
And in the midst a hole I wis:
There came a young man with his ginne,
And he put it a handful in.


The good old Gentlewoman would tell us that were children how it was meant by
a furd glooue. Some other naughty body would peradventure have construed it
not half so mannerly. The riddle is pretty but that it holds too much of the
Cachemphaton or foul speech and may be drawn to a reprobate sense.

We dissemble after a sort, when we speak by common proverbs, Parimia, or
Proverb.
or, as we use to call them, old said sawes, as thus: As the old cock crows
so does the chick:
A bad Cook that cannot his own fingers lick.


Meaning by the first, that the young learn by the old, either to be good or
evil in their behauiours: by the second, that he is not to be counted a wise
man, who being in authority, and having the administration of many good and
great things, will not serve his own turn and his friends whilst he may, and
many such prouerbiall speeches: as, Totnesse is turned French, for a strange
alteration: Skarborow warning, for a sudden commandment, allowing no respect
or delay to bethink a man of his business. Note nevertheless a diversity, for
the two last examples be proverbs, the two first prouerbiall speeches.

Ye do likewise dissemble, when ye speak in derision or mockery, and that
may be many ways: as sometime in sport, sometime in earnest, and privily, and
apertly, and pleasantly, and bitterly: Ironia, or the Dry mock.
but first by the figure Ironia, which we call the dry mock: as he that said
to a bragging Ruffian, that threatened he would kill and slay, no doubt you are
a good man of your hands: or, as it was said by a French king, to one that
praide his reward, showing how he had been cut in the face at a certain battle
fought in his service: ye may see, quoth the king, what it is to run away and
look backwards. And as Alphonso king of Naples, said to one that proffered to
take his ring when he washed before dinner, this will serve another well: meaning
that the Gentlem^ had another time taken the^, and because the king forgot to
ask for them, never restored his ring again.

Sarcasmus. or the Bitter taunt.
Or when we deride with a certain severity, we may call it the bitter taunt
[Sarcasmus] as Charles the fifth Emperor answered the Duke of Arskot,
beseeching him recompense of service done at the siege of Renty, against Henry
the French king, where the Duke was taken prisoner, and afterward escaped clad
like a Colliar. Thou were taken, quoth the Emperor, like a coward, and
scapedst like a Colliar, wherefore get thee home and live upon thine own. Or
as king Henry the eight said to one of his privy chamber, who sued for Sir
Anthony Rowse, a knight of Norfolk, that his Majesty would be good unto him,
for that he was an ill beggar. Quoth the king again, if he be ashamed to beg,
we are ashamed to give. Or as Charles the fifth Emperor, having taken in
battle John Frederike Duke of Saxon, with the Lantgraue of Hessen and others:
this Duke being a man of monstrous bigness and corpulence, after the Emperor
had seen the prisoners, said to those that were about him, I have gone a
hunting many times, yet never took I such a swine before.

Asteismus. or the Merry scoff. otherwise The civil jest.
Or when we speak by manner of pleasantery, or merry skoffe, that is, by a kind
of mock, whereof the sense is farrefet, and without any gall or offense. The
Greeks call it [Asteismus] we may term it the civil jest, because it is a
mirth very full of civility, and such as the most civil men do use. As Cato
said to one that had given him a good knock on the head with a long piece of
timber he bare on his shoulder, and then bad him beware: what (quoth Cato) will thou strike me again? for ye know, a warning should be given before a man have
received harm, and not after. And as king Edward the sixth, being of young
years, but old in wit, said to one of his privy chamber, who sued for a
pardon for one that was condemned for a robbery, telling the king that it was
but a small trifle, not past sixteen shillings matter which he had taken:
quoth the king again, but I warrant you the fellow was sorry it had not been
sixteen pound: meaning how the malefactors intent was as evil in that trifle,
as if it had been a greater sum of money. In these examples if ye mark there
is no grief or offense ministered as in those other before, and yet are very
witty, and spoken in plain derision.

The Emperor Charles the fifth was a man of very few words, and delighted little
in talk. His brother king Ferdinando being a man of more pleasant discourse,
sitting at the table with him* said, I pray your Majesty be not so silent, but
let us talk a little. What need that brother, quoth the Emperor, since you
have words enough for us both.

Or when we give a mock with a scornful countenance as in some smiling sort
looking aside or by drawing the lip awry, or shrinking up the nose; the
Greeks called it Micterismus, Micterismus. or the Fleering fru^pe.
we may term it a fleering frumpe, as he that said to one whose words he
believed not, no doubt Sir of that. This fleering frumpe is one of the Courtly
graces of hicke the scorner.

Or when we deride by plain and flat contradiction, Antiphrasis. or the Broad
floute.
as he that saw a dwarf go in the street said to his companion that walked
with him: See yonder giant: and to a Negro or woman blackemoore, in good sooth
year a fair one, we may call it the broad floute.

Or when ye give a mock under smooth and lowly words as he that hard one call
him all to naught and say, thou art sure to be hanged ere thou dye: quoth
the other very soberly. Sir I know your maistership speaks but in jest,
Charie^tismus. or the Privy nippe.
the Greeks call it (charientismus) we may call it the privy nippe, or a myld
and appeasing mockery: all these be soldiers to the figure allegoria and fight
under the banner of dissimulation.

Nevertheless ye have yet two or three other figures that smatch a spice of
the same false semblant, Hiperbole. or the Over reacher, otherwise called the
loud liar.
but in another sort and manner of phrase, whereof one is when we speak in the
superlatiue and beyond the limits of credit, that is by the figure which the
Greeks call Hiperbole, the Latins Dementiens or the lying figure. I for his
immoderate excess call him the over reacher right with his original or [lowd
lyar] and me thinks not amiss: now when I speak that which neither I my self
think to be true, nor would have any other body believe, it must needs be a
great dissimulation, because I mean nothing less then that I speak, and this
manner of speech is used, when either we would greatly advance or greatly abase
the reputation of any thing or person, and must be used very discreetly, or else
it will seem odious, for although a praise or other report may be allowed
beyond credit, it may not be beyond all measure, specially in the proseman, as
he that was speaker in a Parliament of king Henry the eights reign, in his
Oration which ye know is of ordinary to be made before the Prince at the first
assembly of both houses, old seem to praise his Majesty thus. What should I
go about to recite your Majesty's innumerable virtues, even as much as if I
took upon me to number the stars of the sky, or to tell the sands of the
sea. This Hyperbole was both vltra fidem and also vltra modum, and therefore of
a grave and wise Counselor made the speaker to be accounted a gross
flattering fool: peradventure if he had used it thus, it had been better and
nevertheless a lie too, but a more moderate lie and no less to the purpose of
the kings commendation, thus. I am not able with any words sufficiently to
express your Majesty's regal virtues, your kingly merits also toward us
your people and realm are so exceeding many, as your praises therefore are
infinite, your honor and renown everlasting: And yet all this if we shall
measure it by the rule of exact verity, is but an untruth, yet a more cleanely
commendation then was master Speakers. Nevertheless as I said before if we
fall a praising, specially of our mistresses virtue, beauty, or other good
parts, we be allowed now and then to ouer-reach a little by way of comparison
as he that said thus in praise of his Lady.

Give place ye lovers here before,
That spent your boasts and braggs in vain:
My Ladies beauty passes more,
The best of your I dare well said:
Then does the sun the candle light,
Or brightest day the darkest night.
And as a certain noble Gentlewoman lame^ting at the unkindness of her lover
said very pretily in this figure.

But since it will no better be,
My tears shall never blin:
To moist the earth in such degree,
That I may drown therein:
That by my death all men may say,
Lo weemen are as true as they.
Then have ye the figure Periphrasis, holding somewhat of the disse^bler, by
reason of a secret intent not appearing by the words, Periphrasis, or the
Figure of ambage.
as when we go about the bush, and will not in one or a few words express that
thing which we desire to have known, but do chose rather to do it by many
words, as we our selves wrote of our Sovereign Lady thus: Whom Princes serve,
and Realms obey,
And greatest of Bryton kings begot:
She came abroad even yesterday,
When such as saw her, knew her not.


And the rest that follows, meaning her Majesty's person, which we would
seem to hide leaving her name unspoken, to the intent the reader should guess
at it: nevertheless upon the matter did so manifestly disclose it, as any
simple judgment might easily perceive by whom it was meant, that is by Lady
Elizabeth, Queen of England and daughter to king Henry the eight, and therein
rests the dissimulation. It is one of the gallantest figures among the poets
so it be used discretely and in his right kind, but many of these makers that
be not half their crafts masters, do very often abuse it and also many
ways. For if the thing or person they go about to describe by circumstance, be
by the writers improuidence otherwise bewrayed, it loses the grace of a
figure, as he that said: The tenth of March when Aries received,
Dan Phoebus rays into his horned head.


Intending to describe the spring of the year, which every man knows of
himself, hearing the day of March named: the verses be very good the figure
naught worth, if it were meant in Periphrase, for the matter, that is the
season of the year which should have been covertly disclosed by ambage, was by
and by blabbed out by naming the day of the month, and so the purpose of the
figure disapointed, peradventure it had bin better to have said thus: The month
and day when Aries receiud,
Dan Phoebus rays into his horned head.


For now there remains for the Reader somewhat to study and guess upon, and
yet the spring time to the learned judgment sufficiently expressed.

The Noble Earl of Surrey wrote thus: In winters just return, when Boreas began
his reign,
And every tree unclothed him fast as nature taught the^ plain.


I would feign learn of some good maker, whether the Earl spoke this in
figure of Periphrase or not, for mine own opinion I think that if he meant to
describe the winter season, he would not have disclosed it so broadly, as to
say winter at the first word, for that had been against the rules of art, and
without any good judgment: which in so learned and excellent a personage we
ought not to suspect, we say therefore that for winter it is no Periphrase but
language at large: we say for all that, having regard to the second verse that
follows it is a Periphrase, seeming that thereby he intended to show in what
part of the winter his loves gave him anguish, that is in the time which we
call the fall of the leaf, which begins in the month of October, and stands
very well with the figure to be uttered in that sort notwithstanding winter be
named before, for winter has many parts: such namely as do not shake of the
leaf, nor unclothe the trees as here is mentioned: thus may ye judge as I do,
that this noble Earl wrate excellently well and to purpose. Moreover, when a
maker will seem to use circumlocution to set forth any thing pleasantly and
figuratively, yet no less plain to a ripe reader, then if it were named
expressly, and when all is done, no man can perceive it to be the thing
intended. This is a foul oversight in any writer as did a good fellow, who
weening to show his cunning, would needs by periphrase express the realm of
Scotland in no less then eight verses, and when he had said all, no man could
imagine it to be spoken of Scotland: and did besides many other faults in his
verse, so deadly belie the matter by his description, as it would pity any
good maker to hear it.

Synechdoche. or the Figure of quick conceit.
Now for the shutting up of this Chapter, will I remember you farther of that
manner of speech which the Greeks call Synecdoche, and we the figure of
[quicke conceite] who for the reasons before alleged, may be put under the
speeches allegorical, because of the darkness and duplicitie of his sense: as
when one would tell me how the French king was overthrown at Saint Quintans, I
am enforced to think that it was not the king himself in person, but the
Constable of France with the French kings power. Or if one would say, the
town of Andwerpe were famished, it is not so to be taken, but of the people of
the town of Andwerp, and this conceit being drawn aside, and (as it were)
from one thing to another, it encombers the mind with a certain imagination
what it may be that is meant, and not expressed: as he that said to a young
gentlewoman, who was in her chamber making her self unready. Mistress will ye
give me leave to unlace your peticote, meaning (perchance) the other thing that
might follow such vnlasing. In the old time, whosoever was allowed to undo
his Ladies girdle, he might lie with her all night: wherefore, the taking of a
woman's maydenhead away, was said to undo her girdle. Virgineam dissoluit
zonam, says the Poet, conceiving out of a thing precedent, a thing subsequent.
This may suffice for the knowledge of this figure [quicke conceit.]

CHAP. XIX.
Of Figures sententious, otherwise called Rhetorical.

NOw if our presupposall be true, that the Poet is of all other the most
ancient Orator, as he that by good and pleasant persuasions first reduced the
wild and beastly people into public societies and civility of life,
insinuating unto them, under fictions with sweet and colored speeches, many
wholesome lessons and doctrines, then no doubt there is nothing so fit for
him, as to be furnished with all the figures that be Rhetorical, and such as
do most beautify language with eloquence and sententiousnes. Therefore, since
we have already allowed to our maker his auricular figures, and also his
sensable, by which all the words and clauses of his meeters are made as well
tunable to the ear, as stirring to the mind, we are now by order to bestow
upon him those other figures which may execute both offices, and all at once to
beautify and give sense and sententiousnes to the whole language at large. So
as if we should entreat our maker to play also the Orator, and ^^^ther it be
to plead, or to praise, or to advise, that in all three cases he may utter,
and also persuade both copiously and vehemently.

And your figures rhethoricall, besides their remembered ordinary virtues, that
is, sente^tiousnes, and copious amplification, or enlargement of language, do
also contain a certain sweet and melodious manner of speech, in which
respect, they may, after a sort, be said auricular: because the ear is no
less ravished with their current tune, than the mind is with their
sententiousnes. For the ear is properly but an instrument of conueyance for
the mind, to apprehend the sense by the sound. And our speech is made
melodious or harmonicall, not only by strayned tunes, as those of Music, but
also by choice of smoothe words: and thus, or thus, marshalling them in their
comeliest construction and order, and as well by sometimes sparing, sometimes
spending them more or less liberally, and carrying or transporting of them
farther off or nearer, setting them with sundry relations, and variable forms,
in the ministry and use of words, do breed no little alteration in man. For
to say truly, what else is man but his mind? which, whosoever have skill to
compass, and make yielding and flexible, what may not he command the body to
perform? He therefore that has vanquished the mind of man, has made the
greatest and most glorious conquest. But the mind is not assailable unless it
be by sensible approches, whereof the audible is of greatest force for
instruction or discipline: the visible, for apprehension of exterior knowledges
as the Philosopher says. Therefore the well tuning of your words and clauses
to the delight of the ear, makes your information no less plausible to the
mind than to the ear: no though you filled them with never so much sense and
sententiousnes. Then also must the whole tale (if it tend to persuasion) bear
his just and reasonable measure, being rather with the largest, than with the
scarcest. For like as one or two drops of water perce not the flint stone, but
many and often droppings do: so cannot a few words (be they never so pithie or
sententious) in all cases and to all manner of minds, make so deep an
impression, as a more multitude of words to the purpose discreetely, and
without superfluity uttered: the mind being no less vanquished with large
load of speech, than the limbs are with heavy burden. Sweetenes of speech,
sentence, and amplification, are therefore necessary to an excellent Orator and
Poet, ne may in no wise be spared from any of them.

And first of all others your figure that works by iteration or repetition of
one word or clause does much alter and affect the ear and also the mind of
the hearer, and therefore is counted a very brave figure both with the Poets
and rhetoriciens, and this repetition may be in seven sorts.

Repetition in the first degree we call the figure of Report according to the
Greek original, Anaphora, or the Figure of Report.
and is when we make one word begin, and as they are wont to say, lead the
dance to many verses in suit, as thus.

To think on death it is a misery,
To think on life it is a vanity:
To think on the world verily it is,
To think that hear man has no perfect bliss.
And this written by Sir Walter Raleigh of his greatest mistress in most
excellent verses.

In vain mine eyes in vain you wast your tears,
In vain my sighs the smokes of my despaires:
In vain you search the earth and heavens above,
In vain ye seek, for fortune keeps my love.
Or as the buffon in our interlude called Lusty London said very knauishly and
like himself.

Many a fair less in London town,
Many a bavvdie basket borne up and down:
Many a broker in a third bare gown.
Many a bankrowte scarce worth a crown.
In London.
Ye have another sort of repetition quite contrary to the former when ye make
one word finish many verses in suit, Antistrophe, or the Counter turn.
and that which is harder, to finish many clauses in the midst of your verses
or dittie (for to make them finish the verse in our vulgar it should hinder the
rhyme) and because I do find few of our English makers use this figure, I have
set you down two little ditties which our selves in our younger years played
upon the Antistrophe, for so is the figures name in Greek: one upon the
mutable love of a Lady, another upon the meritorious love of Christ our
Savior, thus.

Her lowly looks, that gave life to my love,
With spiteful speech, curstness and cruelty:
She killed my love, let her rigor remove,
Her cherefull lights and speeches of pity
Revive my love: anon with great disdain,
She shunnes my love, and after by a train
She seeks my love, and says she loves me most,
But seeing her love, so lightly won and lost:
I longd not for her love, for well I thought,
Firm is the love, if it be as it ought.
The second upon the merits of Christ's passion toward mankind, thus, Our
Christ the son of God, chief author of all good,
Was he by his allmight, that first created man:
And with the costly price, of his most precious blood,
He that redeemed man: and by his instance won
Grace in the sight of God, his only father dear,
And reconciled man: and to make man his peer
Made himself very man: brief to conclude the case,
This Christ both God and man, he all and only is:
The man brings man to God and to all heavens bliss.


The Greeks call this figure Antistrophe, the Latins, conuersio, I following
the original call him the counterturne, because he turns counter in the
midst of every meetre.

Take me the two former figures and put them into one, and it is that which the
Greeks call symploche, the Latins complexio, or conduplicatio, Symploche, or
the figure of reply.
and is a manner of repetition, when one and the self word does begin and end
many verses in suit and so wrappes up both the former figures in one, as he
that sportingly complained of his untrusty mistress, thus.

Who made me shent for her loves sake?
Mine own mistress.
Who would not seem my part to take,
Mine own mistress.
What made me first so well content
Her courtesy.
What makes me now so sore repent
Her cruelty.
The Greeks name this figure Symploche, the Latins Complexio, perchance for
that he seems to hold in and to wrap up the verses by reduplication, so as
nothing can fall out. I had rather call him the figure of reply.

Ye have another sort of repetition when with the word by which you finish
your verse, Anadiplosis, or the Redouble.
ye begin the next verse with the same, as thus: Comfort it is for man to
have a wife,
Wife chaste, and wise, and lowly all her life.


Or thus: Your beutie was the cause of my first love,
Love while I live, that I may sore repent.


The Greeks call this figure Anadiplosis, I call him the Redouble as the
original bears.

Ye have an other sort of repetition, Epanalepsis, or the Echo sound.
otherwise, the slow return.
when ye make one word both begin and end your verse, which therefore I call
the slow return, otherwise the Echo sound, as thus: Much must he be beloved,
that loves much,
Fear many must he needs, whom many fear.


Unless I called him the echo sound, I could not tell what name to give him,
unless it were the slow return.

Ye have another sort of repetition when in one verse or clause of a verse, ye
iterate one word without any intermission, as thus: Epizeuxis, the Underlay. or
Coocko-spel.
It was Maryne, Maryne that wrought mine woe.


And this bemoaning the departure of a dear friend.

The chiefest staff of mine assured stay,
With no small grief, is gone, is gone away.
And that of Sir Walter Raleighs very sweet.

With wisdoms eyes had but blind fortune seen,
Than had my love, my love for ever been.
The Greeks call him Epizeuxis, the Latins Subiunctio, we may call him the
underlay, me thinks if we regard his manner of iteration, and would depart from
the original, we might very properly, in our vulgar and for pleasure call him
the cuckowspell, for right as the cuckoo repeats his lay, which is but one
manner of note, and does not insert any other tune betwixt, and sometimes for
have stammers out two or three of them one immediately after another, as cuck,
cuck, cuckoo, so does the figure Epizeuxis in the former verses, Maryne,
Maryne, without any intermission at all.

Ploche, or the Doubler.
Yet have ye one sort of repetition, which we call the doubler, and is as the
next before, a speedy iteration of one word, but with some little intermissio^
by inserting one or two words between, as in a most excellent dittie written
by Sir Walter Raleigh these two closing verses: Yet when I savve my self to
you was true,
I loved my self, because my self loved you.


And this spoken in common Proverb.

An ape will be an ape, by kind as they say,
Though that ye clad him all in purple array.
Or as we once sported upon a fellows name who was called Woodcock, and for an
ill part he had played entreated favor by his friend.

I pray you entreat no more for the man,
Woodcocke will be a vvoodcocke do what ye can.
Now also be there many other sorts of repetition if a man would use them, but
are nothing commendable, and therefore are not observed in good poesy, as a
vulgar rimer who doubled one word in the end of every verse, thus: adieu, adieu,
my face, my face.
And an other that did the like in the beginning of his verse, thus: To love
him and love him, as sinners should do.


These repetitio^s be not figurative but fantastical, for a figure is ever
used to a purpose, either of beauty or of efficacy: and these last recited be
to no purpose, for neither can ye say that it vrges affection, nor that it
beautifieth or enforces the sense, nor has any other subtilitie in it, and
therefore is a very foolish impertinency of speech, and not a figure.

Prosonomasia, or the Nicknamer.
Ye have a figure by which ye play with a couple of words or names much
resembling, and because the one seems to answer the other by manner of
illusion, and does, as it were, nick him, I call him the Nicknamer. If any
other man can give him a fitter English name, I will not be angry, but I am
sure mine is very near the original sense of Prosonomasia, and is rather a
by-name given in sport, than a surname given of any earnest purpose. As,
Tiberius the Emperor, because he was a great drinker of wine, they called him
by way of derision to his own name, Caldius Biberius Mero, in stead of
Claudius Tiberius Nero: and so a jesting friar that wrate against Erasmus,
called him by resemblance to his own name, Errans mus, and are maintained by
this figure Prosonomasia, or the Nicknamer. But every name given in jest or by
way of a surname, if it do not resemble the true, is not by this figure, as,
the Emperor of Greece, who was surnamed Constantinus C^pronimus, because he
beshit the foont at the time he was christened: and so ye may see the
difference betwixt the figures Antonomasia and Prosonomatia. Now when such
resemblance happens between words of another nature, and not upon men's names,
yet does the Poet or maker find pretty sport to play with them in his verse,
specially the Comicall Poet and the Epigrammatist. Sir Philip Sidney in a
dittie plaide very pretily with these two words, Love and live, thus.

And all my life I will confess,
The less I love, I live the less.
And we in our Interlude called the woer, played with these two words, lubber
and lover, thus, the country clown came and woed a young maid of the City,
and being agreeued to come so often, and not to have his answer, said to the old
nurse very impatiently.

Iche pray you good mother tell our young dame, Woer.

Whence I am come and what is my name,
I cannot come a woing every day.
Quoth the nurse.

They be lubbers not lovers that so use to say. Nurse.

Or as one replied to his mistress charging him with some disloyalty toward
her.

Prove me madame ere ye fall to reprove,
Meek minds should rather excuse than accuse.
Here the words prove and reprove, excuse and accuse, do pleasantly encounter,
and (as it were) mock one another by their much resemblance: and this is by the
figure Prosonomatia, as well as if they were men's proper names, alluding to each
other.

Then have ye a figure which the Latins call Traductio, and I the tranlacer:
Traductio, or the Tranlacer.
which is when ye turn and tranlace a word into many sundry shapes as the
Tailor does his garment, and after that sort do play with him in your dittie:
as thus, Who lives in love his life is full of fears,
To lose his love, liuelode or liberty
But lively sprites that young and recklesse be,
Think that there is no living like to theirs.


Or as one who much gloried in his own wit, whom Persius taxed in a verse very
pithily and pleasantly, thus.

Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter.
Which I have turned into English, not so briefly, but more at large of purpose
the better to declare the nature of the figure: as thus, Thou vveenest thy wit
naught vvorth if other vveet it not
As well as thou thy self, but o thing well I vvot,
Who so in earnest vveenes, he does in mine advise,
Show himself vvitlesse, or more witty than wise.


Here ye see how in the former rhyme this word life is tranlaced into live,
living, lively, liuelode: and in the latter rhyme this word wit is translated
into weete, ween, wotte, witless, witty and wise: which come all from one
original.

Ye have a figurative speech which the Greeks call Antipophora, I name him the
Responce, and is when we will seem to ask a question to the intent we will
answer it our selves, Antipophora, or Figure of responce.
and is a figure of argument and also of amplification. Of argument, because
proponing such matter as our adversary might object and then to answer it our
selves, we do unfurnish and prevent him of such help as he would otherwise
have used for himself: then because such objection and answer spend much
language it serves as well to amplify and enlarge our tale. Thus for example.

Wily vvorldling come tell me I thee pray,
Wherein hopest thou, that makes thee so to swell?
Riches? alack it taries not a day,
But where fortune the fickle list to dvvell*
In thy children? how hardly shall thou find,
Them all at once, good and thriftie and kind:
Thy wife? o fair but frail metal to trust,
Servants? what thieves? what treachours and iniust?
Honor perchance? it restes in other men:
Glory? a smoke: but wherein hopest thou then?
In Gods justice? and by what merit tell?
In his mercy? o now thou speak well,
But thy lewd life has lost his love and grace,
Daunting all hope to put despair in place.
We read that Crates the Philosopher Cinicke in respect of the manifold
discommodities of man's life, held opinion that it was best for man never to
have been borne or soon after to dye, [Optimum non nasci vel cito mori] of
whom certain verses are left written in Greek which I have Englished, thus.

What life is the liefest? the needy is full of woe and awe,
The wealthy full of brawle and brabbles of the law:
To be a married man? how much art thou beguild,
Seeking thy rest by carke, for household wife and child:
To till it is a toil, to grase some honest gain,
But such as gotten is with great hazard and pain:
The sayler of his ship, the merchant of his ware,
The soldier in arms, how full of dread and care?
A shrewd wife brings thee bate, wiue not and never thrive,
Children a charge, childlesse the greatest lack alive:
Youth witless is and frail, age sickly and forlorn,
Then better to dye soon, or never to be borne.
Metrodorus the Philosopher Stoic was of a contrary opinion reuersing all the
former suppositions against Crates, thus.

What life list ye to lead? in good City and town
Is won both wit and wealth, Court gets us great renown:
Country keeps us in heal, and quietness of mind,
Where wholesome aires and exercise and pretty sports we find:
Traffic it turns to gain, by land and eke by seas,
The land-borne lives safe, the foreign at his ease:
Householder has his home, the roge romes with delight,
And makes more, merry meals, then does the Lordly wight:
Wed and thou have a bed, of solace and of joy,
Wed not and have a bed, of rest without annoy:
The settled love is safe, sweet is the love at large,
Children they are a store, no children are no charge,
Lusty and gay is youth, old age honored and wise:
Then not to dye or be unborn, is best in mine advise.
Edward Earl of Oxford a most noble and learned Gentleman made in this figure
of responce an emble of desire otherwise called Cupide which for his
excellency and wit, I set down some part of the verses, for example.

When were thou borne desire?
In pomp and pryme of May,
By whom sweet boy were thou begot?
By good conceit men say,
Tell me who was thy nurse?
Fresh youth in sugared joy.
What was thy meat and daily food?
Sad sighs with great annoy.
What had thou then to drink?
Unfeigned lovers tears.
What cradle were thou rocked in?
In hope deuoyde of fears.
Syneciosis, or the Cross copling.
Ye have another figure which me thinks may well be called (not much sweruing
from his original in sense) the Crosse-couple, because it takes me two
contrary words, and tieth them as it were in a pair of couples, and so makes
them agree like good fellows, as I saw once in France a wolf coupled with a
mastiffe, and a fox with a hounde. Thus it is.

The niggards fault and the unthrifts is all one,
For neither of them both knows how to use his own.
Or thus.

The covetous miser, of all his goods ill got,
As Well wants that he has, as that he has not.
In this figure of the Crosse-couple we wrate for a forlorn lover complaining
of his mistress cruelty these verses among other.

Thus for your sake I daily dye,
And do but seem to live in deed:
Thus is my bliss but misery,
My lucre loss without your meede.
Ye have another figure which by his nature we may call the Rebound,
Atanaclasis. or the Rebounde.
alluding to the tennis ball which being smitten with the racket reboundes
back again, and where the last figure before played with two words somewhat
like, this plays with one word written all alike but carrying diverse senses
as thus. The maid that soon married is, soon marred is.
Or thus better because married and marred be different in one letter.

To pray for you ever I cannot refuse,
To pray upon you I should you much abuse.
Or as we once sported upon a country fellow who came to run for the best
game, and was by his occupation a dyer and had very big swelling legs.

He is but course to run a course,
Whose shankes are bigger then his thye:
Yet is his luck a little worse,
That often dies before he dye.
Where ye see this word course and dye, used in diverse senses, one giving the
Rebounde upon the other.

Ye have a figure which as well by his Greek and Latin originals, and also by
allusion to the manner of a man's gate or going may be called the marching
figure, for after the first step all the rest proceed by double the space,
and so in our speech one word proceeds double to the first that was spoken,
and goes as it were by strides or paces: it may as well be called the clyming
figure, Clymax. or the Marching figure.
for Clymax is as much to say as a ladder, as in one of our Epitaphes showing
how a very mean man by his wisdom and good fortune came to great estate and
dignity.

His virtue made him wise, his wisdom brought him wealth,
His wealth wan many friends, his friends made much supply:
Of aides in weal and woe in sickness and in health,
Thus came he from a low, to sit in seat so hye.
Or as Ihean de Mehune the French Poet.

Peace makes plenty, plenty makes pride,
Pride breeds quarrel, and quarrel brings war:
War brings spoil, and spoil poverty,
Poverty patience, and patience peace:
So peace brings war, and war brings peace.
Antimetauole or the Countercha^ge.
Ye have a figure which takes a couple of words to play with in a verse, and by
making them to change and shift one into others place they do very pretily
exchange and shift the sense, as thus.

We dwell not here to build us boures,
And halles for pleasure and good cheer:
But halles we build for us and ours,
To dwell in them whilst we are here.
Meaning that we dwell not here to build, but we build to dwell, as we live not
to eat, but eat to live, or thus.

We wish not peace to maintain cruel war,
But we make war to maintain us in peace.
Or thus.

If Poesy be, as some have said,
A speaking picture to the eye:
Then is a picture not denaid,
To be a muet Poesy.
Or as the Philosopher Musonius vvrote.

With pleasure if we work unhonestly and ill,
The pleasure passes, the bad it bideth still:
Well if we work with travail and with pains,
The pain passes and still the good remains.
A witty fellow in Rome wrate under the Image of Caesar the Dictator these two
verses in Latin, which because they are spoken by this figure of
Counterchaunge I have turned into a couple of English verses very well keeping
the grace of the figure.

Brutus for casting out of kings, was first of Consuls past,
Caesar for casting Consuls out, is of ^ur kings the last.
Cato of any Senator not only the grauest but also the promptest and wittiest
in any civil scoff, misliking greatly the engrossing of offices in Rome that
one man should have many at once, and a great number go without that were as
able men, said thus by Counterchaunge.

It seems your offices are very little worth,
Or very few of you worthy of offices.
Again: In trifles earnest as any man can be,
In earnest matters no such trifler as he.


Ye have another figure much like to the Sarcasmus, Insultatio, or the
Disdainefull.
or bitter taunt we spoke of before: and is when with proud and insolent
words, we do vpbraid a man, or ride him as we term it: for which cause the
Latins also call it Insultatio, I choose to name him the Reproachful or
scorner, as when Queen Dido saw, that for all her great love and
entertainements bestowed upon Aeneas, he would needs depart, and follow the
Oracle of his destinies, she brake out in a great rage and said very
disdainefully.

Hye thee, and by the wild waves and the wind,
Seek Italy and Realms for thee to reign,
If piteous Gods have power amidst the main,
On ragged rocks thy penance thou may find.
Or as the poet Iuuenall reproched the covetous Merchant, who for lucres sake
passed on no peril either by land or sea, thus: Go now and give thy life unto
the wind,
Trusting unto a piece of brucklewood,
Four inches from thy death or seven good
The thickest planke for shipboord that we find.


Ye have another figure very pleasant and fit for amplification, Antitheton, or
the The renconter.
which to answer the Greek term, we may call the encounter, but following the
Latin name by reason of his contentious nature, we may call him the
Quarreller, for so be al such persons as delight in taking the contrary part of
whatsoever shall be spoken: when I was a scholar in Oxford they called every
such one Johannes ad oppositum.

Good have I done you, much, harm did I never none,
Ready to joy your gains, your losses to bemone,
Why therefore should you grutch so sore at my welfare:
Who only bred your bliss, and never causd your care.
Or as it is in these two verses where one speaking of Cupids bow, deciphered
thereby the nature of sensual love, whose beginning is more pleasant than the
end, thus allegorically and by antitheton.

His bent is sweet, his loose is somewhat sour,
In joy begun, ends often in woeful hour.
Master Diar in this quarelling figure.

Nor love has now the force, on me which it ones had,
Your frowns can neither make me mourn, nor favors make me glad.
Isocrates the Greek Orator was a little too full of this figure, and so was
the Spaniard that wrote the life of Marcus Aurelius, and many of our modern
writers in vulgar, use it in excess and incur the vice of fond affectation:
otherwise the figure is very commendable.

In this quarrelling figure we once played this merry Epigrame of an importune
and shrewd wife, thus: My neighbor has a wife, not fit to make him thrive,
But good to kill a quick man, or make a dead revive.
So shrewd she is for God, so cunning and so wise,
To counter with her goodman, and all by contraries.
For when he is merry, she lurcheth and she loures,
When he is sad she singes, or laughes it out by hours.
Bid her be still her tongue to talk shall never cease,
When she should speak and please, for spite she holds her peace,
Bid spare and she will spend, bid spend she spares as fast,
What first ye would have done, be sure it shall be last.
Say go, she comes, say come, she goes, and leaves him all alone,
Her husband (as I think) calls her ouerthvvart Ione.


Erotema. or the Questioner.
There is a kind of figurative speech when we ask many questions and look for
none answer, speaking indeed by interrogation, which we might as well say by
affirmation. This figure I call the Questioner or inquisitiue, as when Medea
excusing her great cruelty used in the murder of her own children which she
had by Jason, said: Was I able to make them I pray you tell,
And am I not able to mar them all asvvell?


Or as another wrote very commendably.

Why strive I with the stream, or hoppe against the hill,
Or search that never can be found, and loose my labor still?
Cato understanding that the Senate had appointed three citizens of Rome for
ambassadors to the king of Bithinia, whereof one had the Gowte, another the
Meigrim, the third very little courage or discretion to be employed in any such
business, said by way of skoffe in this figure.

Must not (trovve ye) this message be well sped,
That has neither heart, nor heels, nor head?
And as a great Princess answered her seruitour, who distrusting in her
favors toward him, praised his own constancy in these verses.

No fortune base or frail can alter me:
To whom she in this figure repeting his words: No fortune base or frail can
alter thee.
And can so blind a vvitch so conquer me?


The figure of exclamation, Ecphonisis. or the Outcry.
I call him [the outcrie] because it vtters our mind by all such words as do
show any extreme passion, whether it be by way of exclamation or crying out,
admiration or wondering, imprecation or cursing, obtestation or taking God and
the world to witness, or any such like as declare an impotent affection, as
Chaucer of the Lady Cresseida by exclamation.

O soppe of sorrow soonken into care,
O caytife Cresseid, for now and euermare.
Or as Gascoine wrote very passionatly and well to purpose.

Ay me the days that I in dole consume,
Alas the nights which witness well mine vvoe:
O vvrongfull world which make my fancy fume,
Fie fickle fortune, fie, fie thou art my foe:
Out and alas so froward is my chance,
No nights nor days, nor worlds can me auance.
Petrarche in a sonet which Sir Thomas Wiat Englished excellently well, said in
this figure by way of imprecation and obtestation: thus, Perdie I said it not,
Nor never thought to do:
As Well as I ye wot,
I have no power thereto:
"And if I did the lot
That first did me enchaine,
May never slake the knot
But strait it to my pain.
"And if I did each thing,
That may do harm or woe:
Continually may wring,
My heart where so I go.
"Report may always ring:
Of shame on me for aye,
If in my heart did spring,
The words that you do say.
"And if I did each star,
That is in heaven above.


And so forth, etc.

We use sometimes to proceed all by single words, without any close or
coupling, Brachiologa, or the Cutted comma
saving that a little pause or comma is given to every word. This figure for
pleasure may be called in our vulgar the cutted comma, for that there cannot be
a shorter division then at every words end. The Greeks in their language call
it short language, as thus.

Envy, malice, flattery, disdain,
Avarice, deceit, falshed, filthy gain.
If this loose language be used, not in single words, but in long clauses, it
is called Asindeton, and in both cases we utter in that fashion, when either we
be earnest, or would seem to make have.

Parison, or the Figure of even.
Ye have another figure which we may call the figure of even, because it goes
by clauses of egall quantity, and not very long, but yet not so short as the
cutted comma: and they give good grace to a dittie, but specially to a prose.
In this figure we once wrote in a melancholic humor these verses.

The good is geason, and short is his abode,
The bad bides long, and easy to be found:
Our life is loathsome, our sins a heavy lode,
Conscience a cursed judge, remorse a privy goade.
Disease, age and death still in our ear they round,
That hence we must the sickly and the sound:
Treading the steps that our forefathers troad,
Rich, poor, holy, wise, all flesh it goes to ground.
In a prose there should not be used at once of such even clauses past three or
four at the most.

When so ever we multiply our speech by many words or clauses of one sense, the
Greeks call it Sinonimia, as who would say, Sinonimia, or the Figure of store.
like or consenting names: the Latins having no fit term to give him,
called it by a name of event, for (said they) many words of one nature and
sense, one of them does expound another. And therefore they called this figure
the [Interpreter] I for my part had rather call him the figure of [store]
because plenty of one manner of thing in our vulgar we call so. Aeneas asking
whether his Captain Orontes were dead or alive, used this store of speeches
all to one purpose.

Is he alive,
Is he as I left him queauing and quick,
And has he not yet given up the ghost,
Among the rest of those that I have lost?
Or if it be in single words, then thus.

What is become of that beautiful face,
Those lovely looks, that favor amiable,
Those sweet features, and visage full of grace,
That countenance which is alonly able
To kill and cure?
Ye see that all these words, face, looks, favor, features, visage,
countenance, are in sense but all one. Which store, nevertheless, does much
beautify and enlarge the matter. So said another.

My faith, my hope, my trust, my God and eke my guide,
Stretch forth thy hand to save the soul, what ere the body bide.
Here faith, hope and trust be words of one effect, allowed to us by this
figure of store.

Otherwhiles we speak and be sorry for it, as if we had not well spoken, so
that we seem to call in our word again, Metanoia, or the Penitent.
and to put in another fitter for the purpose: for which respects the Greeks
called this manner of speech the figure of repentance: then for that upon
repentance commonly follows amendment* the Latins called it the figure of
correction, in that the speaker seems to reform that which was said amiss.
I following the Greek original, choose to call him the penitent, or
repentant: and singing in honor of the maiden Queen, meaning to praise her for
her greatness of courage, ouershooting my self, called it first by the name
of pride: then fearing least fault might be found with that term, by and by
turned this word pride to praise: resembling her Majesty to the Lion, being her
own noble armory, which by a sly construction purporteth magnanimity. Thus
in the latter end of a Parthemiade.

O peereles you, or else no one alive,
"Your pride serves you to feaze them all alone:
"Not pride madame, but praise of the lion,
To conquer all and be conquered by none.
And in another Parthemiade thus insinuating her Majesty's great constancy in
refusal of all marriages offered her, thus: "Her heart is hid none may it see,
"Marble or flinte folk vveene it be.


Which may employ rigor and cruelty, than corrects it thus.

Not flinte I trovve I am a lier,
But Siderite that seeles no fire.
By which is intended, that it proceeded of a cold and chaste complexion not
easily allured to love.

Antenagoge. or the Recompencer.
We have another manner of speech much like to the repentant, but does not as
the same recant or unsay a word that has been said before, putting another
fitter in his place, but having spoken any thing to deprave the matter or
party, he denies it not, but as it were helps it again by another more
favorable speech: and so seems to make amends, for which cause it is called
by the original name in both languages, the Recompencer, as he that was merrily
asked the question, whether his wife were not a shrewe as well as others of his
neighbors wives, answered in this figure as pleasantly, for he could not well
deny it.

I must needs say, that my wife is a shrevve,
But such a husvvife as I know but a fevve.
Another in his first proposition giving a very faint commendation to the
Courtiers life, weaning to make him amends, made it worser by a second
proposition, thus: The Courtiers life full delicate it is,
But where no wise man will ever set his blis.


And an other speaking to the incoragement of youth in study and to be come
excellent in letters and arms, said thus: Many are the pains and perils to be
past,
But great is the gain and glory at the last.


Our poet in his short ditties, Epithonema. or the Surclose.
but specially playing the Epigrammatist will use to conclude and shut up his
Epigram with a verse or two, spoken in such sort, as it may seem a manner of
allowance to all the premises, and that with a joyful approbation, which the
Latins call Acclamatio, we therefore call this figure the surcloze or
consenting close, as Virgill when he had largely spoken of of Prince Eneas his
success and fortunes concluded with this close.

Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.
In English thus: So huge a piece of work it was and so hie,
To rear the house of Roman progente.


Sir Philip Sidney very pretily closed up a dittie in this sort.

What medcine then, can such disease remove,
Where love breeds hate, and hate engenders love.
And we in a Partheniade written of her Majesty, declaring to what perils
virtue is generally subject, and applying that fortune to her self, closed it
up with this Epiphoneme.

Than if there be,
Any so cancard heart to grutch,
At your glories: my Queen: in vain,
Repining at your fatal reign:
It is for that they feel too much,
Of your bountee.
As who would say her own overmuch lenity and goodness, made her ill willers
the more bold and presumptuous.

Lucretius Carus the philosopher and poet inueighing sore against the abuses of
the superstitious religion of the Gentiles, and recompting the wicked fact of
king Agamemnon in sacrificing his only daughter Iphigenia, being a young
damsel of excellent beauty, to the intent to please the wrathful gods,
hinderers of his navigations, after he had said all, closed it up in this one
verse, spoken in Epiphonema.

Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum.
In English thus: Lo what an outrage, could cause to be done,
The peevish scruple of blind religion.


Auxesis, or the Auancer.
It happens many times that to urge and enforce the matter we speak of, we go
still mounting by degrees and increasing our speech with words or with
sentences of more weight one then another, and is a figure of great both
efficacy and ornament, as he that declaring the great calamity of an
unfortunate prince, said thus: He lost besides his children and his wife,
His realm, ronovvne, liege, liberty and life.


By which it appears that to any noble Prince the loss of his estate ought
not to be so grievous, as of his honor, nor any of them both like to the lack
of his liberty, but that life is the dearest detriment of any other. We call
this figure by the Greek original the Auancer or figure of increase because
every word that is spoken is one of more weight then another.

And as we lamented the cruelty of an inexorable and unfaithful mistress.

If by the laws of love it be a falt,
The faithful friend, in absence to forget:
But if it be (once do thy heart but halt,)
A secret sin: what forfet is so great:
As by despite in view of every eye,
The solemn vows often sworn with tears so salt,
And holy Leagues fast sealed with hand and heart:
For to repeal and break so vvilfully?
But now (alas) without all just desert,
My lot is for my troth and much good will,
To reap disdain, hatred and rude refuse,
Or if ye would work me some greater ill:
And of mine earned joys to feel no part,
What else is this (o cruel) but to use,
Thy murdring knife the guiltless blood to spill.
Where ye see how she is charged first with a fault, then with a a secret
sin, afterward with a foul forfet, last of all with a most cruel and bloody
deed. And thus again in a certain lovers complaint made to the like effect.

They say it is a ruth to see thy lover need,
But you can see me weep, but you can see me bleed:
And never shrink nor shame, ne shed no tear at all,
You make my wounds your self, and fill them up with gall:
Yea you can see me sound, and faint for want of breath,
And gasp and groan for life, and struggle still with death,
What can you now do more; swear by your maydenhead,
Then for to flea me quick, or strip me being dead.
In these verses you see how one cruelty surmounts another by degrees till it
come to very slaughter and beyond, for it is thought a despite done to a dead
carkas to be an evidence of greater cruelty then to have killed him.

After the Auancer follows the abbaser working by words and sentences of
extenuation or diminution. Meiosis. or the Disabler.
Whereupon we call him the Disabler or figure of Extenuation: and this
extenuation is used to diverse purposes, sometimes for modesties sake, and to
avoid the opinion of arrogancy, speaking of our selves or of ours, as he that
disabled himself to his mistress* thus.

Not all the skill I have to speak or do,
Which little is God wot (set love apart:)
Liueload nor life, and put them both thereto,
Can counterpeise the due of your desert.
It may be also done for despite to bring our adversaries in contempt, as he
that said by one (commended for a very brave soldier) disabling him
scornefully, thus.

A ^^^ise man (forsooth) and fit for the war,
Good at hand grippes, better to fight a far:
Whom bright weapon in show as it is said,
Yea his own shade, has often made afraid.
The subtilitie of the scoff lies in these Latin words [eminus and cominus
pugnare.] Also we use this kind of Extenuation when we take in hand to comfort
or cheer any perilous enterprise, making a great matter seem small, and of
little difficulty, and is much used by captains in the war, when they (to
give courage to their soldiers) will seem to disable the persons of their
enemies, and abase their forces, and make light of every thing that might be a
discouragement to the attempt, as Hanniball did in his Oration to his
soldiers, when they should come to pass the Alps to enter Italy, and for
sharpness of the weather, and steepness of the mountains their hearts began
to fail them.

We use it again to excuse a fault, and to make an offense seem less then it
is, by giving a term more favorable and of less vehemency then the troth
requires, as to say of a great robbery, that it was but a pilfry matter: of an
arrant ruffian that he is a tall fellow of his hands: of a prodigal fool,
that he is a kind hearted man: of a notorious unthrift, a lusty youth, and
such like phrases of extenuation, which fall more aptly to the office of the
figure Curry fauell before remembered.

And we use the like terms by way of pleasant familiarity, and as it were for
a Courtly manner of speech with our egalls or inferiors, as to call a young
Gentlewoman Mall for Mary, Nell for Elner: Jack for John, Robin for Robert: or
any other like affected terms spoken of pleasure, as in our triumphals calling
familiarly upon our Muse, I called her Moppe.

But will you vveet,
My little muse, my pretty moppe:
If we shall algates change our stop,
Chose me a svveet.
Understanding by this word [Moppe] a little pretty Lady, or tender young thing.
For so we call little fishes, that be not come to their full growth [moppes,] as
whiting moppes, gurnard moppes.

Also such terms are used to be given in derision and for a kind of contempt,
as when we say Lording for Lord, and as the Spaniard that calls an Earl of
small revenue Contadilio: the Italian calls the poor man, by contempt
pouerachio, or pouerino, the little beast animalculo or animaluchio, and such
like diminutiues apperteining to this figure, the [Disabler] more ordinary in
other languages than in our vulgar.

This figure of retire holds part with the propounder of which we spoke before
(prolepsis) because of the resumption of a former proposition uttered in
generality to explane the same better by a particular division. Epanodis, or
the figure of Retire.
But their difference is, in that the propounder resumes but the matter only.
This [retire] resumes both the matter and the terms, and is therefore
accounted one of the figures of repetition, and in that respect may be called
by his original Greek name the [Resounde] or the [retire] for this word
[(...)] serves both senses resound and retire. The use of this figure, is seen
in this dittie following, Love hope and death, do stir in me much strife,
As never man but I lead such a life:
For burning love does vvound my heart to death:
And when death comes at call of inward grief,
Cold lingering hope does feed my fainting breath:
Against my will, and yields my vvound relief,
So that I live, but yet my life is such:
As never death could grieve me half so much.


Then have ye a manner of speech, Dialisis, or the Dismembrer.
not so figurative as fit for argumentation, and works not unlike the dilemma
of the Logicians, because he propones two or more matters entierly, and does as
it were set down the whole tale or rekoning of an argument and then clear
every part by it self, as thus.

It can not be but nigardship or need,
Made him attempt this foul and wicked deed:
Nigardship not, for alvvayes he was free,
Nor need, for who does not his richesse see?
Or as one that entreated for a fair young maid who was taken by the watch in
London and carried to Bridewell to be punished.

Now gentill Sirs let this young maid alone,
For either she has grace of else she has none:
If she have grace, she may in time repent,
If she have none what boots her punishment.
Or as another pleaded his deserts with his mistress.

Were it for grace, or else in hope of gain,
To say of my deserts, it is but vain:
For well in mind, in case ye do them bear,
To tell them often, it should but irke your ear:
Be they forgot: as likely should I fail,
To win with words, where deeds can not prevail.
Then have ye a figure very meet for Orators or eloquent perswaders such as
our maker or Poet must in some cases show him self to be, Merismus. or the
Distributer.
and is when we may conveniently utter a matter in one entier speech or
proposition and will rather do it peecemeale and by distributio^ of every part
for amplification sake, as for example he that might say, a house was
outragiously plucked down: will not be satisfied so to say, but rather will
speak it in this sort: they first undermined the groundsills, they beat down
the walls, they vnfloored the loftes, they vntiled it and pulled down the
roof. For so in deed is a house pulled down by circumstances, which this
figure of distribution does set forth every one apart, and therefore I name him
the distributor according to his original, as wrate the Tuscane Poet in a
Sonet which Sir Thomas Wyat translated with very good grace, thus.

Set me whereas the sun does parch the green,
Or where his beams do not dissolve the ice:
In temperate heat where he is felt and seen,
In presence pressed of people mad or wise:
Set me in hye or yet in low degree,
In longest night or in the shortest day:
In clearest sky, or where clouds thickest be,
In lusty youth or when my hears are gray:
Set me in heaven, in earth or else in hell,
In hill or dale or in the foming flood:
Thrall or at large, alive where so I dwell,
Sick or in health, in evil fame or good:
Hers will I be, and only with this thought,
Content my self, although my chance be naught.
All which might have been said in these two verses. Set me wheresoever ye
will,
I am and will be yours still.
The zealous Poet writing in praise of the maiden Queen would not seem to
wrap up all her most excellent parts in a few words them entierly
comprehending, but did it by a distributor or merismus in the negative for the
better grace, thus.

Not your beauty, most gracious sovereign,
Nor maidenly looks, mainteind with majesty:
Your stately port, which does not match but stain,
For your presence, your palace and your train,
All Princes Courts, mine eye could ever see:
Not your quick wits, your sober governance:
Your clear forsight, your faithful memory,
So sweet features, in so staid countenance:
Nor languages, with plentuous utterance,
So able to discourse, and entertain:
Not noble race, far beyond Caesar's reign,
Run in right line, and blood of nointed kings:
Not large empire, armies, treasurs, domaine,
Lusty liueries, of fortunes dearst darlings:
Not all the skilles, fit for a Princely dame,
Your learned Muse, with use and study brings.
Not true honor, ne that immortal fame
Of maiden reign, your only own renown
And no Queens else, yet such as yeeldes your name
Greater glory than does your treble crown.
And then concludes thus.

Not any one of all these honored parts
Your Princely happes, and habites that do move,
And as it were, ensorcell all the hearts
Of Christen kings to quarrel for your love,
But to possess, at once and all the good
Art and engine, and every star above
Fortune or kind, could farce in flesh and blood,
Was force enough to make so many strive
For your person, which in our world stood
By all consents the minionst maid to wiue.
Where ye see that all the parts of her commendation which were partitularly
remembered in twenty verses before, are wrapped up in the two verses of this last
part, videl.

Not any one of all your honored parts,
Those Princely haps and habites, etc.
This figure serves for amplification, and also for ornament, and to enforce
persuasion mightily. Sir Geffrey Chaucer, father of our English Poets, has
these verses following in the distributor.

When faith fails in Priests sawes,
And Lords hestes are holden for laws,
And robbery is taken for purchase,
And lechery for solace
Then shall the Realm of Albion
Be brought to great confusion.
Where he might have said as much in these words: when vice abounds, and virtue
decays in Albion, then etc. And as another said, When Prince for his people
is wakefull and wise,
Peers ayding with arms, Counselors with advise,
Magistrate sincerely using his charge,
People pressed to obey, nor let to run at large,
Prelate of holy life, and with devotion
Preferring piety before promotion,
Priest still preaching, and praying for our heal:
Then blessed is the state of a commonweal.


All which might have been said in these few words, when every man in charge
and authority does his duty, and executes his function well, then is the
commonwealth happy.

The Greek Poets who made musical ditties to be song to the lute or harp,
Epimone, or the Loueburden.
did use to link their staves together with one verse running throughout the
whole song by equal distance, and was, for the most part, the first verse of
the staff, which kept so good sense and conformity with the whole, as his
often repetition did give it greater grace. They called such linking verse
Epimone, the Latins versus intercalaris, and we may term him the Loue-burden,
following the original, or if it please you, the long repeat: in one respect
because that one verse alone bears the whole burden of the song according to
the original: in another respect, for that it comes by large distances to be
often repeated, as in this ditty made by the noble knight Sir Philip Sidney, My
true love has my heart and I have his,
By just exchange one for another given:
I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss,
There never was a better bargain driven.
My true love has my heart and I have his.
My heart in me keeps him and me in one,
My heart in him his thoughts and senses guides:
He loves my heart, for once it was his own,
I cherish his because in me it bides.
My true love has my heart, and I have his.


Many times our Poet is carried by some occasion to report of a thing that is
marvelous, Paradoxon, or the Wondrer.
and then he will seem not to speak it simply but with some sign of
admiration, as in our interlude called the Woer.

I wonder much to see so many husbands thrive,
That have but little wit, before they come to wiue:
For one would easily ween who so has little wit,
His wife to teach it him, were a thing much unfit.
Or as Cato the Roman Senator said one day merrily to his companion that
walked with him, pointing his finger to a young unthrift in the street who
lately before had sold his patrimony, of a goodly quantity of salt marshes,
lying near unto Capua shore.

Now is it not, a wonder to behold,
Yonder gallant skarce twenty winter old,
By might (mark ye) able to do more?
Than the main sea that batters on his shore?
For what the waves could never wash away,
This proper youth has wasted in a day.
Not much unlike the vvondrer have ye another figure called the doubtful,
because oftentimes we will seem to cast perils, Aporia, or the Doubtful.
and make doubt of things when by a plain manner of speech we might affirm
or deny him, as thus of a cruel mother who murdered her own child.

Whether the cruel mother were more to blame,
Or the shrevvd child come of so cursed a dame:
Or whether some smatch of the fathers blood,
Whose kin were never kind, nor never good.
Moved her thereto, etc.
This manner of speech is used when we will not seem, Epitropis, or the Figure
of Reference.
either for manner sake or to avoid tediousness, to trouble the judge or
hearer with all that we could say, but having said enough already, we refer
the rest to their consideration, as he that said thus: Me thinks that I have
said, what may well suffice,
Referring all the rest, to your better advise.


The fine and subtle perswader when his intent is to sting his adversary, or
else to declare his mind in broad and liberal speeches, which might breed
offense or scandal, he will seem to bespeake pardon before hand, Par^sia, or
the Licentious.
whereby his licentiousnes may be the better borne withal, as he that said: If
my speech hap to offend you any way,
Think it their fault, that force me so to say.


Anachinosis. or the Impartener.
Not much unlike to the figure of reference, is there another with some little
diversity which we call the impartener, because many times in pleading and
persuading, we think it a very good policy to acquaint our judge or hearer
or very adversary with some part of our Counsel and advice, and to ask their
opinion, as who would say they could not otherwise think of the matter then we
do. As he that had told a long tale before certain noble women, of a matter
somewhat in honor touching the Sex.

Tell me fair Ladies, if the case were your own,
So foul a fault would you have it be known?
Master Gorge in this figure, said very sweetly.

All you who read these lines and skanne of my desert,
Judge whether was more good, my hap or else my heart.
The good Orator uses a manner of speech in his persuasion and is when all
that should seem to make against him being spoken by th'otherside,
Paramologia, or the figure of Admittance.
he will first admit it, and in the end avoid all for his better advantage, and
this figure is much used by our English pleaders in the Starchamber and
Chancery, which they call to confess and avoid, if it be in case of crime or
injury, and is a very good way. For when the matter is so plain that it cannot
be denied or trauersed, it is good that it be justified by confessall and
auoidance. I call it the figure of admittance. As we once wrate to the reproof
of a Ladie^ fair but cruelty.

I know your wit, I know your pleasant tongue,
Your some sweet smiles, your some, but lovely lowrs:
A beauty to enamour old and young.
Those chaste desires, that noble mind of yours,
And that chief part whence all your honor springs,
A grace to entertain the greatest kings.
All this I know: but sin it is to see,
So fair parts spilt by too much cruelty.
In many cases we are driven for better persuasion to tell the cause that
mooues us to say thus or thus: Etiologia, or the Reason rend or the Tell cause.
or else when we would fortify our allegations by rendering reasons to every
one, this assignation of cause the Greeks called Etiologia, which if we might
without scorn of a new invented term call [Tellcause] it were right according
to the Greek original: and I pray you why should we not? and with as good
authority as the Greeks? Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's principal
Secretary, and a man of great learning and gravity, seeking to give an English
word to this Greek word (...) called it Spitewed, or wedspite. Master
Secretary Wilson giving an English name to his art of Logic, called it
Witcraft, me think I may be bold with like liberty to call the figure
Etiologia [Tellcause.] And this manner of speech is always contemned, with
these words, for, because, and such other confirmatiues. The Latins having no
fit name to give it in one single word, gave it no name at all, but by
circumlocution. We also call him the reason-rendrer, and leave the right
English word [Tel cause] much better answering the Greek original. Aristotle
was most excellent in use of this figure, for he never propones any allegation,
or makes any surmise, but he yields a reason or cause to fortify and prove it,
which geues it great credit. For example ye may take these verses, first
pointing, than confirming by similitudes.

When fortune shall have spit out all her gall,
I trust good luck shall be to me allowde,
For I have seen a ship in haven fall,
After the storm had broke both maste and shrowde.
And this.

Good is the thing that moves us to desire,
That is to joy the beauty we behold:
Else were we lovers as in an endless fire,
Always burning and ever chill a cold.
And in these verses.

Accused though I be without desert,
Since none can prove believe it not for true:
For never yet since first ye had my heart,
Intended I to false or be untrue.
And in this Disticque.

And for her beauties praise, no wight that with her wars:
For where she comes she shows her self like sun among the stars.
And in this other dittie of ours where the lover complains of his Ladies
cruelty, rendering for every surmise a reason, and by telling the cause,
seeks (as it were) to get credit, thus.

Cruel you be who can say nay,
Since ye delight in others woe:
Unwise am I, ye may well say,
For that I have, honored you so.
But blameless I, who could not choose,
To be enchaunted by your eye:
But ye to blame, thus to refuse
My service, and to let me die.
Dichologia, or the Figure of excuse.
Sometimes our error is so manifest, or we be so hardly pressed with our
adversaries, as we cannot deny the fault laid unto our charge: in which case it
is good policy to excuse it by some allowable pretext, as did one whom his
mistress burdened with some unkind speeches which he had past of her, thus.

I said it: but by lapse of lying tongue,
When fury and just grief my heart oppressed:
I said it: as ye see, both frail and young,
When your rigor had ranckled in my breast.
The cruel wound that smarted me so sore,
Pardon therefore (sweet sorrow) or at least
Bear with mine youth that never fell before,
Least your offense increase my grief the more.
And again in these, I spoke amysse I cannot it deny
But caused by your great discourtesie:
And if I said that which I now repent,
And said it not, but by misgouernment
Of youthful years, your self that are so young
Pardon for once this error of my tongue,
And think amends can never come to late:
Love may be cursed, but love can never hate.


Speaking before of the figure [Synecdoche] we called him [Quicke conceit]
because he inured in a single word only by way of intendment or large meaning,
Noema, or the Figure of close conceit.
but such as was speedily discovered by every quick wit, as by the half to
understand the whole, and many other ways appearing by the examples. But by
this figure [Noema] the obscurity of the sense lies not in a single word, but
in an entier speech, whereof we do not so easily conceive the meaning, but as
it were by conjecture, because it is witty and subtle or dark, which makes
me therefore call him in our vulgar the [Close conceit] as he that said by
himself and his wife, I thank God in forty winters that we have lived
together, never any of our neighbors set us at one, meaning that they never
fell out in all that space, which had been the directer speech and more apert,
and yet by intendment amounts all to one, being nevertheless dissemblable and
in effect contrary. Pawlet Lord Treasorer of England, and first Marquis of
Winchester, with the like subtle speech gave a quippe to Sir William Gyfford,
who had married the Marquis sister, and all her life time could never love her
nor like of her company, but when she was dead made the greatest moan for her
in the world, and with tears and much lamentation uttered his grief to the L.
Treasorer, o good brother quoth the Marquis, I am right sorry to see you now
love my sister so well, meaning that he showed his love too late, and should
have done it while she was a live.

A great counselor somewhat forgetting his modesty, used these words: Gods
lady I reckon my self as good a man as he you talk of, and yet I am not able
to do so. Yea sir quoth the party, your L. is too good to be a man, I would ye
were a Saint, meaning he would he were dead, for none are shrined for Saints
before they be dead.

The Logician uses a definition to express the truth or nature of every thing
by his true kind and difference, Orismus, or the Definer of difference.
as to say wisdom is a prudent and witty foresight and consideration of
humane or worldly actions with their euentes. This definition is Logical. The
Orator uses another manner of definition, thus: Is this wisdom? no it is a
certain subtle knauish crafty wit, it is no industry as ye call it, but a
certain busy brainsicknesse, for industry is a lively and vnweried search
and occupation in honest things, egernesse is an appetite in base and small
matters.

It serves many times to great purpose to prevent our adversaries arguments,
and take upon us to know before what our judge or adversary or hearer thinks,
and that we will seem to utter it before it be spoken or alleged by them, in
respect of which boldness to enter so deeply into another man's conceit or
conscience, and to be so privy of another man's mind, gave cause that this
figure was called the [presumptuous] I will also call him the figure of
presupposall or the preuenter, Procatalepsis, or the presumptuous, otherwise
the figure of Presupposall.
for by reason we suppose before what may be said* or perchance would be said
by our adversary or any other, we do prevent them of their advantage, and do
catch the ball (as they are wont to say) before it come to the ground.

Paralepsis, or the Passager.
It is also very many times used for a good policy in pleading or persuasion
to make wise as if we set but light of the matter, and that therefore we do
pass it over slightly when in deed we do then intend most effectually and
despightfully if it be inuectiue to remember it: it is also when we will not
seem to know a thing, and yet we know it well enough, and may be likened to
the manner of women, who as the common saying is, will say nay and take it.

I hold my peace and will not say for shame,
The much untruth of that uncivil dame:
For if I should her coullours kindly blaze,
It would so make the chaste ears amaze. etc.
Commoratio, or the figure of abode
It is said by manner of a prouerbiall speech that he who finds himself well
should not wagge, even so the perswader finding a substantial point in his
matter to serve his purpose, should dwell upon that point longer then upon any
other less assured, and use all endeavor to maintain that one, and as it were
to make his chief abode thereupon, for which cause I name him the figure of
abode, according to the Latin name: Some take it not but for a course of
argument and therefore hardly may one give any examples thereof.

Now as art and good policy in persuasion bids us to abide and not to stir
from the point of our most advantage, Metastasis, or the flitting figure. or
the Remove.
but the same to enforce and tarry upon with all possible argument, so does
discretion will us sometimes to flit from one matter to another, as a thing
meet to be forsaken, and another entered upon, I call him therefore the
flitting figure, or figure of remove, like as the other before was called the
figure of aboade.

Even so again, Parecnasis, or the Stragler.
as it is wisdom for a perswader to tarry and make his abode as long as he
may conveniently without tediousnes to the hearer, upon his chief proofs or
points of the cause tending to his advantage, and likewise to depart again
when time serves, and go to a new matter serving the purpose as well. So is it
requisite many times for him to talk far from the principal matter, and as
it were to range aside, to the intent by such extraordinary mean to induce or
infer other matter, as well or better serving the principal purpose, and
nevertheless in season to return home where he first strayed out. This manner of
speech is termed the figure of digression by the Latins, following the Greek
original, we also call him the straggler by allusio^ to the soldier that
marches out of his array, or by those that keep no order in their march, as
the battles well ranged do: of this figure there need be given no example.

Occasion offers many times that our maker as an orator, Expeditio, or the
speedy dispatcher.
or perswader, or pleader should go roundly to work, and by a quick and swift
argument dispatch his persuasion, and as they are wont to say not to stand all
day trifling to no purpose, but to rid it out of the way quickly. This is done
by a manner of speech, both figurative and argumentatiue, when we do briefly
set down all our best reasons serving the purpose, and reject all of them
saving one, which we accept to satisfy the cause: as he that in a litigious
case for land would prove it not the adversaries, but his clients.

No man can say its his by heritage,
Nor by Legacy, or Testatours device:
Nor that it came by purchase or engage,
Nor from his Prince for any good service.
Then needs must it be his by very vvrong,
Which he has offered this poor plaintiff so long.
Though we might call this figure very well and properly the [Paragon] yet dare
I not so to do for fear of the Courtiers envy, who will have no man use that
term but after a courtly manner, that is, in praising of horses, hawks,
hounds, pearls, diamonds, rubies, emerodes, and other precious stones:
specially of fair women whose excellency is discovered by paragonizing or
setting one to another, which moved the zealous Poet, speaking of the maiden
Queen, to call her the paragon of Queens. This considered, I will let our
figure enjoy his best beknowen name, and call him still in all ordinary cases
the figure of comparison: as when a man will seem to make things appear good
or bad, or better or worse, or more or less excellent, either upon spite or
for pleasure or any other good affection, then he sets the less by the
greater, or the greater to the less, the equal to his equal, and by such
confronting of them together, drives out the true ods that is betwixt them, and
makes it better appear, as when we sang of our Sovereign Lady thus, in the
twentieth Partheniade. As falcon fares to bussards flight,
As egles eyes to owlates sight,
As fierce saker to coward kite,
As brightest noone to darkest night:
As summer sun exceeds far,
The moon and every other star:
So far my Princess praise does pass,
The famoust Queen that ever was.


And in the eighteen Partheniade thus. Set rich rubie to red esmayle,
The ravens plume to peacocks tail,
Lay me the larkes to lizards eyes,
The duskie cloud to azure sky,
Set shallow brooks to surging seas,
An orient pearl to a white pease:


etc. Concluding.

There shall no less an ods be seen
In mine from every other Queen.
Dialogismus, or the right reasoner.
We are sometimes occasioned in our tale to report some speech from another man's
mouth, as what a king said to his privy counsel or subject, a captain to his
soldier, a soldier to his captain, a man to a woman, and contrariwise: in
which report we must always give to every person his fit and natural, and
that which best becomes him. For that speech becomes a king which does not
a carter, and a young man that does not an old: and so in every sort and
degree. Virgil speaking in the person of Eneas, Turnus and many other great
Princes, and sometimes of meaner men, ye shall see what decency every of their
speeches holds with the quality, degree and years of the speaker. To which
examples I will for this time refer you.

So if by way of fiction we will seem to speak in another man's person, as if
king Henry the eight were alive, and should say of the town of Bulleyn, what
we by war to the hazard of our person hardly obtained, our young son
without any peril at all, for little money delivered up again. Or if we should
feign king Edward the third, understanding how his successor Queen Marie had
lost the town of Calays by negligence, should say: That which the sword wanne,
the distaffe has lost. This manner of speech is by the figure Dialogismus, or
the right reasoner.

In weighty causes and for great purposes, Gnome, or the Director.
wise perswaders use grave and weighty speeches, specially in matter of advise
or counsel, for which purpose there is a manner of speech to allege textes or
authorities of witty sentence, such as smatch moral doctrine and teach
wisdom and good behavior, by the Greek original we call him the directour,
by the Latin he is called sententia: we may call him the sage sayer, thus.
"Nature bids us as a loving mother,
"To love our selves first and next to love another. Sententiae. or the Sage
sayer.

"The Prince that couets all to know and see,
"Had need fall mild and patient to be.
"Nothing sticks faster by us as appears,
"Then that which we learn in our tender years.


And that which our sovereign Lady wrate in defiance of fortune.

Never think you fortune can bear the sway,
Where virtues force, can cause her to obey.
Heed must be taken that such rules or sentences be choisly made and not often
used least excess breed lothsomnesse.

Art and good policy moves us many times to be earnest in our speech,
Sinathrismus. or the Heaping figure
and then we lay on such load and so go to it by heaps as if we would win
the game by multitude of words and speeches, not all of one but of diverse
matter and sense, for which cause the Latins called it Congeries and we the
heaping figure, as he that said To muse in mind how fair, how wise, how
good,
How brave, how free, how courteous and how true,
My Lady is does but inflame my blood.


Or thus.

I deem, I dream, I do, I taste, I touch,
Nothing at all but smells of perfect bliss.
And thus by master Edward Diar, vehement swift and passionatly.

But if my faith my hope, my love my true intent,
My liberty, my service vowed, my time and all be spent.
In vain, etc.
But if such earnest and hasty heaping up of speeches be made by way of
recapitulation, which commonly is in the end of every long tale and Oration,
because the speaker seems to make a collection of all the former material
points, to bind them as it were in a bundle and lay them forth to enforce the
cause and renew the hearers memory, then ye may give him more properly the name
of the [collectour] or recapitulatour, and serves to very great purpose as in
an hympne written by us to the Queens Majesty entitled ( Minerua) wherein
speaking of the mutabilitie of fortune in the case of all Princes generally,
we seemed to exempt her Majesty of all such casualtie, by reason she was by
her destiny and many divine parts in her, ordained to a most long and
constant prosperity in this world, concluding with this recapitulation.

But thou art free, but were thou not in deed,
But were thou not, come of immortal seed:
Never yborne, and thy mind made to bliss,
Heavens metal that everlasting is:
Were not thy wit, and that thy virtues shall,
Be deemd divine thy favor face and all:
And that thy loze, ne name may never dye,
Nor thy state turn, stayed by destiny:
Dread were least once thy noble heart may feel,
Some rufull turn, of her unsteady wheel.
Apostrophe, or the turn tale.
Many times when we have run a long race in our tale spoken to the hearers, we
do suddenly fly out and either speak or exclaim at some other person or
thing, and therefore the Greeks call such figure (as we do) the turnway or
turnetale, and breeds by such exchange a certain recreation to the hearers
minds, as this used by a lover to his unkind mistress.

And as for you (fair one) say now by proof ye find,
That rigor and ingratitude soon kill a gentle mind.
And as we in our triumphals, speaking long to the Queens Majesty, upon the
sudden we burst out in an exclamation to Phoebus, seeming to draw in a new
matter, thus. But O Phoebus,
All glistering in thy gorgious gown,
Would thou wit safe to slide a down:
And dvvell with us,
But for a day,
I could tell thee close in thine ear,
A tale that thou had lever hear
I dare well say:
Then ere thou were,
To kiss that unkind runneavvay,
Who was transformed to boughs of bay:
For her cursed heart. etc.


And so returned again to the first matter.

The matter and occasion leads us many times to describe and set forth many
things, Hypotiposis, or the counterfeit representation.
in such sort as it should appear they were truly before our eyes though they
were not present, which to do it requires cunning: for nothing can be kindly
counterfeit or represented in his absence, but by great discretion in the doer.
And if the things we covet to describe be not natural or not veritable, than
yet the same axeth more cunning to do it, because to feign a thing that never
was nor is like to be, proceeds of a greater wit and sharper invention than
to describe things that be true.

And these be things that a poet or maker is wont to describe sometimes as
true or natural, Prosopographia.
and sometimes to feign as artificial and not true. viz. The visage, speech
and countenance of any person absent or dead: and this kind of representation
is called the Counterfeit countenance: as Homer does in his Iliades, diverse
personages: namely Achilles and Thersites, according to the truth and not by
fiction. And as our poet Chaucer does in his Canterbury tales set forth the
Sumner, Pardoner, Manciple, and the rest of the pilgrims, most naturally and
pleasantly.

Prosopopeia. or the Counterfeit in personation.
But if ye will feign any person with such features, qualities and co^ditio^s, or
if ye will attribute any humane quality, as reason or speech to do^be creatures
or other insensible things, and do study (as one may say) to give the^ a humane
person, it is not Prosopographia, but Prosopopeia, because it is by way of
fictio^, and no prettier examples can be given to you thereof, than in the
Romant of the rose translated out of French by Chaucer, describing the persons
of avarice, envy, old age, and many others, whereby much morality is taught.

Cronographia. or the Counterfeit time.
So if we describe the time or season of the year, as winter, summer, harvest,
day, midnight, noone, evening, or such like: we call such description the
counterfeit time. Cronographia examples are every where to be found.

Topographia. or the Counterfeit place.
And if this description be of any true place, city, castle, hill, valley or
sea, and such like: we call it the counterfeit place Topographia, or if ye
feign places untrue, as heaven, hell, paradise, the house of fame, the palace
of the sun, the den of sheep, and such like which ye shall see in Poets:
so did Chaucer very well describe the country of Saluces in Italy, which ye
may see, in his report of the Lady Gryfyll.

Pragmatographia. or the Counterfeit action.
But if such description be made to represent the handling of any business with
the circumstances belonging thereunto as the manner of a battle, a feast, a
marriage, a burial or any other matter that lies in feat and actiuitie: we
call it then the counterfeit action [Pragmatographia.]

In this figure the Lord Nicholas Vaux a noble gentleman, and much delighted in
vulgar making, and a man otherwise of no great learning but having herein a
marvelous facillitie, made a dittie representing the battle and assault of
Cupide, so excellently well, as for the gallant and propre application of his
fiction in every part, I cannot choose but set down the greatest part of his
ditty, for in truth it can not be amended.

When Cupid scaled first the fort,
Wherein my heart lay wounded sore
The battrie was of such a sort,
That I must yield or die therefore.
There saw I love upon the wall,
How he his banner did display,
Alarm alarm he began to call,
And bad his soldiers keep array.
The arms the which that Cupid bare,
Were pierced hearts with tears besprent:
In silver and sable to declare
The steadfast love he alvvaies meant.
There might you see his band all dressed
In colors like to white and black,
With powder and with pellets pressed,
To bring them forth to spoil and sack,
Good will the master of the shot,
Stood in the Rampire brave and proud,
For expense of powder he spared not,
Assault assault to cry aloude.
There might you hear the Canons rore,
Each piece discharging a lovers look, etc.
As well to a good maker and Poet as to an excellent perswader in prose, the
figure of Similitude is very necessary, Omiosis. or Resemblance.
by which we not only bewtifie our tale, but also very much enforce and
enlarge it. I say enforce because no one thing more prevails with all
ordinary judgments than persuasion by similitude. Now because there are sundry
sorts of them, which also do work after diverse fashions in the hearers
conceits, I will set them all forth by a triple division, exempting the
general Similitude as their common Auncestour, and I will call him by the name
of Resemblance without any addition, from which I derive three other sorts: and
give every one his particular name, as Resemblance by Pourtrait or Imagery,
which the Greeks call Icon, Resemblance moral or mystical, which they call
Parabola, and Resemblance by example, which they call Paradigma, and first we
will speak of the general resemblance, or bare similitude, which may be thus
spoken.

But as the watrie showers delay the raging wind,
So does good hope clean put away despair out of my mind.
And in this other likening the forlorn lover to a stricken dear.

Then as the stricken dear, withdrawes himself alone,
So do I seek some secret place, where I may make my moan.
And in this of ours where we liken glory to a shadow.

As the shadow (his nature being such,)
Follows the body, whether it will or no,
So does glory, refuse it nere so much,
Wait on virtue, be it in weal or vvo.
And even as the shadow in his kind,
What time it bears the carkas company,
Goth often before, and often comes behind:
So does renown, that raises us so hye,
Come to us quick, sometime not till we dye.
But the glory, that growth not over fast,
Is ever great, and likeliest long to last.
Again in a ditty to a mistress of ours, where we likened the cure of Love to
Achilles lance.

The lance so bright, that made Telephus vvound,
The same rusty, salued the sore again,
So may my meede (Madame) of you redownd,
Whose rigor was first author of my pain.
The Tuskan poet uses this Resemblance, inuring as well by Dissimilitude as
Similitude, likening himself (by Implication) to the fly, and neither to the
eagle nor to the owl: very well Englished by Sir Thomas Wiat after his
fashion, and by my self thus: There be some fowls of sight so proud and
stark,
As can behold the sun, and never shrink,
Some so feeble, as they are feign to vvinke,
Or never come abroad till it be dark:
Others there be so simple, as they think,
Because it shines, to sport them in the fire,
And feel unware, the vvrong of their desire,
Fluttring amidst the flame that does them burn,
Of this last rank (alas) am I a right,
For in my ladies looks to stand or turn
I have no power, ne find place to retire,
Where any dark may shade me from her sight
But to her beams so bright whilst I aspire,
I perish by the bane of my delight.


Again in these likening a wise man to the true lover.

As true love is content with his enjoy,
And asks no witness nor no record,
And as faint love is evermore most coy,
To boast and brag his troth at every word:
Even so the wise vvithouten other meede:
Contents him with the guilt of his good deed.
And in this resembling the learning of an evil man to the seeds sown in
barren ground.

As the good seeds sown in fruitful soil,
Bring forth foyson when barren does them spoil:
So does it fare when much good learning hits,
Upon shrewde wills and ill disposed wits.
And in these likening the wise man to an idiot.

A sage man said, many of those that come
To Athens school for vvisdome, ere they went
They first seemed wise, then lovers of wisdom,
Then Orators, then idiots, which is meant
That in wisdom all such as profit most,
Are least surly, and little apt to boast.
Again, for a lover, whose credit upon some report had been shaken, he prays
better opinion by similitude.

After ill crop the soil must eft be sown,
And fro shipwreck we sail to seas again,
Then God forbid whose fault has once been known,
Should for ever a spotted wight remain.
And in this working by resemblance in a kind of dissimilitude between a
father and a master.

It fares not by fathers as by masters it does fare,
For a foolish father may get a wise son,
But of a foolish master it haps very rare
Is bread a wise servant where ever he won.
And in these, likening the wise man to the Giant, the fool to the Dwarf.

Set the Giant deep in a dale, the dwarf upon an hill,
Yet will the one be but a dwarf, the other a giant still.
So will the wise be great and high, even in the lowest place:
The fool when he is most aloft, will seem but low and base.
Icon. or Resemblance by imagerie.
But when we liken an humane person to another in countenance, stature, speech
or other quality, it is not called bare resemblance, but resemblaunce by
imagerie or pourtrait, alluding to the painters term, who yeldeth to the eye a
visible representatio^ of the thing he describes and painteth in his table. So
we commending her Majesty for wisdom beauty and magnanimity likened her to
the Serpent, the Lion and the Angel, because by common usurpation, nothing is
wiser then the Serpent, more courageous then the Lion, more bewtifull then the
Angel. These are our verses in the end of the seventh Partheniade.

Nature that seldom works amiss,
In vvomans breast by passing art:
Has lodged safe the Lions heart,
And feately fixed with all good grace,
To Serpents head an Angels face.
And this manner of resemblaunce is not only performed by likening of lively
creatures one to another, but also of any other natural thing, bearing a
proportion of similitude, as to liken yealow to gold, white to silver, red to
the rose, soft to silk, hard to the stone and such like. Sir Philip Sidney in
the description of his mistress excellently well handled this figure of
resemblaunce by imagerie, as ye may see in his book of Archadia: and ye may
see the like, of our doings, in a Partheniade written of our sovereign Lady,
wherein we resemble every part of her body to some natural thing of excellent
perfection in his kind, as of her forehead, brows and hair, thus. Of silver
was her forehead hye,
Her brows two bows of hebenie,
Her tresses trust were to behold
Frizled and fine as fringe of gold.


And of her lips.

Two lips wrought out of rubie rock,
Like leaves to shut and to unlock.
As portall door in Princes chamber:
A golden tongue in mouth of amber.
And of her eyes.

Her eyes God wot what stuff they are,
I durst be sworn each is a star:
As clear and bright as wont to guide
The Pylot in his vvinter tide.
And of her breasts.

Her bosom sleake as Paris plaster,
Held up two balls of alabaster,
Each byas was a little cherrie:
Or else I think a strawberie.
And all the rest that follows, which may suffice to exemplify your figure
of Icon, or resemblance by imagerie and portrait.

But whenever by your similitude ye will seem to teach any morality or good
lesson by speeches mystical and dark, Parabola. or Resemblance mystical.
or far fette, under a sense metaphorical applying one natural thing to
another, or one case to another, inferring by them a like consequence in other
cases the Greeks call it Parabola, which term is also by custom accepted of
us: nevertheless we may call him in English the resemblance mystical: as when
we liken a young child to a green twigge which ye may easily bend every way
ye list: or an old man who labors with continual infirmities, to a dry and
dricksie oak. Such parables were all the preachings of Christ in the Gospel,
as those of the wise and foolish virgins, of the evil steward, of the laborers
in the vineyard, and a number more. And they may be feigned as well as true: as
those fables of Aesope, and other apologies invented for doctrine sake by wise
and grave men.

Finally, if in matter of counsel or persuasion we will seem to liken one
case to another, such as pass ordinarily in man's affairs, Paradigma, or a
resemblance by example.
and do compare the past with the present, gathering probability of like
success to come in the things we have presently in hand: or if ye will draw
the judgments precedent and authorized by antiquity as veritable, and
peradventure feigned and imagined for some purpose, into similitude or
dissimilitude with our present actions and affairs, it is called resemblance
by example: as if one should say thus, Alexander the great in his expedition to
Asia did thus, so did Hanniball coming into Spain, so did Caesar in Egypt,
therefore all great Captains and Generals ought to do it.

And thus again, It has been always usual among great and magnanimous
princes in all ages, not only to repulse any injury and invasion from their
own realms and dominions, but also with a charitable and Princely compassion
to defend their good neighbors Princes and Potentats, from all oppression of
tyrants and usurpers. So did the Romans by their arms restore many Kings of
Asia and Affricke expulsed out of their kingdoms. So did K. Edward 1.
restablish Baliol rightful owner of the crown of Scotland against Robert le
brus no lawful King. So did king Edward the third aid Dampeeter king of
Spain against Henry bastard and usurper. So have many English Princes helped
with their forces the poor Dukes of Britain their ancient friends and allies,
against the outrages of the French kings: and why may not the Queen our
sovereign Lady with like honor and godly zele yield protection to the people of
the Low countries, her nearest neighbors to rescue them a free people from the
Spanish servitude.

And as this resemblance is of one man's action to another, so may it be made by
examples of brute beasts, aptly corresponding in quality or event, as one
that wrote certain pretty verses of the Emperor Maximinus, to warn him that he
should not glory too much in his own strength, for so he did in very deed,
and would take any common soldier to task at wrestling, or weapon, or in any
other actiuitie and feats of arms, which was by the wiser sort misliked,
these were the verses.

The Elephant is strong, yet death does it subdue,
The bull is strong, yet cannot death eschew.
The Lion strong, and slain for all his strength:
The Tygar strong, yet kilde is at the length.
Dread thou many, that dreadest not any one,
Many can kill, that cannot kill alone.
And so it fell out, for Maximinus was slain in a mutiny of his soldiers,
taking no warning by these examples, written for his admonition.

CHAP. XX.
The last and principal figure of our poetical Ornament.

Exargasia. or The Gorgious.
FOr the glorious luster it sets upon our speech and language, the Greeks
call it [Exargasia] the Latin [Expolitio] a term transferred from these
polishers of marble or porphirite, who after it is rough hewn and reduced to
that fashion they will, do set upon it a goodly glass, so smoth and clear as
ye may see your face in it, or otherwise as it fares by the bare and naked
body, which being attired in rich and gorgious apparel, seems to the common
usage of the eye much more comely and bewtifull then the natural. So does this
figure (which therefore I call the Gorgious) polish our speech and as it were
attire it with copious and pleasant amplifications and much variety of
sentences all running upon one point and to one intent: so as I doubt whether I
may term it a figure, or rather a mass of many figurative speeches, applied
to the bewtifying of our tale or argument. In a work of ours entitled
Philocalia we have strained to show the use and application of this figure and
all others mentioned in this book, to which we refer you. I find none
example in English meetre, so well maintayning this figure as that dittie of
her Majesty's own making passing sweet and harmonicall, which figure being as
his very original name purporteth the most bewtifull and gorgious of all
others, it asks in reason to be reserved for a last complement, and
desciphred by the art of a Ladies pen, her self being the most bewtifull,
or rather beauty of Queens. And this was the occasion: our sovereign Lady
perceiving how by the Sc. Q. residence within this Realm at so great liberty
and ease (as were skarce meet for so great and dangerous a prisoner) bred
secret factions among her people, and made many of the nobility incline to
favor her party: some of them desirous of innovation in the state: others
aspiring to greater fortunes by her liberty and life. The Queen our
sovereign Lady to declare that she was nothing ignorant of those secret
practizes, though she had long with great, wisdom and patience dissembled it,
writes this ditty most sweet and sententious, not hiding from all such
aspiring minds the danger of their ambition and disloyalty: which afterward
fell out most truly by th'exemplary chastisement of sundry persons, who in
favor of the said Sc. Q. declining from her Majesty, sought to interrupt the
quiet of the Realm by many evil and undutiful practizes. The ditty is as
follows.

The doubt of future foes, exiles my present joy,
And wit me warnes to shun such snares as threaten mine annoy.
For falsehood now does flow, and subject faith does ebb,
Which would not be, if reason ruled or wisdom weu'd the web.
But clouds of to is untried, do cloak aspiring minds,
Which turn to reign of late repent, by course of changed vvindes.
The top of hope supposed, the root of ruth vvil be,
And frutelesse all their graffed guiles, as shortly ye shall see.
Then dazeld eyes with pride, which great ambition blinds,
Shall Be vnseeld by worthy wights, whose foresight falsehood finds.
The daughter of debate, that eke discord does sovve
Shall reap no gain where formor rule has taught still peace to grow.
No foreign bannisht vvight shall ancre in this port,
Our realm it brooks no strangers force, let them elsvvhere resort.
Our rusty svvorde with rest, shall first his edge employ,
To polle their tops that seek, such change and gape for joy.
In a work of ours entitled [Philo Calia] where we entreat of the loves
between prince Philo and Lady Calia, in their mutual letters, messages, and
speeches: we have strained our muse to show the use and application of this
figure, and of all others.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the vices or deformities in speech and vvriting principally noted by
ancient Poets.

IT has been said before how by ignorance of the maker a good figure may
become a vice, and by his good discretion, a vicious speech go for a virtue in
the Poetical science. This saying is to be explaned and qualified, for some
manner of speeches are always intolerable and such as cannot be used with any
decency, but are ever indecent namely barbarousnesse, incongruitie, ill
disposition, fond affectation, rusticitie, and all extreme darkness, such as
it is not possible for a man to understand the matter without an interpretour,
all which parts are generally to be banished out of every language, unless it
may appear that the maker or Poet do it for the nonce, as it was reported by
the Philosopher Heraclitus that he wrote in obscure and dark terms of purpose
not to be understood, whence he merited the nickname Scotinus, otherwise I see
not but the rest of the common faults may be borne with sometimes, or pass
without any great reproof, not being used overmuch or out of season as I said
before: so as every surplusage or preposterous placing or undue iteration or
dark word, or doubtful speech are not so narrowly to be looked upon in a
large poem, nor specially in the pretty Poesies and devises of Ladies, and
Gentlewomen makers, whom we would not have too precise Poets least with their
shrewd wits, when they were married they might become a little too fantastical
wives, nevertheless because we seem to promise an art, which does not justly
admit any wilful error in the teacher, and to the end we may not be carped at
by these methodicall men, that we have omitted any necessary point in this
business to be regarded, I will speak somewhat touching these viciosities of
language particularly and briefly, leaving no little to the Grammarians for
maintenance of the scholasticall war, and altercations: we for our part
condescending in this devise of ours, to the appetite of Princely personages
and other so tender and quesie complexions in Court, as are annoyed with
nothing more then long lessons and overmuch good order.

CHAP. XXII.
Some vices in speeches and vvriting are always intolerable, some others now
and then borne vvithall by license of approved authors and custom.

THe foulest vice in language is to speak barbarously: this term grew by the
great pride of the Greeks and Latins, Barbarismus. or Foreign speech
when they were dominatours of the world reckoning no language so sweet and
civil as their own, and that all nations beside them selves were rude and
uncivil, which they called barbarous: So as when any strange word not of the
natural Greek or Latin was spoken, in the old time they called it barbarism,
or when any of their own natural words were sounded and pronounced with
strange and ill shapen accents, or written by wrong ortographie, as he that
would say with us in England, a dousand for a thousand, isterday, for
yesterday, as commonly the Dutch and French people do, they said it was
barbarously spoken. The Italian at this day by like arrogance calls the
Frenchman, Spaniard, Dutch, English, and all other breed behither their
mountains Appennines, Tramontani, as who would say Barbarous. This term being
then so used by the ancient Greeks, there have been since, notwithstanding
who have dug for the Etimologie somewhat deeper, and many of them have said
that it was spoken by the rude and barking language of the Affricans now called
Barbarians, who had great traffic with the Greeks and Romans, but that can
not be so, for that part of Affricke has but of late received the name of
Burbarie, and some others rather think that of this word Barbarous, that
country came to be called Barbaria and but few years in respect agone. Others
among whom is Ihan Leon a Moore of Granada, will seem to derive Barbaria, from
this word Bar, twice iterated thus Barbar, as much to say as fly, fly, which
chanced in a persecution of the Arabians by some seditious Mahometanes in the
time of their Pontif. Habdul mumi, when they were had in the chase, and driven
out of Arabia Westward into the countries of Mauritania, and during the
pursuit cried one upon another fly away, fly away, or pass pass, by which
occasion they say, when the Arabians which were had in chase came to stay and
settle them selves in that part of Africa, they called it Barbar, as much to
say, the region of their flight or pursuit. Thus much for the term, though
not greatly pertinent to the matter, yet not unpleasant to know for them that
delight in such niceties.

Solecismus. or Incongruitie.
Your next intolerable vice is solecismus or incongruitie, as when we speak
false English, that is by misusing the Grammatical rules to be observed in
cases, genders, tenses and such like, every poor scholar knows the fault,
and calls it the breaking of Priscians head, for he was among the Latins a
principal Grammarian.

Cacozelia. or Fond affectation.
Ye have another intolerable ill manner of speech, which by the Greeks
original we may call fond affectation, and is when we affect new words and
phrases other then the good speakers and writers in any language, or then
custom has allowed, and is the common fault of young scholars not half well
studied before they come from the University or schools, and when they come
to their friends, or happen to get some benefice or other promotion in their
countries, will seem to coigne fine words out of the Latin, and to use new
fangled speeches, thereby to show themselves among the ignorant the better
learned.

Another of your intolerable vices is that which the Greeks call Soraismus,
Soraismus. or The mingle mangle.
and we may call the [mingle mangle] as when we make our speech or writings of
sundry languages using some Italian word, or French, or Spanish, or Dutch, or
Scottish, not for the nonce or for any purpose (which were in part excusable)
but ignorantly and affectedly as one that said using this French word Roy, to
make ryme with another verse, thus.

O mighty Lord of love, dame Venus only joy,
Whose Princely power exceedes each other heavenly roy.
The verse is good but the term peeuishly affected.

Another of reasonable good facility in translation finding certain of the
hymns of Pyndarus and of Anacreons odes, and other Lirickes among the Greeks
very well translated by Rounsard the French Poet, and applied to the honor of
a great Prince in France, comes our minion and translates the same out of
French into English, and applies them to the honor of a great noble man in
England (wherein I commend his reverent mind and duty) but does so
impudently rob the French Poet both of his praise and also of his French
terms, that I cannot so much pity him as be angry with him for his injurious
dealing (our said maker not being ashamed to use these French words freddon,
egar, superbous, filanding, celest, calabrois, thebanois a number of others,
for English words, which have no manner of conformity with our language either
by custom or deriuation which may make them tolerable. And in the end (which
is worst of all) makes his vaunt that never English finger but his has touched
Pindars string which was nevertheless word by word as Rounsard had said before
by like braggery. These be his verses.

And of an ingenious invention, infanted with pleasant travail.
Whereas the French word is enfante as much to say borne as a child, in another
verse he says. I will freddon in thine honor.


For I will shake or quiver my fingers, for so in French is freddon, and in
another verse.

But if I will thus like pindar,
In many discourses egar.
This word egar is as much to say as to wander or stray out of the way, which
in our English is not received, nor these words calabrois, thebanois, but
rather calabrian, theba^ [filanding sisters] for the spinning sisters: this man
deserves to be endited of pety larceny for pilfring other men's devises from
them and converting them to his own use, for in deed as I would wish every
inue^tour which is the very Poet to receive the praises of his invention, so
would I not have a tra^slatour be ashamed to be acknowen of his translation.

Cacosintheton or the Misplacer.
Another of your intolerable vices is ill disposition or placing of your words
in a clause or sentence: as when you will place your adjective after your
substantive, thus: Maid fair, widow rich, priest holy, and such like,
which though the Latins did admit, yet our English did not, as one that said
ridiculously.

In my years lusty, many a deed doughtie did I.
All these remembered faults be intolerable and ever indecent.

Cacemphaton. or the figure of foul speech.
Now have ye other vicious manners of speech, but sometimes and in some cases
tolerable, and chiefly to the intent to move laughter, and to make sport, or
to give it some pretty strange grace, and is when we use such words as may be
drawn to a foul and unshamefast sense, as one that would say to a young
woman, I pray you let me iape with you, which in deed is no more but let me
sport with you. Yea and though it were not altogether so directly spoken, the
very sounding of the word were not commendable, as he that in the presence of
Ladies would use this common Proverb, Iape with me but hurt me not,
Bourde with me but shame me not.


For it may be taken in another peruerser sense by that sort of persons that
hear it, in whose ears no such matter ought almost to be called in memory,
this vice is called by the Greeks Cacemphaton, we call it the unshamefast or
figure of foul speech, which our courtly maker shall in any case shun, least
of a Poet he become a Buffon or railing companion, the Latins called him
Scurra. There is also another sort of ill-favored speech subject to this vice,
but resting more in the manner of the ilshapen sound and accent, than for the
matter it self, which may easily be avoided in choosing your words those that
be of the pleasantest orthography, and not to rhyme too many like sounding
words together.

Ye have another manner of composing your meter nothing commendable, specially
if it be too much used, Tautologia, or the figure of self saying.
and is when our maker takes too much delight to fill his verse with words
beginning all with a letter, as an English rimer that said: The deadly drops
of dark disdain,
Do daily drench my due desartes.


And as the Monk we spoke of before, wrote a whole Poem to the honor of
Carolus Caluus, every word in his verse beginning with C, thus: Carmina
clarisonae Caluis cantate camenae.


Many of our English makers use it too much, yet we confess it does not ill
but pretily becomes the meetre, if ye pass not two or three words in one
verse, and use it not very much, as he that said by way of Epithete.

The smoakie sighs: the trickling tears.
And such like, for such composition makes the meetre run away smoother, and
passes from the lips with more facility by iteration of a letter then by
alteration, which alteration of a letter requires an exchange of ministry and
office in the lips, teeth or palate, and so does not the iteration.

Your misplacing and preposterous placing is not all one in behavior of
language, for the misplacing is always intolerable, Histeron, proteron. or
the Preposterous.
but the preposterous is a pardonable fault, and many times gives a pretty
grace unto the speech. We call it by a common saying to set the carte before
the horse, and it may be done, either by a single word or by a clause of
speech: by a single word thus: And if I not perform, God let me never thrive.


For perform not: and this vice is sometime tolerable enough, but if the word
carry any notable sense, it is a vice not tolerable, as he that said praising
a woman for her red lips, thus: A corrall lip of hew.


Which is no good speech, because either he should have said no more but a
corrall lip, which had been enough to declare the redness, or else he should
have said, a lip of corrall hew, and not a corrall lip of hew. Now if this
disorder be in a whole clause which carries more sentence then a word, it is
then worst of all.

Ye have another vicious speech which the Greeks call Acyron, we call it the
uncouth, Acyron, or the Uncouth.
and is when we use an obscure and dark word, and utterly repugnant to that we
would express, if it be not by virtue of the figures metaphore, allegory,
abusion, or such other laudable figure before remembered, as he that said by way
of Epithete.

A dongeon deep, a dampe as dark as hell.
Where it is evident that a dampe being but a breath or vapor, and not to be
discerned by the eye, ought not to have this epithete (dark,) no more then
another that praising his mistress for her bewtifull hair, said very
improperly and with an uncouth term. Her hair surmounts Apollos pride,
In it such bewty reigns.


Whereas this word reign is ill applied to the beauty of a woman's hair, and
might better have been spoken of her whole person, in which beauty, favor, and
good grace, may perhaps in some sort be said to reign as our selves wrate, in
a Partheniade praising her Majesty's countenance, thus: A cheer where love
and Majesty do reign,
Both mild and stern, etc.


Because this word Majesty is a word expressing a certain Sovereign
dignity, as well as a quallitie of countenance, and therefore may properly be
said to reign, and requires no meaner a word to set him forth by. So it is
not of the beauty that remains in a woman's hair, or in her hand or any other
member: therefore when ye see all these improper or hard Epithets used, ye may
put them in the number of [vncouths] as one that said, the floods of graces: I
have heard of the floods of tears, and the floods of eloquence, or of any
thing that may resemble the nature of a watercourse, and in that respect we
say also, the streams of tears, and the streams of utterance, but not the
streams of graces, or of beauty. Such manner of uncouth speech did the Tanner
of Tamworth use to king Edward the fourth, which Ta^ner having a great while
mistaken him, and used very broad talk with him, at length perceiving by his
train that it was the king, was afraid he should be punished for it, said
thus with a certain rude repentance.

I hope I shall be hanged to morrow.
For [ I fear me] I shall be hanged, whereat the king laughed a good, not only
to see the Tanners vain fear, but also to hear his ill shapen term, and
gave him for recompense of his good sport, the inheritance of Plumton park, I
am afraid the Poets of our time that speak more finely and correctedly will
come too short of such a reward.

Also the Poet or makers speech becomes vicious and unpleasant by nothing more
than by using too much surplusage: The vice of Surplusage.
and this lies not only in a word or two more than ordinary, but in whole
clauses, and peradventure large sentences impertinently spoken, or with more
labor and curiosity than is requisite. The first surplusge the Greeks call
Pleonasmus, I call him [too full speech] and is no great fault, as if one
should say, I heard it with mine ears, and saw it with mine eyes, as if a man
could hear with his heels, or see with his nose. We our selves used this
superfluous speech in a verse written of our mistress, nevertheless, not much
to be misliked, for even a vice sometime being seasonably used, has a pretty
grace, For ever may my true love live and never die Pleonasmus, or Too full
speech

And that mine eyes may see her crownde a Queen.


As, if she lived ever* she could ever die, or that one might see her crowned
without his eyes.

Another part of surplusage is called Macrologia, Macrologia, or Long language
or long language, when we use large clauses or sentences more than is
requisite to the matter: it is also named by the Greeks Perissologia, as he
that said, the Ambassadors after they had received this answer at the kings
hands, they took their leave and returned home into their country from whence
they came.

So said another of our rimers, meaning to show the great annoy and difficulty
of those wars of Troy, caused for Helenas sake.

Nor Menelaus was unwise,
Or troop of Trojans mad,
When he with them and they with him,
For her such combat had.
These clauses (he with them and they with him) are surplusage, and one of
them very impertinent, because it could not otherwise be intended, but that
Menelaus, fighting with the Trojans, the Trojans must of necessity sight with
him.

Another point of surplusage lies not so much in superfluity of your words,
as of your travail to describe the matter which ye take in hand, and that ye
ouer-labour your self in your business. And therefore the Greeks call it
Periergia, Periergia, or Ouerlabour, otherwise called the curious.
we call it ouer-labor, iumpe with the original: or rather [the curious] for
his overmuch curiosity and study to show himself fine in a light matter, as
one of our late makers who in most of his things wrote very well, in this (to
mine opinion) more curiously than needed, the matter being ripely considered:
yet is his verse very good, and his meetre cleanly. His intent was to declare
how upon the tenth day of March he crossed the river of Thames, to walk in
Saint Georges field, the matter was not great as ye may suppose.

The tenth of March when Aries received
Dan Phoebus rays into his horned head,
And I my self by learned lore perceived
That Ver approcht and frosty vvinter fled
I crossed the Thames to take the cheerful air,
In open fields, the vveather was so fair.
First, the whole matter is not worth all this solemn circumstance to describe
the tenth day of March, but if he had left at the two first verses, it had been
enough. But when he comes with two other verses to enlarge his description, it
is not only more than needs, but also very ridiculous, for he makes wise, as
if he had not been a man learned in some of the mathematickes (by learned lore)
that he could not have told that the x. of March had fallen in the spring of
the year: which every carter, and also every child knows without any
learning. Then also when he says [Ver approcht, and frosty winter fled] though
it were a surplusage (because one season must needs give place to the other)
yet does it well enough pass without blame in the maker. These, and a hundred
more of such faulty and impertinent speeches may ye find amongst us vulgar
Poets, when we be careless of our doings.

Tapinosis, or the Abbaser.
It is no small fault in a maker to use such words and terms as do diminish
and abbase the matter he would seem to set forth, by imparing the dignity,
height vigor or majesty of the cause he takes in hand, as one that would say
king Philip shrewdly harmed the town of S. Quintaines, when in deed he wanne
it and put it to the sack, and that king Henry the eight made spoils in
Turwin, when as in deed he did more then spoil it, for he caused it to be
defaced and razed flat to the earth, and made it inhabitable. Therefore the
historiographer that should by such words report of these two kings gestes in
that behalf, should greatly blemish the honor of their doings and almost
speak untruly and injuriously by way of abbasement, as another of our bad
rymers that very indecently said.

A misers mind thou have, thou have a Princes pelf.
A lewd term to be given to a Princes treasure ( pelf) and was a little more
manerly spoken by Seriant Bendlowes, when in a progress time coming to salute
the Queen in Huntingtonshire he said to her Cochman, stay thy cart good
fellow, stay thy cart, that I may speak to the Queen, whereat her Majesty
laughed as she had been tickled, and all the rest of the company although very
graciously (as her manner is) she gave him great thanks and her hand to kiss.
These and such other base words do greatly disgrace the thing and the speaker
or writer: the Greeks call it [Tapinosis] we the [abbaser.]

Others there be that fall into the contrary vice by using such bombasted
words, as seem altogether farced full of wind, Bomphiologia, or Pompious
speech.
being a great deal to high and lofty for the matter, whereof ye may find
too many in all popular rymers.

Then have ye one other vicious speech with which we will finish this Chapter,
Amphibologia or the Ambiguous.
and is when we speak or write doubtfully and that the sense may be taken two
ways, such ambiguous terms they call Amphibologia, we call it the ambiguous,
or figure of sense incertaine, as if one should say Thomas Tailor saw William
Tyler drunk, it is indifferent to think either the one or the other drunk.
Thus said a gentleman in our vulgar pretily notwithstanding because he did it
not ignorantly, but for the nonce.

I sat by my Lady soundly sleeping,
My mistress lay by me butterly weeping.
No man can tell by this, whether the mistress or the man, slept or wept:
these doubtful speeches were used much in the old times by their false
Prophets as appears by the Oracles of Delphos and and of the Sybilles
prophecies devised by the religious persons of those days to abuse the
superstitious people, and to encomber their busy brains with vain hope or
vain fear.

Lucianus the merry Greek recites a great number of them, devised by a
coosening companion one Alexander, to get himself the name and reputation of
the God Aesculapius, and in effect all our old British and Saxon prophesies be
of the same sort, that turn them on which side ye will, the matter of them may
be verified, nevertheless carries generally such force in the heads of fond
people, that by the comfort of those blind prophecies many insurrections and
rebellions have been stirred up in this Realm, as that of Jack Straw, and
Jack Cade in Richard the seconds time, and in our time by a seditious fellow
in Norffolke calling himself Captain Ket and others in other places of the
Realm lead altogether by certain prophetical rymes, which might be constred
two or three ways as well as to that one whereunto the rebels applied it,
our maker shall therefore avoid all such ambiguous speeches unless it be when
he does it for the nonce and for some purpose.

CHAP. XXIII.
What it is that generally makes our speech well pleasing and commendable, and
of that which the Latins call Decorum.

IN all things to use decency, is it only that gives every thing his good
grace and without which nothing in man's speech could seem good or gracious, in
so much as many times it makes a bewtifull figure fall into a deformity, and
on the other side a vicious speech seem pleasant and bewtifull: this decency
is therefore the line and level for all good makers to do their business by. But
herein rests the difficulty, to know what this good grace is, and wherein it
consists, for peradventure it be easier to conceive then to express, we will
therefore examine it to the bottom and say: that every thing which pleases the
mind or senses, and the mind by the senses as by means instrume^tall, does it
for some amiable point or quality that is in it, which draws them to a good
liking and contentment with their proper objects. But that cannot be if they
discover any illfauorednesse or disproportion to the parts apprehensiue, as
for example, when a sound is either too loud or too low or otherwise confuse,
the ear is ill affected: so is the eye if the color be sad or not liminous
and recreatiue, or the shape of a membred body without his due measures and
simmetry, and the like of every other sense in his proper function. These
excesses or defectes or confusions and disorders in the sensible obiectes are
deformities and unseemly to the sense. In like sort the mind for the things
that be his mental obiectes has his good graces and his bad, whereof the one
contents him wondrous well, the other displeases him continually, no more nor
no less then ye see the discordes of music do to a well tuned ear. The
Greeks call this good grace of every thing in his kind, (...), the Latins
[decorum] we in our vulgar call it by a scholasticall term [decencie] our own
Saxon English term is [seemelynesse] that is to say, for his good shape and
utter appearance well pleasing the eye, we call it also [comelynesse] for the
delight it brings coming toward us, and to that purpose may be called
[pleasant approche] so as every way seeking to express this (...) of the
Greeks and decorum of the Latins, we are feign in our vulgar tongue to borrow
the term which our eye only for his noble prerogative over all the rest of
the senses does usurp, and to apply the same to all good, comely, pleasant and
honest things, even to the spiritual obiectes of the mind, which stand no
less in the due proportion of reason and discourse than any other material
thing does in his sensible beauty, proportion and comeliness.

Now because this comeliness rests in the good conformity of many things
and their sundry circumstances, with respect one to another, so as there be
found a just correspondencie between them by this or that relation, the
Greeks call it Analogy or a convenient proportion. This lovely conformity,
or proportion, or conueniencie between the sense and the sensible has nature
her self first most carefully observed in all her own works, then also by
kind graft it in the appetites of every creature working by intelligence to
covet and desire: and in their actions to imitate and perform: and of man
chiefly before any other creature as well in his speeches as in every other part
of his behavior. And this in generality and by an usual term is that which
the Latins call [decorum.] So albeit we before alleged that all our figures
be but transgressions of our daily speech, yet if they fall out decently to the
good liking of the mind or ear and to the bewtifying of the matter or
language, all is well, if indecently, and to the ears and minds misliking (be
the figure of it self never so commendable) all is amiss, the election is the
writers, the judgment is the worlds, as theirs to whom the reading
apperteineth. But since the actions of man with their circumstances be
infinite, and the world likewise replenished with many judgments, it may be a
question who shall have the determination of such controversy as may arise
whether this or that action or speech be decent or indecent: and verily it
seems to go all by discretion, not perchance of every one, but by a learned
and experienced discretion, for otherwise seems the decorum to a weak and
ignorant judgment, then it does to one of better knowledge and experience:
which shows that it rests in the discerning part of the mind, so as he who
can make the best and most differences of things by reasonable and witty
distinction is to be the fittest judge or sentencer of [decencie.] Such
generally is the discreetest man, particularly in any art the most skillful and
discreetest, and in all other things for the more part those that be of much
observation and greatest experience. The case then standing that discretion
must chiefly guide all those business, since there be sundry sorts of
discretion all unlike, even as there be men of action or art, I see no way so
fit to enable a man truly to estimate of [decencie] as example, by whose
verity we may deem the differences of things and their proportions, and by
particular discussions come at length to sentence of it generally, and also in
our behauiours the more easily to put it in execution. But by reason of the
sundry circumstances, that man's affairs are as it were wrapped in, this
[decencie] comes to be very much alterable and subject to variety, in so much
as our speech asks one manner of decency, in respect of the person who
speaks: another of his to whom it is spoken: another of whom we speak:
another of what we speak, and in what place and time and to what purpose. And
as it is of speech, so of al other our behauiours. We will therefore set you
down some few examples of every circumstance how it alters the decency of
speech or action. And by these few shall ye be able to gather a number more to
confirm and establish your judgment by a perfect discretion.

This decency, so farfoorth as apperteineth to the consideration of our art,
rests in writing, speech and behavior. But because writing is no more then
the image or character of speech, they shall go together in these our
observations. And first we will sort you out diverse points, in which the wise
and learned men of times past have noted much decency or vndecencie, every man
according to his discretion, as it has been said before: but wherein for the
most part all discreet men do generally agree, and vary not in opinion,
whereof the examples I will give you be worthy of remembrance: and though they
brought with them no doctrine or institution at all, yet for the solace they
may give the readers, after such a rabble of scholastical precepts which be
tedious, these reports being of the nature of matters historical, they are to
be embraced: but old memories are very profitable to the mind, and serve as a
glass to look upon and behold the events of time, and more exactly to skan
the truth of every case that shall happen in the affairs of man, and many
there be that happily do not observe every particularitie in matters of decency
or vndecencie: and yet when the case is told them by another man, they
commonly give the same sentence upon it. But yet whosoever observes much,
shall be counted the wisest and discreetest man, and whosoever spends all his
life in his own vain actions and conceits, and observes no man's else, he shall
in the end prove but a simple man. In which respect it is always said, one
man of experience is wiser than ten learned men, because of his long and
studious observation and often trial.

And your decencies are of sundry sorts, according to the many circumstances
accompanying our writing, speech or behavior, so as in the very sound or voice
of him that speaks, there is a decency that becomes, and an vndecencie
that misbeco^meth us, which The Emperor Anthonine marked well in the Orator
Philiseus, who spoke before him with so small and shrill a voice as the Emperor
was greatly annoyed therewith, and to make him shorten his tale, said, by thy
beard thou should be a man, but by thy voice a woman.

Phauorinus the Philosopher was counted very wise and well learned, but a
little too talkatiue and full of words: for the which Timocrates reproved him
in the hearing of one Polemon. That is no wonder quoth Polemon, for so be all
women. And besides, Phauorinus being known for an Eunuke or gelded man, came
by the same nippe to be noted as an effeminate and degenerate person.

And there is a measure to be used in a man's speech or tale, so as it be
neither for shortness too dark, nor for length too tedious. Which made
Cleomenes king of the Lacedaemonians give this unpleasant answer to the
Ambassadors of the Samiens, who had told him a long message from their City,
and desired to know his pleasure in it. My masters (says he) the first part
of your tale was so long, that I remember it not, which made that the second I
understood not, and as for the third part I do nothing well allow of. Great
princes and grave counselors who have little spare leisure to hearken, would
have speeches used to them such as be short and sweet.

And if they be spoken by a man of account, or one who for his years,
profession or dignity should be thought wise and reverend, his speeches and
words should also be grave, pithie and sententious, which was well noted by
king Antiochus, who likened Hermogenes the famous Orator of Greece, unto these
fowls in their moulting time, when their feathers be sick, and be so loase in
the flesh that at any little rowse they can easily shake them off: so says
he, can Hermogenes of all the men that ever I knew, as easily deliver from him
his vain and impertinent speeches and words.

And there is a decency, that every speech should be to the appetite and
delight, or dignity of the hearer and not for any respect arrogant or
undutiful, as was that of Alexander sent Ambassador from the Athenians to
The Emperor Marcus, this man seeing the emperor not so attentive to his tale, as
he would have had him, said by way of interruption, Caesar I pray thee give me
better ear, it seem thou know me not, nor from whom I came: the Emperor
nothing well liking his bold malapert speech, said: thou art deceived, for I
hear thee and know well enough, that thou art that fine, foolish, curious,
saucy Alexander that tendest to nothing but to comb and cury thy hair, to
pare thy nails, to pick thy teeth, and to perfume thy self with sweet oils,
that no man may abide the sent of thee. Proud speeches, and too much finesse
and curiosity is not commendable in an Ambassador. And I have known in my
time such of them, as studied more upon what apparel they should wear, and
what countenaunces they should keep at the times of their audience, then they
did upon the effect of their errant or commission.

And there is dece^cy in that every man should talk of the things they have
best skill of, and not in that, their knowledge and learning serves them not
to do, as we are wont to say, he speaks of Robin hood that never shot in his
bow: there came a great Orator before Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia, and
uttered much matter to him touching fortitude and valiancie in the wars: the
king laughed: why laughest thou quoth the learned man, since thou art a king
thy self, and one whom fortitude best becomes? why said Cleomenes would it
not make any body laugh, to hear the swallow who feeds only upon flies, to
boast of his great pray, and see the eagle stand by and say nothing? if thou
were a man of war or ever had been day of thy life, I would not laugh to
here thee speak of valiancie, but never being so, and speaking before an old
captain I can not choose but laugh.

And some things and speeches are decent or indecent in respect of the time
they be spoken or done in. As when a great clerk presented king Antiochus with
a book treating all of justice, the king that time lying at the siege of a
town, who looked upon the title of the book, and cast it to him again:
saying, what a devil tellest thou to me of justice, now thou see me use
force and do the best I can to bereeue mine enemy of his town? every thing
has his season which is called Opportunity, and the unfitness or indecency of
the time is called Importunity.

Sometime the vndeceny arises by the indignity of the word in respect of the
speaker himself, as when a daughter of France and next heir general to the
crown (if the law Salique had not barred her) being set in a great chaufe by
some hard words given her by another prince of the blood, said in her anger,
thou durst not have said thus much to me if God had given me a pair of, etc.
and told all out, meaning if God had made her a man and not a woman she had
been king of France. The word became not the greatness of her person, and
much less her sex, whose chief virtue is shamefastness, which the Latins
call Verecundia, that is a natural fear to be noted with any impudicitie: so
as when they hear or see any thing tending that way they commonly blush, and
is a part greatly praised in all women.

Yet will ye see in many cases how pleasant speeches and sauouring some
skurrillity and unshamefastness have now and then a certain decency, and well
become both the speaker to say, and the hearer to abide, but that is by reason
of some other circumstance, as when the speaker himself is known to be a
common iester or buffon, such as take upon them to make princes merry, or when
some occasion is given by the hearer to induce such a pleasant speech, and in
many other cases whereof no general rule can be given, but are best known by
example: as when Sir Andrew Flamock king Henry the eights standerdbearer, a
merry conceyted man and apt to skoffe, waiting one day at the kings heels when
he entered the park at Greenewich, the king blew his horn, Flamock having his
belly full, and his tail at commandment, gave out a rappe nothing faintly,
that the king turned him about and said how now sir? Flamock not well knowing
how to excuse his unmannerly act, if it please you Sir quoth he, your Majesty
blew one blast for the keeper and I another for his man. The king laughed
heartily and took it nothing offensiuely: for indeed as the case fell out it
was not indecently spoken by Sir Andrew Flamock, for it was the cleaneliest
excuse he could make, and a merry implicatiue in terms nothing odious, and
therefore a sporting satisfaction to the kings mind, in a matter which without
some such merry answer could not have been well taken. So was Flamocks action
most uncomely, but his speech excellently well beco^ming the occasion.

But at another time and in another like case, the same skurrillitie of Flamock
was more offensive, because it was more indecent. As when the king having
Flamock with him in his barge, passing from Westminster to Greenewich to visit
a fair Lady whom the king loved and was lodged in the tower of the Park: the
king coming within sight of the tower, and being disposed to be merry, said,
Flamock let us rhyme: as well as I can said Flamock if it please your grace. The
king began thus: Within this tower,
There lies a flower,
That has my heart.


Flamock for answer: Within this hour, she will, etc. with the rest in so
uncleanly terms, as might not now become me by the rule of Decorum to utter
writing to so great a Majesty, but the king took them in so evil part, as he
bid Flamock auant varlet, and that he should no more be so near unto him. And
wherein I would feign learn, lay this vndecencie? in the skurrill and filthy
terms not meet for a kings care? perchance so. For the king was a wise and
grave man, and though he hated not a fair woman, yet liked he nothing well to
hear speeches of ribaudrie: as they report of the emperor Octauian: Licet
fuerit ipse incontinentissimus, fuit tamen incontinente seuerissimus vltor. But
the very cause in deed was for that Flamocks reply answered not the kings
expectation, for the kings rhyme commencing with a pleasant and amorous
proposition: Sir Andrew Flamock to finish it not with love but with
lothsomnesse, by terms very rude and uncivil, and seeing the king greatly
favor that Lady for her much beauty by like or some other good parts, by his
fastidious answer to make her seem odious to him, it held a great
disproportion to the kings appetite, for nothing is so unpleasant to a man, as
to be encountered in his chief affection, and specially in his loves, and whom
we honor we should also reverence their appetites, or at the least bear with
them (not being wicked and utterly evil) and whatsoever they do affect, we do
not as becomes us if we make it seem to them horrible. This in mine opinion
was the chief cause of the vndecencie and also of the kings offense. Aristotle
the great philosopher knowing this very well, what time he put Calistenes to
king Alexander the greats service gave him this lesson. Sir quoth he, ye go
now from a scholar to be a courtier, see ye speak to the king your master,
either nothing at all, or else that which pleases him, which rule if
Calistenes had followed and forborne to cross the kings appetite in diverse
speeches, it had not cost him so deeply as afterward it did. A like matter of
offense fell out between The Emperor Charles the fifth, and an Ambassador of
king Henry the eight, who^ I could name but will not for the great opinion the
world had of his wisdom and sufficiency in that behalf, and all for misusing
of a term. The king in the matter of controversy betwixt him and Lady
Catherine of Castill the Emperors awnt, found himself grieved that the
Emperor should take her part and work under hand with the Pope to hinder the
divorce: and gave his Ambassador commission in good terms to open his griefs
to the Emperor, and to expostulat with his Majesty, for that he seemed to
forget the kings great kindness and friendship before times used with
The Emperor, as well by disbursing for him sundry great sums of money which
were not all yet repayd: as also by furnishing him at his need with store of
men and munition to his wars, and now to be thus used he thought it a very
evil requital. The Ambassador for too much animositie and more then needed
in the case, or perchance by ignorance of the propriety of the Spanish tongue,
told the Emperor among other words, that he was Hombre el mas ingrato enel
mondo, the ingratest person in the world to use his master so. The Emperor
took him suddenly with the word, and said: call thou me ingrato? I tell
thee learn better terms, or else I will teach them thee. Th'Embassadour
excused it by his commission, and said: they were the king his masters words,
and not his own. Nay quoth The Emperor, thy master durst not have sent me
these words, were it not for that broad ditch between him and me, meaning the
sea, which is hard to pass with an army of revenge. The Ambassador was
commanded away and no more hard by the Emperor, til by some other means
afterward the grief was either pacified or forgotten, and all this
inconuenie^ce grew by misuse of one word, which being otherwise spoken and in
some sort qualified, had easily helped all, and yet th'Embassadour might
sufficiently have satisfied his commission and much better advanced his
purpose, as to have said for this word [ye are ingrate,] ye have not used such
gratitude toward him as he has deserved: so ye may see how a word spoken
indecently, not knowing the phrase or propriety of a language, makes a whole
matter many times miscarrie. In which respect it is to be wished, that none
Ambassador speak his principal commandments but in his own language or in
another as natural to him as his own, and so it is used in all places of the
world saving in England. The Princes and their commissioners fearing least
otherwise they might utter any thing to their disadvantage, or else to their
disgrace: and I my self having seen the Courts of France, Spain, Italy,
and that of the Empire, with many inferior Courts, could never perceive that
the most noble personages, though they knew very well how to speak many
foreign languages, would at any times that they had been spoken unto, answer
but in their own, the Frenchman in French, the Spaniard in Spanish, the
Italian in Italian, and the very Dutch Prince in the Dutch language: whether it
were more for pride, or for fear of any lapse, I cannot tell. And Henry Earl
of Arundel being an old Courtier and a very princely man in all his actions,
kept that rule always. For on a time passing from England toward Italy by
her majesty's license, he was very honorably enterteined at the Court of
Brussels, by the Lady Duches of Parma, Regent there: and sitting at a banquet
with her, where also was the Prince of Orange, with all the greatest Princes of
the state, the Earl, though he could reasonably well speak French, would not
speak one French word, but all English, whether he asked any question, or
answered it, but all was done by Truchemen. In so much as the Prince of Orange
maruelling at it, looked a side on that part where I stood a beholder of the
feast, and said, I marvel your Noblemen of England do not desire to be better
languaged in the foreign languages. This word was by and by reported to the
Earl. Quoth the Earl again, tell my Lord the Prince, that I love to speak
in that language, in which I can best utter my mind and not mistake.

Another Ambassador used the like oversight by ouerweening himself that he
could naturally speak the French tongue, whereas in troth he was not skillful
in their terms. This Ambassador being a Bohemian, sent from the Emperor to
the French Court, where after his first audience, he was highly feasted and
banquetted. On a time, among other, a great Princess sitting at the table, by
way of talk asked the Ambassador whether the Empress his his mistress when
she went a hunting, or otherwise travailed abroad for her solace, did ride a
horsback or go in her coach. To which the Ambassador answered unawares and not
knowing the French term, Par ma foy elle cheuauche fort bien, and si en prend
grand plaisir. She rides (says he) very well, and takes great pleasure in it.
There was good smiling one upon another of the Ladies and Lords, the Ambassador
wist not whereat, but laughed himself for company. This word Cheuaucher in
the French tongue has a reprobate sense, specially being spoken of a woman's
riding.

And as rude and uncivil speeches carry a marvelous great indecencie, so do
sometimes those that be overmuch affected and nice: or that do savor of
ignorance or adulation, and be in the ear of grave and wise persons no less
offensive than the other: as when a suitor in Rome came to Tiberius the Emperor
and said, I would open my case to your Majesty, if it were not to trouble your
sacred business, sacras vestras occupationes as the Historiographer reports.
What meanest thou by that term quoth the Emperor, say laboriosas I pray thee,
and so thou may truly say, and bid him leave off such affected flattering
terms.

The like vndecencie used a Herald at arms sent by Charles the fifth Emperor,
to Fraunces the first French king, bringing him a message of defiance, and
thinking to qualify the bitterness of his message with words pompous and
magnificent for the kings honor, used much this term (sacred Majesty) which
was not usually given to the French king, but to say for the most part [Sire]
The French king neither liking of his errant, nor yet of his pompous speech,
said somewhat sharply, I pray thee good fellow clawe me not where I itch not
with thy sacred majesty, but go to thy business, and tell thine errand in
such terms as are decent betwixt enemies, for thy master is not my friend, and
turned him to a Prince of the blood who stood by, saying, me thinks this
fellow speaks like Bishop Nicholas, for on Saint Nicholas night commonly the
Scholars of the Country make them a Bishop, who like a foolish boy, goes
about blessing and preaching with so childish terms, as makes the people
laugh at his foolish counterfaite speeches.

And yet in speaking or writing of a Princes affairs and fortunes there is a
certain Decorum, that we may not use the same terms in their business, as we
might very well do in a meaner persons, the case being all one, such reverence
is due to their estates. As for example, if an Historiographer shall write of an
Emperor or King, how such a day he joined battle with his enemy, and being
ouer-laide ran out of the field, and took his heels, or put spur to his
horse and fled as fast as he could: the terms be not decent, but of a mean
soldier or captain, it were not indecently spoken. And as one, who
translating certain books of Virgils Aeneidos into English meetre, said that
Aeneas was feign to trudge out of Troy: which term became better to be spoken
of a beggar, or of a rogue, or a lackey: for so we use to say to such manner of
people, be trudging hence.

Another Englishing this word of Virgill [fato profugus] called Aeneas [by fate
a fugitiue] which was indecently spoken, and not to the Authors intent in the
same word: for whom he studied by all means to auaunce above all other men of
the world for virtue and magnanimity, he meant not to make him a fugitive. But
by occasion of his great distresses, and of the hardness of his destinies, he
would have it appear that Aeneas was enforced to fly out of Troy, and for
many years to be a romer and a wandrer about the world both by land and sea
[fato profugus] and never to find any resting place till he came into Italy, so
as ye may evidently perceive in this term [fugitiue] a notable indignity
offered to that princely person, and by the other word (a wanderer) none
indignity at all, but rather a term of much love and commiseration. The same
translatour when he came to these words: Insignem pietate virum, tot voluere
casus tot adire labores compulit. He turned it thus, what moved Juno to tugge
so great a captain as Aeneas, which word tugge spoken in this case is so
indecent as none other could have been devised, and took his first original
from the cart, because it signifies the pull or draught of the oxen or horses,
and therefore the leathers that bear the chief stresse of the draught, the
cartars call them tugges, and so we use to say that shrewd boys tugge each
other by the ears, for pull.

Another of our vulgar makers, spoke as illfaringly in this verse written to
the dispraise of a rich man and covetous. Thou have a misers mind (thou have a
princes pelfe] a lewd term to be spoken of a princes treasure, which in no
respect nor for any cause is to be called pelf, though it were never so mean,
for pelf is properly the scrappes or shreds of tailors and of skinners, which
are accounted of so vile price as they be commonly cast out of doors, or
otherwise bestowed upon base purposes: and carries not the like reason or
decency, as when we say in reproach of a niggard or vserer, or worldly covetous
man, that he sets more by a little pelf of the world, than by his credit or
health, or conscience. For in comparison of these treasours all the gold or
silver in the world may by a skornefull term be called pelf, and so ye see
that the reason of the decency holds not alike in both cases. Now let us
pass from these examples, to treat of those that concern the comeliness and
decency of man's behavior.

And some speech may be when it is spoken very indecent, and yet the same
having afterward somewhat added to it may become pretty and decent, as was the
stowte word used by a captain in France, who sitting at the lower end of the
Duke of Guyses table among many, the day after there had been a great battle
foughten, the Duke finding that this captain was not seen that day to do any
thing in the field, taxed him privily thus in all the hearings. Where were you
Sir the day of the battle, for I saw ye not? the captain answered promptly:
where ye durst not have been: and the Duke began to kindle with the word,
which the Gentleman perceiving, said spedily: I was that day among the
carriages, where your excellency would not for a thousand crowns have been
seen. Thus from indecent it came by a witty reformation to be made decent
again.

The like happened on a time at the Duke of Northumberlandes bourd, where merry
John Heywood was allowed to sit at the tables end. The Duke had a very noble
and honorable mind always to pay his debts well, and when he lacked money,
would not stick to sell the greatest part of his plate: so had he done few
days before. Heywood being loath to call for his drink so often as he was dry,
turned his eye toward the cupbord and said I find great miss of your graces
standing cups: the Duke thinking he had spoken it of some knowledge that his
plate was lately sold, said somewhat sharply, why Sir will not those cups
serve as good a man as your self. Heywood readily replied. Yes if it please
your grace, but I would have one of them stand still at mine elbow full of
drink that I might not be driven to trouble your men so often to call for it.
This pleasant and speedy reuers of the former words help all the matter
again, whereupon the Duke became very pleasant and drank a bolle of wine to
Heywood, and bid a cup should always be standing by him.

It were to busy a piece of work for me to tell you of all the parts of
decency and indecency which have been observed in the speeches of man and in
his writings, and this that I tell you is rather to solace your ears with
pretty conceits after a sort of long scholasticall precepts which may happen
have doubled them, rather then for any other purpose of institution or
doctrine, which to any Courtier of experience, is not necessary in this
behalf. And as they appear by the former examples to rest in our speech and
writing: so do the same by like proportion consist in the whole behavior of
man, and that which he does well and commendably is ever decent, and the
contrary indecent, not in every man's judgment always one, but after their
several discretion and by circumstance diversely, as by the next Chapter shall be
showed.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of decency in behavior which also belongs to the consideration of the Poet
or maker.

ANd there is a dece^cy to be observed in every man's actio^ and behavior
as well as in his speech and writing which some peradventure would think
impertinent to be treated of in this book, where we do but inform the
commendable fashions of language and style: but that is otherwise, for the good
maker or poet who is in dece^t speech and good terms to describe all things
and with praise or dispraise to report every ma^s behavior, ought to know the
comeliness of an actio^ as well as of a word and thereby to direct himself
both in praise and persuasion or any other point that perteines to the Orators
art. Wherefore some examples we will set down of this manner of dece^cy in
behavior leaving you for the rest to our book which we have written de
Decoro, where ye shall see both parts handled more exactly. And this decency
of man's behavior as well as of his speech must also be deemed by discretion, in
which regard the thing that may well become one man to do may not become
another, and that which is seemly to be done in this place is not so seemly
in that, and at such a time decent, but at another time indecent, and in such a
case and for such a purpose, and to this and that end and by this and that
event, perusing all the circumstances with like consideration. Therefore we say
that it might become king Alexander to give a hundredth talentes to Anaxagoras
the Philosopher, but not for a beggarly Philosopher to accept so great a gift,
for such a Prince could not be impouerished by that expense, but the
Philosopher was by it excessiuely to be enriched, so was the kings action
proportionable to his estate and therefore decent, the Philosophers,
disproportionable both to his profession and calling and therefore indecent.

And yet if we shall examine the same point with a clearer discretion, it may
be said that whatsoever it might become king Alexander of his regal largess to
bestow upon a poor Philosopher unasked, that might as well become the
Philosopher to receive at his hands without refusal, and had otherwise been
some empeachement of the kings ability or wisdom, which had not been decent
in the Philosoper, nor the immoderatnesse of the kings gift in respect of the
Philosophers mean estate made his acceptance the less decent, since Princes
liberalities are not measured by merit nor by other men's estimations, but by
their own appetits and according to their greatness. So said king Alexander
very like himself to one Perillus to whom he had given a very great gift,
which he made curtesy to accept, saying it was too much for such a mean person,
what quoth the king if it be too much for thy self, have thou never a friend
or kinsman that may fare the better by it? But peradventure if any such
immoderat gift had been craved by the Philosopher and not voluntarily offered by
the king it had been indecent to have taken it. Even so if one that stands
upon his merit, and spares to crave the Princes liberality in that which is
moderate and fit for him, does as indecently. For men should not expect till
the Prince remembered it of himself and began as it were the gratification, but
ought to be put in remembrance by humble solicitations, and that is duetifull
and decent, which made king Henry the eighth her Majesty's most noble father, and
for liberality nothing inferior to king Alexander the great, answer one of
his privy chamber, who prayed him to be good and gracious to a certain old
Knight being his servant, for that he was but an ill beggar, if he be ashamed
to beg we will think scorn to give. And yet peradventure in both these
cases, the vndecencie for too much craving or sparing to crave, might be easily
helped by a decent magnificence in the Prince, as Amazis king of Egypt very
honorably considered, who asking one day for one Diopithus a noble man of his
Court, what was become of him for that he had not seen him wait of long time,
one about the king told him that he heard say he was sick and of some conceit
he had taken that his Majesty had but slenderly looked to him, using many
others very bountifully. I beshrew his fools head quoth the king, why had he
not sued unto us and made us privy of his want, then added, but in truth we
are most to blame our selves, who by a mindeful beneficence without suit should
have supplied his bashfulnesse, and forthwith commanded a great reward in
money and pension to be sent unto him, but it happened that when the kings
messengers entered the chamber of Diopithus, he had newly given up the ghost:
the messengers sorrowed the case, and Diopithus friends sat by and wept, not
so much for Diopithus death, as for pity that he ouerliued not the coming of
the kings reward. Thereupon it came ever after to be used for a proverb that
when any good turn comes too late to be used, to call it Diopithus reward.

In Italy and France I have known it used for common policy, the Princes to
differ the bestowing of their great liberalities as Cardinalships and other
high dignities and offices of gain, till the parties whom they should seem to
gratify be so old or so sick as it is not likely they should long enjoy them.

In the time of Charles the ninth French king, I being at the Spaw waters,
there lay a Marshall of France called Monsieur de Sipier, to use those waters
for his health, but when the Physicians had all given him up, and that there
was no hope of life in him, came from the king to him a letters patents of six
thousand crowns yearly pension during his life with many comfortable words:
the man was not so much past remembrance, but he could say to the messenger
trop tard, trop tard, it should have come before, for in deed it had been
promised long and came not till now that he could not fare the better by it.

And it became king Antiochus, better to bestow the fair Lady Stratonica his
wife upon his son Demetrius who lay sick for her love and would else have
perished, as the Physicians cunningly discovered by the beating of his pulse,
then it could become Demetrius to be inamored with his fathers wife, or to
enjoy her of his gift, because the fathers act was led by discretion and of a
fatherly compassion, not grutching to depart from his dearest possession to
save his childs life, where as the son in his appetite had no reason to lead
him to love unlawfully, for whom it had rather been decent to die, then to have
violated his fathers bed with safety of his life.

No more would it be seemly for an aged man to play the wanton like a child,
for it stands not with the conueniency of nature, yet when king Agesilaus
having a great sort of little children, was one day disposed to solace himself
among them in a gallery where they played, and took a little hobby horse of
wood and bestrid it to keep them in play, one of his friends seemed to mislike
his lightness, o good friend quoth Agesilaus, rebuke me not for this fault till
thou have children of thine own, showing in deed that it came not of vanity
but of a fatherly affection, ioying in the sport and company of his little
children, in which respect and as that place and time served, it was
dispenceable in him and not indecent.

And in the choice of a man's delights and manner of his life, there is a
decency, and so we say the old man generally is no fit companion for the young
man, nor the rich for the poor, nor the wise for the foolish. Yet in some
respects and by discretion it may be otherwise, as when the old man has the
government of the young, the wise teaches the foolish, the rich is waited on by
the poor for their relief, in which regard the conversation is not indecent.

And Proclus the Philosopher knowing how every indecencie is unpleasant to
nature, and namely, how uncomely a thing it is for young men to do as old men
do (at leastwise as young men for the most part do take it) applied it very
wittily to his purpose: for having his son and heir a notable unthrift, and
delighting in nothing but in hawks and hounds, and gay apparel, and such
like vanities, which neither by gentle nor sharp admonitions of his father,
could make him leave: Proclus himself not only bare with his son, but also
used it himself for company, which some of his friends greatly rebuked him for,
saying, o Proclus, an old man and a Philosopher to play the fool and
lascivious more than the son. Mary, quoth Proclus, and therefore I do it, for
it is the next way to make my son change his life, when he shall see how
indecent it is in me to lead such a life, and for him being a young man, to
keep company with me being an old man, and to do that which I do.

So is it not unseemly for any ordinary Captain to win the victory or any
other auantage in war by fraud and breach of faith: as Hanniball with the
Romans, but it could not well become the Romans managing so great an Empire,
by examples of honor and justice to do as Hanniball did. And when Parmenio in
a like case persuaded king Alexander to break the day of his appointment, and
to set upon Darius at the sudden, which Alexander refused to do, Parmenio
saying, I would do it if I were Alexander, and I too quoth Alexander if I were
Parmenio: but it behooves me in honor to fight liberally with mine enemies,
and justly to overcome. And thus ye see that was decent in Parmenios action,
which was not in the king his masters.

A great nobleman and Counselor in this Realm was secretly advised by his
friend, not to use so much writing his letters in favor of every man that
asked them, specially to the Judges of the Realm in cases of justice. To whom
the noble man answered, it becomes us Counselors better to use instance for
our friend, then for the Judges to sentence at instance: for whatsoever we do
require them, it is in their choice to refuse to do, but for all that the
example was ill and dangerous.

And there is a decency in choosing the times of a man's business, and as the
Spaniard says, es tiempo de negotiar, there is a fit time for every man to
perform his business in, and to atte^d his affairs, which out of that time
would be indecent: as to sleep al day and wake al night, and to go a hunting
by torch-light, as an old Earl of Arundel used to do, or for any occasion of
little importance, to wake a man out of his sleep, or to make him rise from
his dinner to talk with him, or such like importunities, for so we call every
unseasonable action, and the vndecencie of the time.

Callicratides being sent Ambassador by the Lacedaemonians, to Cirus the young
king of Persia to contract with him for money and men toward their wars
against the Athenians, came to the Court at such unseasonable time as the king
was yet in the midst of his dinner, and went away again saying, it is now no
time to interrupt the kings mirth. He came again another day in the after
noone, and finding the king at a rere-banquet, and to have taken the wine
somewhat plentifully, turned back again, saying, I think there is no hour
fit to deal with Cirus, for he is ever in his banquets: I will rather leave
all the business undone, then do any thing that shall not become the
Lacedaemonians: meaning to offer conference of so great importance to his
Country, with a man so distempered by surfeit, as he was not likely to give
him any reasonable resolution in the cause.

One Eudamidas brother to king Agis of Lacedemonia, coming by Zenocrates
school and looking in, saw him sit in his chair, disputing with a long hoare
beard, asked who it was, one answered, Sir it is a wise man and one of them
that searches after virtue, and if he have not yet found it quoth Eudamidas
when will he use it, that now at this years is seeking after it, as who would
say it is not time to talk of matters when they should be put in execution,
nor for an old man to be to seek what virtue is, which all his youth he should
have had in exercise.

Another time coming to hear a notable Philosopher dispute, it happened, that
all was ended even as he came, and one of his familiers would have had him
requested the Philosopher to begin again, that were indecent and nothing
civil quoth Eudamidas, for if he should come to me supperlesse when I had
supped before, were it seemly for him to pray me to suppe again for his
company?

And the place makes a thing decent or indecent, in which consideration one
Euboidas being sent Ambassador into a foreign realm, some of his familiars
took occasion at the table to praise the wives and women of that country in
presence of their own husbands, which th'embassadour misliked, and when supper
was ended and the guestes departed, took his familiars aside, and told them
that is was nothing decent in a strange country to praise the women, nor
specially a wife before her husbands face, for inconueniencie that might rise
thereby, as well to the prayser as to the woman, and that the chief
commendation of a chaste matrone, was to be known only to her husband, and not
to be observed by strangers and guestes.

And in the use of apparel there is no little decency and vndecencie to be
perceived, as well for the fashion as the stuff, for it is comely that every
estate and vocation should be known by the differences of their habit: a
clarke from a lay man: a gentleman from a yeoman: a soldier from a citizen,
and the chief of every degree from their inferiors, because in confusion and
disorder there is no manner of decency.

The Romans of any other people most severe ce^surers of decency, thought no
upper garment so comely for a civil man as a long playted gown, because it
shows much gravity and also pudicitie, hiding every member of the body which
had not bin pleasant to behold. In so much as a certain Proconsull or Legate of
theirs dealing one day with Ptolome king of Egypt, seeing him clad in a strait
narrow garment very lasciuiously, discovering every part of his body, gave him
a great check for it: and said, that unless he used more sad and comely
garments, the Romans would take no pleasure to hold amity with him, for by
the wantonness of his garment they would judge the vanity of his mind, not to
be worthy of their constant friendship. A pleasant old courtier wearing one day
in the sight of a great counselor, after the new guise a french cloak skarce
reaching to the wast, a long beaked doublet hanging down to his thies, and an
high pair of silk netherstocks that covered all his buttockes and loignes the
Councellor marueled to see him in that sort disguised, and otherwise than he
had bin wont to be. Sir quoth the Gentleman to excuse it: if I should not be
able when I had need to piss out of my doublet, and to do the rest in my
netherstocks (using the plain term) all men would say I were but a lowte, the
Councellor laughed heartily at the absurdity of the speech, but what would
those sower fellows of Rome have said trow ye? truly in mine opinion, that
all such persons as take pleasure to show their limbs, specially those that
nature has commanded out of sight, should be enjoined either to go stark
naked, or else to resort back to the comely and modest fashion of their own
country apparel, used by their old honorable ancestors.

And there is a dece^cy of apparel in respect of the place where it is to be
used: as, in the Court to be richely apparrelled: in the country to wear more
plain and homely garments. For who who would not think it a ridiculous thing
to see a Lady in her milke-house with a velvet gown, and at a bridal in her
cassock of mockado: a Gentleman of the Country among the bushes and briers,
go in a pounced dublet and a pair of embrodered hosen, in the City to wear
a frise Ierkin and a pair of leather breeches? yet some such phantasticals
have I known, and one a certain knight, of all other the most vain, who
commonly would come to the Sessions, and other ordinary meetings and
Commissions in the Country, so bedect with buttons and aglets of gold and such
costly embroderies, as the poor plain men of the Country called him (for his
gayness) the golden knight. Another for the like cause was called Saint
Sunday: I think at this day they be so far spent, as either of the^ would be
content with a good cloth cloak: and this came by want of discretion, to
discern and deem right of decency, which many Gentlemen do wholly limite by
the person or degree, where reason does it by the place and presence: which
may be such as it might very well become a great Prince to wear courser
apparel than in another place or presence a meaner person.

Nevertheless in the use of a garment many occasions alter the decency,
sometimes the quality of the person, sometimes of the case, otherwhiles the
country custom, and often the constitution of laws, and the very nature of
use it self. As for example a king and prince may use rich and gorgious
apparel decently, so cannot a mean person do, yet if an herald of arms to
whom a king gives his gown of cloth of gold, or to whom it was incident as a
fee of his office, do were the same, he does it decently, because such has
always been th'allowances of heraldes: but if such herald have worn out, or
sold, or lost that gown, to buy him a new of the like stuff with his own
money and to wear it, is not decent in the eye and judgment of them that know
it.

And the country custom makes things decent in use, as in Asia for all men to
wear long gowns both a foot and horseback: in Europa short gaberdins, or
clokes, or iackets, even for their upper garments. The Turk and Persian to
wear great tolibants of ten, fifteen, and twenty else of linen a piece
upon their heads, which can not be removed: in Europe to were caps or hats,
which upon every occasion of salutation we use to put of, as a sign of
reverence. In The East parts the men to make water couring like women, with us
standing at a wall. With them to congratulat and salute by giving a beck with
the head, or a bend of the body, with us here in England, and in Germany, and
all other Northern parts of the world to shake hands. In France, Italy, and
Spain to embrace over the shoulder, under the arms, at the very knees,
according the superiors degree. With us the women give their mouth to be
kissed* in other places their cheek, in many places their hand, or in steed of
an offer to the hand, to say these words Bezo los manos. And yet some others
surmounting in all courtly civility will say, Los manos and los piedes. And
above that reach too, there be that will say to the Ladies, Lombra de sus
pisadas, the shadow of your steps. Which I recite unto you to show the phrase
of those courtly seruitours in yielding the mistresses honor and reverence.

And it is seen that very particular use of it self makes a matter of much
decency and vndecencie, without any country custom or allowance, as if one
that has many years worn a gown shall come to be seen wear a iakquet or
ierkin, or he that has many years worn a beard or long hair among those
that had done the contrary, and come suddenly to be pold or shaven, it will
seem only to himself, a deshight and very indecent, but also to all others
that never used to go so, until the time and custom have abrogated that
mislike.

So was it here in England till her Majesty's most noble father for diverse good
respects, caused his own head and all his Courtiers to be polled and his beard
to be cut short. Before that time it was thought more decent both for old men
and young to be all shaven and to wear long hair either rounded or square.
Now again at this time, the young Gentlemen of the Court have taken up the
long hair trayling on their shoulders, and think it more decent: for what
respect I would be glad to know.

The Lacedaemonians bearing long bushes of hair, finely kept and curled up,
used this civil argument to maintain that custom. Hair (say they) is the
very ornament of nature appointed for the head, which therefore to use in his
most sumptuous degree is comely, specially for them that be Lords, Masters of
men, and of a free life, having ability and leisure enough to keep it clean,
and so for a sign of seignorie, riches and liberty, the masters of the
Lacedaemonians used long hair. But their vassals, servant and slaves used it
short or shaven in sign of servitude and because they had no mean nor leisure
to kembe and keep it cleanely. It was besides combersome to them having many
business to attend, in some services there might no manner of filth be falling
from their heads. And to all soldiers it is very noisome and a dangerous
disauantage in the wars or in any particular combat, which being the most
comely profession of every noble young Gentleman, it ought to persuade them
greatly from wearing long hair. If there be any that seek by long hair to
help or to hide an ill featured face, it is in them allowable so to do,
because every man may decently reform by art, the faults and imperfections
that nature has wrought in them.

And all singularities or affected parts of a ma^s behavior seem vndece^t, as
for one man to march or iet in the street more stately, or to look more
sole^pnely, or to go more gayly and in other colors or fashioned garments
then another of the same degree and estate.

Yet such singularities have had many times both good liking and good success,
otherwise then many would have looked for. As when Dinocrates the famous
architect, desirous to be known to king Alexander the great, and having none
acquaintance to bring him to the kings speech, he came one day to the Court
very strangely apparelled in long skarlet robes, his head compast with a
garland of Laurel, and his face all to be slicked with sweet oil, and stood
in the kings chamber, motioning nothing to any man: news of this stranger came
to the king, who caused him to be brought to his presence, and asked his name,
and the cause of his repair to the Court. He answered, his name was
Dinocrates the Architect, who came to present his Majesty with a platform of
his own devising, how his Majesty might build a City upon the mountain
Athos in Macedonia, which should bear the figure of a man's body, and told him
all how. Forsooth the breast and bulk of his body should rest upon such a
flat: that hill should be his head, all set with foregrowen woods like hair:
his right arm should stretch out to such a hollow bottom as might be like his
hand: holding a dish containing all the waters that should serve that City: the
left arm with his hand should hold a valley of all the orchards and gardens of
pleasure pertaining thereunto: and either leg should lie upon a ridge of
rock, very gallantly to behold, and so should accomplish the full figure of a
man. The king asked him what commodity of soil, or sea, or nauigable river
lay near unto it, to be able to sustain so great a number of inhabitants.
Truly Sir (quoth Dinocrates) I have not yet considered thereof: for in truth
it is the barest part of all the Country of Macedonia. The king smiled at it,
and said very honorably, we like your device well, and mean to use your
service in the building of a City, but we will choose out a more commodious
situation: and made him attend in that voyage in which he conquered Asia and
Egypt, and there made him chief Surueyour of his new City of Alexandria. Thus
did Dinocrates singularity in attire greatly further him to his advancement.

Yet are generally all rare things and such as breed marvel and admiration
somewhat holding of the indecent, as when a man is bigger and exceeding the
ordinary stature of a man like a Giaunt, or far under the reasonable and
common size of men, as a dwarf, and such vndecencies do not anger us, but
either we pity them or scorn at them.

But at all insolent and unwonted parts of a man's behavior, we find many
times cause to mislike or to be mistrustfull, which proceeds of some
indecency that is in it, as when a man that has always been strange and
unacquainted with us, will suddenly become our familiar and domestic: and
another that has been always stern and churlish, will be upon the sudden
affable and courteous, it is neither a comely sight, nor a sign of any good
toward us. Which the subtle Italian well observed by the successes thereof,
saying in Proverb. Chi me sa meglio che non suole,
Tradito me ha o tradir me vuole
He that speaks me fairer, than his wont was too
Has done me harm, or means for to do.


Now again all manner of conceits that stir up any vehement passion in a
man, do it by some turpitude or evil and indecency that is in them, as to
make a man angry there must be some injury or contempt offered, to make him
envy there must proceed some undeserved prosperity of his egall or inferior,
to make him pity some miserable fortune or spectakle to behold.

And yet in every of these passions being as it were vndecencies, there is a
comeliness to be discerned, which some men can keep and some men can not, as
to be angry, or to envy, or to hate, or to pity, or to be ashamed decently,
that is none otherwise then reason requires. This surmise appears to be
true, for Homer the father of Poets writing that famous and most honorable
poem called the Illiades or wars of Troy: made his comme^cement the
magnanimous wrath and anger of Achilles in his first verse thus: (...). Sing
forth my muse the wrath of Achilles Peleus son: which the Poet would never
have done if the wrath of a prince had not been in some sort comely and
allowable. But when Arrianus and Curtius historiographers that wrote the noble
gestes of king Alexander the great, came to praise him for many things, yet for
his wrath and anger they reproched him, because it proceeded not of any
magnanimity, but upon surfeit and distemper in his diet, nor growing of any
just causes, was exercised to the destruction of his dearest friends and
familiers, and not of his enemies nor any other ways so honorably as the others
was, and so could not be reputed a decent and comely anger.

So may al your other passions be used decently though the very matter of their
original be grounded upon some vndecencie, as it is written by a certain king
of Egypt, who looking out of his window, and seeing his own son for some
grievous offense, carried by the officers of his justice to the place of
execution: he never once changed his countenance at the matter, though the
sight were never so full of ruth and atrocitie. And it was thought a decent
countenance and constant animositie in the king to be so affected, the case
concerning so high and rare a piece of his own justice. But within few days
after when he beheld out of the same window an old friend and familiar of his,
stand begging an alms in the street, he wept tenderly, remembering their old
familiarity and considering how by the mutabilitie of fortune and frailty of
ma^s estate, it might one day come to pass that he himself should fall into
the like miserable estate. He therefore had a remorse very comely for a king in
that behalf, which also caused him to give order for his poor friends
plentiful relief.

But generally to weep for any sorrow (as one may do for pity) is not so
decent in a man: and therefore all high minded persons, when they cannot choose
but shed tears, will turn away their face as a countenance indecent for a man
to show, and so will the standers by till they have suppressed such passion,
thinking it nothing decent to behold such an uncomely countenance. But for
Ladies and women to weep and shed tears at every little grief, it is nothing
uncomely, but rather a sign of much good nature and meeknes of mind, a most
decent property for that sex; and therefore they be for the more part more
devout and charitable, and greater geuers of alms than men, and zealous
relieuers of prisoners, and beseechers of pardons, and such like parts of
commiseration. Yea they be more than so too: for by the common proverb, a
woman will weep for pity to see a gosling go barefoote.

But most certainly all things that move a man to laughter, as do these
scurrilities and other ridiculous behauiours, it is for some vndecencie that is
found in them: which makes it decent for every man to laugh at them. And
therefore when we see or hear a natural fool and idiot do or say any thing
foolishly, we laugh not at him: but when he does or speaks wisely, because
that is unlike him self: and a buffonne or counterfeit fool, to hear him
speak wisely which is like himself, it is no sport at all, but for such a
counterfeit to talk and look foolishly it makes us laugh, because it is no
part of his natural, for in every uncomeliness there must be a certain
absurdity and disproportion to nature, and the opinion of the hearer or
beholder to make the thing ridiculous. But for a fool to talk foolishly or a
wiseman wisely, there is no such absurdity or disproportion.

And though at all absurdities we may decently laugh, and when they be no
absurdities not decently, yet in laughing is there an vndecencie for other
respects sometime, than of the matter it self, Which made Philippus son to
the first Christen Emperor, Philippus Arabicus sitting with his father one day
in the theater to behold the sports, give his father a great rebuke because he
laughed, saying that it was no comely countenance for an Emperor to bewray in
such a public place, nor specially to laugh at every foolish toy: the
posterity gave the son for that cause the name of Philippus Agelastos or
without laughter.

I have seen foreign Ambassadors in the Queens presence laugh so
dissolutely at some rare pastime or sport that has been made there, that
nothing in the world could worse have becomen them, and others very wise men,
whether it have been of some pleasant humor and complexion, or for other
default in the spleen, or for ill education or custom, that could not utter
any grave and earnest speech without laughter, which part was greatly
discommended in them.

And Cicero the wisest of any Roman writers, thought it uncomely for a man to
dance: saying, Saltantem sobrium vidi neminem. I never saw any man dance that
was sober and in his right wits, but there by your leave he failed, nor our
young Courtiers will allow it, besides that it is the most decent and comely
demeanor of all exultations and reioycements of the heart, which is no less
natural to man then to be wise or well learned, or sober.

To tell you the decencies of a number of other behauiours, one might do it to
please you with pretty reports, but to the skillful Courtiers it shall be
nothing necessary, for they know all by experience without learning. Yet some
few remembraunces we will make you of the most material, which our selves
have observed, and so make an end.

It is decent to be affable and courteous at meals and meetings, in open
assemblies more solemn and strange, in place of authority and judgment not
familiar nor pleasant, in counsel secret and sad, in ordinary conferences
easy and apert, in conversation simple, in capitulation subtle and
mistrustfull, at mournings and burials sad and sorrowful, in feasts and
bankets merry and joyful, in household expense pinching and sparing, in
public entertainment spending and pompous. The Prince to be sumptuous and
magnificent, the private man liberal with moderation, a man to be in giving
free, in asking spare, in promise slow, in performance speedy, in contract
circumspect but just, in amity sincere, in ennimitie wily and cautelous [
dolus an virtus quis in host requirit, says the Poet] and after the same rate
every sort and manner of business or affair or action has his decency and
vndecencie, either for the time or place or person or some other circumstaunce,
as Priests to be sober and sad, a Preacher by his life to give good example, a
Judge to be incorrupted, solitary and unacquainted with Courtiers or Courtly
entertainements, and as the Philosopher says Oportet iudice^ esse rudem and
simplicem, without plaite or wrinkle, sower in look and churlish in speech,
contrariwise a Courtly Gentleman to be lofty and curious in countenance, yet
sometimes a creeper, and a curry fauell with his superiors.

And touching the person, we say it is comely for a man to be a lamb in the
house, and a Lion in the field, appointing the decency of his quality by the
place, by which reason also we limit the comely parts of a woman to consist in
four points, that is to be a shrewe in the kitchen, a saint in the Church, an
Angel at the bourd, and an Ape in the bed, as the Chronicle reports by
Mistress Shore paramour to king Edward the fourth.

Then also there is a decency in respect of the persons with who^ we do
negotiate, as with the great personages his egals to be solemn and surly, with
meaner men pleasant and popular, stout with the sturdie and mild with the
meek, which is a most decent conversation and not reproachful or unseemly, as
the proverb goes, by those that use the contrary, a Lion among sheep and a
sheep among Lions.

Right so in negotiating with Princes we ought to seek their favor by
humility and not by sternnesse, nor to traffic with the^ by way of indent or
condition, but frankly and by manner of submission to their wills, for Princes
may be lead but not driven, nor they are to be vanquished by allegation, but
must be suffered to have the victory and be relented unto: nor they are not to
be challenged for right or justice, for that is a manner of accusation: nor to be
charged with their promises, for that is a kind of condemnation: and at their
request we ought not to be hardly entreated but easily, for that is a sign of
deffidence and mistrust in their bounty and gratitude: nor to recite the good
services which they have received at our hands, for that is but a kind of
exprobratio^, but in craving their bounty or largess to remember unto them
all their former beneficences, making no mention of our own merits, and so it
is thankful, and in praising them to their faces to do it very modestly: and
in their commendations not to be excessive for that is tedious, and always
savors of suttelty more then of sincere love.

And in speaking to a Prince the voice ought to be low and not loud nor
shrill, for the one is a sign of humility the other of too much audacitie and
presumption. Nor in looking on them seem to ouerlooke them, nor yet behold
them too steadfastly, for that is a sign of impudence or little reverence, and
therefore to the great Princes Oriental their seruitours speaking or being
spoken unto abbase their eyes in token of lowlines, which behavior we do not
observe to our Princes with so good a discretion as they do: and such as retire
from the Princes presence, do not by and by turn tail to them as we do, but
go backward or sideling for a reasonable space, til they be at the wall or
chamber door passing out of sight, and is thought a most decent behavior to
their sovereigns. I have heard that king Henry the eighth her Majesty's father,
though otherwise the most gentle and affable Prince of the world, could not
abide to have any man stare in his face or to fix his eye too steedily upon him
when he talked with them: nor for a common suter to exclame or cry out for
justice, for that is offensive and as it were a secret impeachement of his
wrong doing, as happened once to a Knight in this Realm of great worship
speaking to the king. Nor in speeches with them to be too long, or too much
affected, for the one is tedious the other is irksome, nor with loud acclamations
to applaude them, for that is too popular and rude and betokens either
ignorance, or seldom access to their presence, or little frequenting their
Courts: nor to show too merry or light a countenance, for that is a sign of
little reverence and is a piece of a contempt.

And in gaming with a Prince it is decent to let him sometimes win of purpose,
to keep him pleasant, and never to refuse his gift, for that is undutiful:
nor to forgive him his losses, for that is arrogant: nor to give him great
gifts, for that is either insolence or folly: nor to feast him with excessive
charge for that is both vain and envious, and therefore the wise Prince king
Henry the seventh her Majesty's grandfather, if his chance had been to lie at
any of his subjects houses, or to pass more meals then one, he that would take
upon him to defray the charge of his diet, or of his officers and household, he
would be maruelously offended with it, saying what private subject dare
undertake a Princes charge, or look into the secret of his expe^ce? Her
Majesty has been known oftentimes to mislike the superfluous expense of her
subjects bestowed upon her in times of her progresses.

Likewise in matter of advise it is neither decent to flatter him for that is
servile* neither to be to rough or plain with him, for that is dangerous, but
truly to Counsel and to admonish, gravely not grievously, sincerely not
sourely: which was the part that so greatly commended Cineas Counselor to
king Pirrhus, who kept that decency in all his persuasions, that he ever
prevailed in advice, and carried the king which way he would.

And in a Prince it is comely to give unasked, but in a subject to ask
unbidden: for that first is sign of a bountiful mind, this of a loyal and
confident. But the subject that craves not at his Princes hand, either he is of
no desert, or proud, or mistrustfull of his Princes goodness: therefore king
Henry the eighth to one that entreated him to remember one Sir Anthony Rouse with
some reward for that he had spent much and was an ill beggar: the king
answered (noting his insolency,) If he be ashamed to beg, we are ashamed to
give, and was nevertheless one of the most liberal Princes of the world.

And yet in some Courts it is otherwise used, for in Spain it is thought very
indecent for a Courtier to crave, supposing that it is the part of an
importune: therefore the king of ordinary calls every second, third or
fourth year for his Checker roll, and bestows his mercedes of his own mere
motion, and by discretion, according to every man's merit and condition.

And in their commendable delights to be apt and accommodate, as if the Prince
be given to hauking, hunting, riding of horses, or playing upon instruments, or
any like exercise, the seruitour to be the same: and in their other appetites
wherein the Prince would seem an example of virtue, and would not mislike to
be egalled by others: in such cases it is decent their seruitours and subjects
study to be like to them by imitation, as in wearing their hair long or
short, or in this or that sort of apparel, such excepted as be only fit for
Princes and none else, which were indecent for a meaner person to imitate or
counterfeit: so is it not comely to counterfeit their voice, or look, or any
other gestures that be not ordinary and natural in every common person: and
therefore to go upright or speak or look assuredly, it is decent in every
man. But if the Prince have an extraordinary countenance or manner of speech,
or bearing of his body, that for a common seruitour to counterfeit is not
decent, and therefore it was misliked in the Emperor Nero, and thought uncomely
for him to counterfeit Alexander the great by holding his head a little awrie,
and nearer toward the tone shoulder, because it was not his own natural.

And in a Prince it is decent to go slowly, and to march with leisure, and
with a certain granditie rather than gravity: as our sovereign Lady and
mistress, the very image of majesty and magnificence, is accustomed to do
generally, unless it be when she walks apace for her pleasure, or to catch
her a heat in the cold mornings.

Nevertheless, it is not so decent in a meaner person, as I have observed in
some counterfeit Ladies of the Country, which use it much to their own
derision. This comelines was wanting in Queen Marie, otherwise a very good and
honorable Princess. And was some blemish to the Emperor Ferdinando, a most
noble minded man, yet so careless and forgetful of himself in that behalf,
as I have seen him run up a pair of stairs so swift and nimble a pace, as
almost had not become a very mean man, who had not gone in some hasty
business.

And in a noble Prince nothing is more decent and welbeseeming his greatness,
than to spare foul speeches, for that breeds hatred, and to let none humble
suitors depart out of their presence (as near as may be) miscontented. Wherein
her Majesty has of all others a most Regal gift, and nothing inferior to the
good Prince Titus Vespasianus in that point.

Also not to be passionate for small detriments or offenses, nor to be a
revenger of them, but in cases of great injury, and specially of dishonors:
and therein to be very stern and vindicatiue, for that savors of Princely
magnanimity: nor to seek revenge upon base and obscure persons, over whom the
conquest is not glorious, nor the victory honorable, which respect moved our
soueraign Lady (keeping always the decorum of a Princely person) at her first
coming to the crown, when a knight of this Realm, who had very insolently
behaved himself toward her when she was Lady Elizabeth, fell upon his knee to
her, and besought her pardon: suspecting (as there was good cause) that he
should have been sent to the Tower, she said unto him most mildly: do you not
know that we are descended of the Lion, whose nature is not to harm or pray
upon the mouse, or any other such small vermin?

And with these examples I think sufficient to leave, giving you information
of this one point, that all your figures Poetical or Rhethoricall, are but
observations of strange speeches, and such as without any art at al we should
use, and commonly do, even by very nature without discipline. But more or less
aptly and decently, or scarcely, or abundantly, or of this or that kind of
figure, and one of us more the^ another, according to the disposition of our
nature, co^stitutio^ of the heart, and facility of each man's vttera^ce: so as
we may conclude, that nature her self suggesteth the figure in this or that
form: but art aydeth the judgment of his use and application, which geues me
occasion finally and for a full conclusion to this whole treatise, to inform
you in the next chapter how art should be used in all respects, and specially
in this behalf of language, and when the natural is more commendable then the
artificial, and contrariwise.

CHAP. XXV.
That the good Poet or maker ought to dissemble his art, and in what cases the
artificial is more commended then the natural, and contrariwise.

ANd now (most excellent Queen) having largely said of Poets and Poesy, and
about what matters they be employed: then of all the commended fourmes of
Poemes, thirdly of metricall proportions, such as do appertain to our vulgar
art: and last of all set forth the poetical ornament consisting chiefly in
the beauty and gallantnesse of his language and style, and so have apparelled
him to our seeming, in all his gorgious habilliments, and pulling him first
from the carte to the school, and from thence to the Court, and preferred him
to your Majesty's service, in that place of great honor and magnificence to
give enterteinment to Princes, Ladies of honor, Gentlewomen and Gentlemen, and
by his many moodes of skill, to serve the many humors of men thither haunting
and resorting, some by way of solace some of serious advise, and in matters
as well profitable as pleasant and honest: We have in our humble conceit
sufficiently performed our promise or rather duty to your Majesty in the
description of this art, so always as we leave him not unfurnished of one
piece that best beseemes that place of any other, and may serve as a principal
good lesson for all good makers to bear continually in mind, in the usage of
this science: which is, that being now lately become a Courtier he show not
himself a craftsman, and merit to be disgraded, and with scorn sent back
again to the shop, or other place of his first faculty and calling, but that
so wisely and discreetly he behave himself as he may worthily retain the
credit of his place, and profession of a very Courtier, which is in plain
terms, cunningly to be able to dissemble. But (if it please your Majesty) may
it not seem enough for a Courtier to know how to wear a fether, and set his
cappe a flaunt, his chain en echarpe, a straight buskin al inglesse, a loose
alo Turquesque, the cape alla Spaniola, the breech a la Franaeoise, and by
twenty manner of new fashioned garments to disguise his body, and his face with
as many countenances, whereof it seems there be many that make a very art,
and study who can show himself most fine, I will not say most foolish and
ridiculous? or perhaps rather that he could dissemble his conceits as well as
his countenances, so as he never speak as he thinks, or think as he speaks,
and that in any matter of importance his words and his meaning very seldom
meet: for so as I remember it was concluded by us setting forth the figure
Allegoria, which therefore not impertinently we call the Courtier or figure of
fair semblant, or is it not perchance more requisite our courtly Poet do
dissemble not only his countenances and co^ceits, but also all his ordinary
actions of behavior, or the most part of the^, whereby the better to win his
purposes and good advantages, as now and then to have a journey or sickness in
his sleeue, thereby to shake of other importunities of greater consequence, as
they use their pilgrimages in France, the Diet in Spain, the baines in Italy?
and when a man is whole to feign himself sick to shun the business in
Court, to entertain time and ease at home, to salve offenses without
discredit, to win purposes by mediation in absence, which their presence would
either impeach or not greatly prefer, to harken after the popular opinions
and speech, to entend to their more private solaces, to practice more deeply
both at leisure and liberty, and when any public affair or other attempt
and counsel of theirs has not received good success, to avoid thereby the
Princes present reproof, to cool their chollers by absence, to win remorse
by lamentable reports, and reconciliation by friends entreaty. Finally by
sequestring themselves for a time fro the Court, to be able the freelier and
cleerer to discern the factions and state of the Court and of all the world
besides, no less then does the looker on or beholder of a game better see into
all points of advantage, then the player himself? and in dissembling of
diseases which I pray you? for I have observed it in the Court of France, not
a burning fever or a plurisie, or a palsy, or the hydropick and swelling
gowte, or any other like disease, for if they may be such as may be either
easily discerned or quickly cured, they be ill to dissemble and do half
handsomely serve the turn.

But it must be either a dry dropsy, or a megrim or letarge, or a fistule in
ano, or some such other secret disease, as the common conversant can hardly
discover, and the Physician either not speedily heal, or not honestly bewray?
of which infirmities the scoffing Pasquil wrote, Vlcus vesicae renum dolor in
pene scirrus. Or as I have seen in diverse places where many make themselves
heart whole, when in deed they are full sick, bearing it stoutly out to the
hazard of their health, rather then they would be suspected of any loathsome
infirmity, which might inhibit the^ from the Princes presence, or enterteinme^t
of the ladies. Or as some other do to bear a port of state and plenty when
they have neither penny nor possession, that they may not seem to droope, and
be rejected as unworthy or insufficient for the greater services, or be pitied
for their poverty, which they hold for a marvelous disgrace, as did the poor
Squire of Castile, who had rather dine with a sheep head at home and drink a
cruse of water to it, then to have a good dinner given him by his friend who
was nothing ignorant of his poverty. Or as others do to make wise they be
poor when they be rich, to shun thereby the public charges and vocations,
for men are not now a days (specially in states of Oligarchie as the most in
our age) called so much for their wisdom as for their wealth, also to avoid
envy of neighbors or bounty in conversation, for whosoever is reputed rich
cannot without reproach, but be either a lender or a spender. Or as others do to
seem very busy when they have nothing to do, and yet will make themselves so
occupied and ouerladen in the Princes affairs, as it is a great matter to have
a couple of words with them, when notwithstanding they lie sleeping on their
beds all an after noone, or sit solemnly at cards in their chambers, or
enterteyning of the Dames, or laughing and gibing with their familiars four
hours by the clock, whiles the poor suter desirous of his dispatch is
answered by some Secretary or page il fault attendre, Monsieur is dispatching
the kings business into Languedock, Prouence Piemont, a common phrase with the
Secretaries of France. Or as I have observed in many of the Princes Courts of
Italy, to seem idle when they be earnestly occupied and entend to nothing but
mischievous practizes, and do busily negotiat by coulor of otiation. Or as
others of them that go ordinarily to Church and never pray to win an opinion
of holiness: or pray still apace, but never do good deed, and give a beggar a
penny and spend a pound on a harlot, to speak fair to a man's face, and foul
behind his back, to set him at his trencher and yet sit on his skirts for so
we use to say by a feigned friend, then also to be rough and churlish in speech
and appearance, but inwardly affectionate and favoring, as I have seen of the
greatest podestates and grauest judges and Presidentes of Parliament in France.

These and many such like disguisings do we find in man's behavior, and
specially in the Courtiers of foreign Countries, where in my youth I was
brought up, and very well observed their manner of life and conversation, for of
mine own Country I have not made so great experience. Which parts,
nevertheless, we allow not now in our English maker, because we have given him
the name of an honest man, and not of an hypocrite: and therefore leaving these
manner of dissimulations to all base-minded men, and of vile nature or
mystery, we do allow our Courtly Poet to be a dissembler only in the
subtilties of his art: that is, when he is most artificial, so to disguise
and cloak it as it may not appear, nor seem to proceed from him by any
study or trade of rules, but to be his natural: nor so evidently to be
descried, as every ladde that reads him shall say he is a good scholar, but
will rather have him to know his art well* and little to use it.

And yet peradventure in all points it may not be so taken, but in such only
as may discover his grossenes or his ignorance by some schollerly affectation:
which thing is very irksome to all men of good trayning, and specially to
Courtiers. And yet for all that our maker may not be in all cases restrained,
but that he may both use* and also manifest his art to his great praise, and
need no more be ashamed thereof, than a shomaker to have made a cleanly shoe,
or a Carpenter to have buylt a fair house. Therefore to discuss and make this
point somewhat cleerer, to weete, where art ought to appear, and where not,
and when the natural is more commendable than the artificial in any humane
action or workmanship, we will examine it further by this distinction.

In some cases we say art is an aid and coadiutor to nature, and a furtherer
of her actions to good effect, or peradventure a mean to supply her wants, by
renforcing the causes wherein she is impotent and defective, as does the art
of physic, by helping the natural concoction, retention, distribution,
expulsion, and other virtues, in a weak and vnhealthie body. Or as the good
gardener seasons his soil by sundry sorts of compost: as mucke or marle, clay
or sand, and many times by blood, or lees of oil or wine* or stale, or
perchance with more costly drugs: and waters his plants, and weeds his herbs
and flowers, and prunes his branches, and vnleaues his boughs to let in the
sun: and twenty other ways cherishes them, and cures their infirmities,
and so makes that never, or very seldom any of them miscarry, but bring forth
their flours and fruits in season. And in both these cases it is no small
praise for the Physician and Gardener to be called good and cunning artificers.

In another respect art is not only an aid and coadiutor to nature in all her
actions, but an alterer of them, and in some sort a surmounter of her skill, so
as by means of it her own effects shall appear more beautiful or strange
and miraculous, as in both cases before remembered. The Physician by the
cordials he will give his patient, shall be able not only to restore the
decayed spirits of man, and render him health, but also to prolong the term
of his life many years over and above the stint of his first and natural
constitution. And the Gardener by his art will not only make an herb, or
flowr, or fruit, come forth in his season without impediment, but also will
embellish the same in virtue, shape, odor and taste, that nature of herself
would never have done: as to make the single gillifloure, or marigold, or
daisie, double: and the white rose, read, yellow, or carnation, a bitter
mellon sweet; a sweet apple, sour; a plumme or cherrie without a stone; a
pear without core or kernel, a goord or coucumber like to a horn, or any
other figure he will: any of which things nature could not do without man's
help and art. These actions also are most singular, when they be most
artificial.

In another respect, we say art is neither an aider nor a surmou^ter, but
only a bare immitatour of natures works, following and counterfeyting her
actions and effects, as the Marmesot does many countenances and gestures of
man, of which sort are the arts of painting and keruing, whereof one
represents the natural by light color and shadow in the superficial or flat,
the other in a body massife expressing the full and empty, even, extant,
rabbated, hollow, or whatsoever other figure and passion of quantity. So also
the Alchimist counterfeits gold, silver, and all other metals, the Lapidarie
pearls and precious stones by glass and other substances falsified, and
sophisticate by art. These men also be praised for their craft, and their
credit is nothing empayred, to say that their conclusions and effects are very
artificial. Finally in another respect art is as it were an encountrer and
contrary to nature, producing effects neither like to hers, nor by
participation with her operations, nor by imitation of her paternes, but makes
things and produces effects altogether strange and diverse, and of such form
and quality (nature always supplying stuff) as she never would nor could
have done of her self, as the carpenter that builds a house, the ioyner that
makes a table or a bedstead, the tailor a garment, the Smith a lock or a key,
and a number of like, in which case the workman gains reputation by his art,
and praise when it is best expressed and most apparent, and most studiously.
Man also in all his actions that be not altogether natural, but are gotten by
study and discipline or exercise, as to dance by measures to sing by note, to
play on the lute, and such like, it is a praise to be said an artificial
dauncer, singer, and player on instruments, because they be not exactly known
or done, but by rules and precepts or teaching of schoolemasters. But in such
actions as be so natural and proper to ^^an, as he may become excellent
therein without any art or imitation at all, (custom and exercise excepted,
which are requisite to every action not numbered among the vital or animal) and
wherein nature should seem to do amiss, and man suffer reproach to be found
destitute of them: in those to show himself rather artificial then natural,
were no less to be laughed at, then for one that can see well enough, to use a
pair of spectacles, or not to hear but by a trunk put to his ear, nor feel
without a pair of ennealed glooues, which things in deed help an infirm
sense, but annoy the perfect, and therefore showing a disabilitie natural move
rather to scorn then commendation, and to pity sooner then to praise. But
what else is language and utterance, and discourse and persuasion, and argument
in man, then the virtues of a well constitute body and mind, little less
natural then his very sensual actions, saving that the one is perfited by
nature at once, the other not without exercise and iteration? Peradventure also
it will be granted, that a man sees better and discernes more brimly his
colors, and hears and feels more exactly by use and often hearing and
feeling and seeing, and though it be better to see with spectacles then not to
see at all, yet is their praise not egall nor in any man's judgment comparable:
no more is that which a Poet makes by art and precepts rather then by natural
instinct: and that which he does by long meditation rather then by a sudden
inspiration, or with great pleasure and facillitie then hardly (and as they are
wont to say) in spite of Nature or Minerua, then which nothing can be more
irksome or ridiculous.

And yet I am not ignorant that there be arts and methodes both to speak and
to persuade and also to dispute, and by which the natural is in some sort
relieved, as the eye by his spectacle, I say relieved in his imperfection, but
not made more perfect then the natural, in which respect I call those arts of
Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric not bare imitations, as the painter or keruers
craft and work in a foreign subject viz. a lively purtraite in his table of
wood, but by long and studious observation rather a repetitio^ or reminiscens
natural, reduced into perfection, and made prompt by use and exercise. And so
whatsoever a man speaks or persuades he does it not by imitation artificially,
but by observation naturally (though one follow another) because it is both the
same and the like that nature does suggest: but if a popingay speak, she does
it by imitation of man's voice artificially and not naturally being the like,
but not the same that nature does suggest to man. But now because our maker or
Poet is to play many parts and not one alone, as first to devise his plat or
subject, then to fashion his poem* thirdly to use his metricall proportions,
and last of all to utter with pleasure and delight, which restes in his manner
of language and style as has been said, whereof the many moodes and strange
phrases are called figures, it is not altogether with him as with the crafts
man, nor altogether otherwise then with the crafts man, for in that he uses
his metricall proportions by appointed and harmonicall measures and distaunces,
he is like the Carpenter or Ioyner, for borrowing their timber and stuff of
nature, they appoint and order it by art otherwise then nature would do, and
work effects in appearance contrary to hers. Also in that which the Poet
speaks or reports of another man's tale or doings, as Homer of Priamus or
Ulysses, he is as the painter or keruer that work by imitation and
representation in a foreign subject, in that he speaks figuratively, or argues
subtillie, or persuades copiously and vehemently, he does as the cunning
gardener that using nature as a coadiutor, furders her conclusions and many
times makes her effects more absolute and strange. But for that in our maker
or Poet, which restes only in devise and issues from an excellent sharp and
quick invention, helped by a clear and bright fantasy and imagination, he is
not as the painter to counterfaite the natural by the like effects and not the
same, nor as the gardener aiding nature to work both the same and the like,
nor as the Carpenter to work effects utterly unlike, but even as nature her
self working by her own peculiar virtue and proper instinct and not by
example or meditation or exercise as all other artificers do, is then most
admired when he is most natural and least artificial. And in the feats of
his language and utterance, because they hold as well of nature to be suggested
and uttered as by art to be polished and reformed. Therefore shall our Poet
receive praise for both, but more by knowing of his art then by unseasonable
using it, and be more commended for his natural eloquence then for his
artificial, and more for his artificial well desembled, then for the same
overmuch affected and grossly or indiscreetly bewrayed, as many makers and
Orators do.

The Conclusion.
ANd with this (my most gracious sovereign Lady) I make an end, humbly
beseeching your pardon, in that I have presumed to hold your ears so long
annoyed with a tedious trifle, so as unless it proceed more of your own
Princely and natural mansuetude then of my merit, I fear greatly least you
may thinck of me as the Philosopher Plato did of Amceris an inhabitant of the
City Cirene, who being in troth a very active and artificial man in driving
of a Princes Chariot or Coche (as your Majesty might be) and knowing it
himself well enough, coming one day into Platos school, and having heard him
largely dispute in matters Philosophical, I pray you (quoth he) give me leave
also to say somewhat of mine art, and in deed showed so many tricks of his
cunning how to lanche forth and stay, and change pace, and turn and wind his
Coche, this way and that way, vphill down hill, and also in even or rough
ground, that he made the whole assembly wonder at him. Quoth Plato being a
grave personage, verily in mine opinion this man should be utterly unfit for
any service of greater importance then to drive a Coche. It is great pity that
so pretty a fellow, had not occupied his brains in studies of more
consequence. Now I pray God it be not thought so of me in describing the toys
of this our vulgar art. But when I consider how every thing has his estimation
by opportunity, and that it was but the study of my younger years in which
vanity reigned. Also that I write to the pleasure of a Lady and a most
gracious Queen, and neither to Priests nor to Prophets or Philosophers.
Besides finding by experience, that many times idleness is less harmefull
then unprofitable occupation, daily seeing how these great aspiring mynds and
ambitious heads of the world seriously searching to deal in matters of state,
be often times so busy and earnest that they were better be unoccupied, and
peradventure altogether idle, I presume so much upon your Majesty's most mild
and gracious judgment howsoever you conceive of mine ability to any better or
greater service, that yet in this attempt ye will allow of my loyal and good
intent always endeavoring to do your Majesty the best and greatest of those
services I can.

A Table of the Chapters in this book, and every thing in them contained.
WHat a Poet and Poesy is, and who may be said the most excellent Poet in our
time. fol. 1 Whether there may be an art of our English or vulgar Poesy 3 How
Poets were the first Priests, the first Prophets, the first Legis-lators and
Politiens in the world. 3 How Poets were the first Philosophers, the first
Astronomers, and Historiographers, and Orators, and Musicians in the world. 5
How every wild and sauadge people use a kind of natural Poesy in versicle
and rhyme, as our vulgar is. 7 Whence the riming Poesy came first to the
Greeks and Latins, and how it had altered, and almost spilt their manner of
Poesy. 7 How in the time of Charlemaynes reign and many years after him, the
Latin Poets wrote in rhyme. 8 In what reputation Poets and Poesy were in the
old time with Princes, and otherwise generally, and how they be now become
contemptible, and for what causes. 12 How Poesy should not be employed upon
vain conceits, nor specially those that be vicious or infamous. 18 The
subject or matter of Poesy what it is. 18 Of Poems and their sundry sorts,
and how thereby the ancient Poets received Surnames. 19 In what form of
Poesy the gods of the gentiles were praised and honored. 21 In what form of
Poesy vice, and the common abuses of man's life were reprehended. 24 How the
Poesy for reprehension of vice, was reformed by two manner of Poems, more
civil than the first. 25 In what form of Poesy the evil and outrageous
behauiours of Princes were reprehended. 26 In what form of Poesy the great
Princes and dominators of the world were praised and honored. 27 Of the places
where in ancient time their enterludes and other Poemes drammaticke were
represented unto the people. 28 Of the shepherds or pastoral poesy called
Eglogue, and to what purpose it was first invented and devised. 30 Of
historical Poesy, by which the famous acts of princes and the virtuous and
worthy lives of our forefathers were reported. 31 In what form of poesy
virtue in the inferior sort was commended. 34 The form wherein honest and
profitable arts and sciences were treated. 35 In what form of poesy the
amarous affections and entertainments were uttered. 36 The form of poetical
reioysings. 36 The form of poetical lamentations. 37 The solemn reioysings
at the birth and nativity of princes children. 40 The manner of reioysings at
weddings and marriages, specially of great Ladies and Gentlewomen and Dames of
honor. 40 The manner of poesy by which they uttered their bitter taunts or
privy nippes, and witty scoffs and other merry conceits. 43 What manner of
poem they used for memorial of the dead. 45 An ancient form of poesy by
which men did use to reproach their enemies. 46 Of the short poem called with
us posie. 47 Who in any age have been the most commended writers in our
English poesy, and the Authors censure given upon them. 48
The Table of the second book.
OF proportion poetical. fol. 53 Of proportion in Staff. 54 Of proportion in
Measure. 55 How many sorts of measures we use in our vulgar. 58 Of the
distinctions of man's voice and pauses allowed to our speech, and of the first
pawse called Ceazure. 61 Of proportion in concord called Rhyme. 63 Of accent,
stir and time, evidently perceived in the distinction of man's voice, and is
that which makes the flowing of a Meetre. 64 Of your Cade^ces by which the
meeter is made Symphonicall, and when they be most sweet and solemn. 65 How
the good maker will not wrench his word to help his rhyme, either by falsifying
his accent or his Ortographie. 67 Of concord in long and short measures, and by
near or far distances, and which of the^ is most commendable. 68 Of
proportion by situation. 69 Of proportion in figure. 75 How if all manner of
sudden innouations were not very scandalous, specially in the laws of any
language, the use of the Greek and Latin feet might be brought into our
vulgar poesy and with good grace enough. 85 A more particular declaration of
the Metricall feet of the Greeks and Latins, and of your feet of two times.
91 Of the feet of three times, and what use we may have of them in our vulgar.
103 Of all the other of three times besides the Dactill. 106 Of your half
foot in a verse* and those verses which they called perfect and defective. 107
Of the breaking of your words of many sillables, and when and how it is to be
used. 108
The Table of the third book.
OF ornament poetical and that it rests in figures. 114 How our writing and
speeches public ought to be figurative, and if they be not do greatly
disgrace the cause and purpose of the speaker and writer. 115 How ornament
poetical is of two sorts according to the double nature and efficacy of
figures. 119 Of language and what speech our maker ought to use. 119 Of style,
and that it is of three kinds, lofty, mean, and low according to the nature
of the subject. 123 Of the lofty, mean, and low subject. 127 Of figures and
figurative speeches. 128 Six points set down by our learned forefathers for a
general rule or regiment of all good utterance, be it by mouth or by writing.
129 How the Greeks first and afterward the Latins invented new names for
every figure, which this Author is also enforced to do in his vulgar art. 130
A division of figures, and how they serve in exornation of language. 132 Of
Auricular figures apperteyning to single words and working by their diverse
sounds and audible tunes, alteration to the ear only and not to the mind.
134 Of Auricular figures perteyning to clawses of speech, and by them working
no little alteration to the ear. 135 Of Auricular figures working by disorder.
140 Of Auricular figures working by surplusage. 142 Of Auricular figures
working by exchange. 142 Of Auricular figures that serve to make the meetre
tuneable and melodious, but not by defect nor surplusage, disorder nor
exchange. 145
The names of your figures Auricular.
ECclipsis, or the figure of default. 136 Zeugma, or the single supply. 136
Prozeugma, or the ringleader. 137 Mezozeugma, or the middlemarcher. 137
Hypozeugma, or the rerewarder. 137 Sillepsis, or the double supply. 137
Hypozeuxis, or the substitute. 138 Aposiopesis, or the figure of silence,
otherwise called the figure of interruption. 139 Prolepsis, or the propounder.
139 Hiperbaton, or the trespasser. 140 Parenthesis, or the insertour. 140
Histeron proteron, or the preposterous. 141 Enallage, or figure of exchange.
142 Hipallage, or the changeling. 143 Omoioteleton, or the figure of likeloose.
144 Parimion, or figure of like letter. 145 Asindeton, or figure of lose
language. 145 Polisindeton, or the coople clause. 146 Irmus, or the long lose.
146 Epitheton, or the qualifier. 147 Endiades, or the figure of twins. 147 Of
the figures which we call Sensable, because they alter and affect the mind by
alteration of sense and first in single words. 148 Metaphora, or the figure of
transport. 148 Catacresis, or the figure of abuse. 150 Metonymia, or the
misnamer. 150 Antonomasia, or the surnamer. 151 Onomatopeia, or the newnamer.
151 Epitheton, or figure of attribution, otherwise called the qualifier. 152
Metalepsis, or the far-fet, 152 Liptote, or the moderator. 153 Paradiastole, or
the currifauel, otherwise called the soother. 154 Meiosis, or the disabler. 154
Tapinosis, or the abbaser. 154 Synecdoche, or the figure of quick conceit. 154
Of sensable figures appertaining to whole speeches, and by them affecting and
altering the mind by force of sense and intendment. 155 Allegoria, or figure
of fair semblant. 155 Enigma, or the riddle. 157 Parimia, or the proverb. 157
Ironia, or the dry mock. 157 Sarcasmus, or the bitter taunt. 158 Asteismus,
the merry scoff, or civil jest. 158 Micterismus, or the fleering frumpe. 159
Antiphrasis, or the broad floute. 159 Charientismus, or the privy nippe. 159
Hyperbole, or the loud lier, otherwise called the ouerreacher. 159 Periphrasis,
or the figure of ambage. 161 Synecdoche, or the figure of quick conceit. 162 Of
figures sententious, otherwise called rhetorical. 163 Anaphora, or the figure
of report. 165 Antistrophe, or the counterturne. 165 Simploche, or figure of
reiteration. 166 Anadiplosis, or the redouble. 167 Epanalepsis, or the slow
return, otherwise called the Echo sound. 167 Epizeuxis, or the underlay,
otherwise called the Cuckowspell. 167 Ploche, or the doubler, otherwise called
the swift repeat. 168 Paronomasia, or the nicknamer. 168 Traductio, or the
tranlacer. 170 Antipophora, or the figure of respo^ce. 170 Sineciosis, or the
crossecoople. 172 Atanaclasis, or the rebound. 173 Clymax, or the marching
figure. 173 Antimetauole, or the counterchange. 174 Insultatio, or the
disdainful. 175 Antitheton, or the quareller, otherwise called the overthwart
or rencounter. 175 Erotema, or the questioner. 176 Echphonisis, or the outcrie.
177 Brachiologia, or the cutted comma. 178 Parison, or the figure of even. 178
Sinonimya, or the figure of store. 179 Metanoia, or the penitent, otherwise
called the figure of repentance. 179 Antenagoge, or the recompencer. 180
Epiphonema, or the close. 181 Auxesis, or the auancer. 182 Meiosis, or the
disabler. 183 Dialisis, or the dismembrer. 185 Merismus, or the distributor.
185 Epimone, or the loueburden. 188 Paradoxon, or the wonderer. 189 Aporia, or
the doubtful. 189 Epitropi, or the figure of reference, otherwise called the
figure of submission. 189 Parrisia, or the licentious. 190 Anachmosis, or the
impartener. 190 Paramologia, or figure of admittance. 190 Etiologia, or the
tell-cause, otherwise called the reason rendrer. 191 Dicheologia, or the figure
of excuse. 192 Noema, or the figure of close conceit. 193 Orismus, or the
definer by difference. 193 Procatalepsis, or the presumptuous. 194 Paralepsis,
or the passenger. 194 Commoratio, or figure of aboade. 194 Metastasis, or
figure of remove, otherwise called the flitter. 194 Parecuasis, or the
straggler, otherwise called the figure of digression. 195 Expeditio, or the
dispatcher. 195 Dialogismus, or the right reasoner. 196 Gnome, or the director,
otherwise called the sage sayer. 197 Sinathrismus, or the heaping figure. 197
Apostrophe, or the turn tale. 198 Hipotiposis, or the counterfeit, otherwise
called the figure of representation. 199 Prosopographia, or the counterfeit
countenance. 199 Prosopopeia, or the false impersonation. 200 Chronographia,
or the counterfeit of time 200 Topographia, or counterfeit of place. 200
Pragmatographia, or counterfeit action. 201 Omoiosis, or the figure of
resemblance. 201 Icon, or resemblance by purtrait, and ymagerie. 204 Parabola,
or resemblance mystical. 205 Paradigma, or resemblance by example. 205
Exargasia, or the gorgious, otherwise called the bewtifull. 206 Of the vices
and deformity in speech principally noted by ancient Poets. 208 How some vices
in speeches are always intolerable some others now and then borne withal by
license of approved authors. 209 Barbarismus, or barbarous speech. 209
Solecismus, or false speech. 210 Cacozelia, or fond affectation. 210
Soraismus, or the vice called the mingle-mangle. 211 Cacosintheton, or the
misplacer. 212 Cacemphaton, or foul speech. 212 Tautologia, or self saying.
213 Acyron, or the uncouth. 214 Pleonasmus, or fault of full speech. 215
Macrologia, or long language. 215 Periergia, or ouerlabor, otherwise called the
curious. 216 Tapinosis, or the abbaser. 216 Bomphiologia, or pompous speech.
217 Amphibologia, or the ambiguous. 217 What it is that generally makes our
speech virtuous or vicious, and of that which the Latins call decorum. 218 Of
decency in behavior and action, which also belongs to the consideration of a
Poet or maker. 231 How the good poet or maker ought to dissemble his art, and
in what cases the artificial is more commended then the natural and
contrariwise. 250 The conclusion. 257
FINIS.

