CERTAIN SERMONS, UPON SEVERAL Texts of Scripture: PREACHED BY THAT Reverend
and faithful servant of Jesus Christ M. ROBERT ROLLOK, Minister of the Church
(and Rector of the College) of EDINBVRGH. Whereof the first eleven were be
fore published, and the remnant seven, are newly adjoy ned thereunto.

Imprinted at Edinburgh ANDRO HEART, 1616.

The number of Sermons, with the Texts of Scripture, and in what leaf to find
every Sermon.
I 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verse. 1. 2. 3 4. Fol. 1 II 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verse. 5. 6. 7.
8. Fol. 24 III 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verse. 9. 10. 11. Fol. 45 IV 2. Cor. Chap. 5.
verse. 12. 13. 14. 15. Fol. 63 V 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verse. 16. 17. 18. Fol. 79 VI
1. Cor. Chap. 2. verse. 6. 7. 8. 9. Fol. 97 VII 1. Cor. Chap. 2. verse. 10. 11.
12. Fol. 118 VIII 2. Cor. Chap. 4. verse. 3. 4. 5. Fol. 137 IX 2. Cor. Chap. 10.
verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Fol. 155 X Philip. Chap. 1. verse. 18. 19. 20. 21. etc.
Fol. 175 XI Titus, Chap. 3. verse. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Fol. 198


These are newly adjoined.
XII Psalm cxxx. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. Fol. 229 XIII Psalm cxxx. verse. 5. 6. 7.
8. Fol. 246 XIV Mat. Chap. 15. ver. 21. 22. 23. 24 etc. Fol. 262 XV Luke chap.
7. ver. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. etc. Fol. 281 XVI John, Chap. 3. verse 6. Fol. 306
XVII ^ Timoth. Chap. 1. verse. 12. 13. 14. Fol. 332 XVIII 1. Tim. Chap. 1. verse.
14. 15. 16. Fol. 357


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THEIR MOST LOVING FRIEND IN THE LORD, MASTER WILLIAM
SCOT of ELY, Grace in this life, and everlasting glory in the Life to come.
OUR Gracious GOD, who in His rich Mercy ( RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL) has in this
latter time raised up many rare and worthy instruments and faithful
Preachers in other Countries about us, has not left this our Country
destitute of the like benefits: for, as amongst them, so amongst us, striving
with our ingratitude, He has raised up from time to time sundry notable men,
indewed with singular graces, whose Ministry He made powerful to ouer^ the
kingdom of Satan, sin, and the Anti^ to acquire a CHVRCH unto Himself, in
the which He might be glorified in the riches of His mercies: of whom the
most part now sleep in the LORD, and rest from their labors: Amongst whom
MASTER ROBERT ROLLOK, of blessed memory, deserves (for his graces) to be
counted with the first: for who ever preassed more to approve himself to GOD
in a good conscience than he? Who ever was more faithful and pairfull in his
calling than he? He stro^e always to glorify GOD, and to honor his
profession and calling by a godly life and conversation, so that the very
enemies of the truth could not accuse him, nor Envy it self justly
reprove him: He set himself always to do good to others: for he thought
he was not his own man, but deputed for the service of others: He was never
idle, but he did either read, meditate, pray, confer, counsel, comfort,
preach or write: He was peaceable in the Church, patient of wrongs, never
vindictiue, but ever ready to forgive: He sought not the world, knowing that
he had here no continuing, but had his conversation in the Heaven, from
whence he looked for his Savior to come.

But it is needless to praise him, either to you, Sir, who knows so well
what store of grace the LORD vouchsafed upon him, or yet to any others, seeing
his works speak plainly enough for him: for as he edified many in his life
by his Preaching, so also has he edified many not only in his Country, but
in many other parts, by his learned and judicious writings, lef^ behind him.

And because his Lectures, that have been before published by us, upon the
COLOSSIANS and THESSALONIANS, as also the first eleven SERMONS here contained,
have been received with good liking and applause of many: and new, finding
that there are not copies extant, especially of these eleven Sermons, to
satisfy the desire of such as seek them, we have thought good to cause
imprint them over again: as also to adjoyne seven other Sermons, preached by
him upon diverse Textes, and received by his Scholars from his mouth: which
indeed we must confess, required the refining hand of the Author, that they
might have shined in their own beauty: Always, our care have been in these,
as in all the rest before published, out of some copies offered unto us, as
near as we could, to give out to the public view of the Church, both the
matter, style, and phrase of the godly Author.

Now, for many reasons we are moved to recommende these his Sermons, (and
our labors therein) to your patronage, that with them your memory, with the
posterity, might long endure.

First, in respect of the entire love and affection ye carried to Master
ROLLOK from the first hour that ye were acquainted with him, even unto his
death: for no man ever loved him, conuersed with him, respected him, etc, more
than your self: and many a time have you resorted unto him in his health, and
offered him such courtesy and kindness, that he acknowledged himself to be
obliged to none so much as to you.

And finally, ye not only visited him in his sickness, but allured him to
come to your house, where without regard of pains and expenses, ye
entertained him, and such as visited him, most liberally and chearefullie,
till the time that the LORD called him to Himself: Yea, ye counted it a
singular blessing of the LORD, that He honored you with suh a guest.

Next, Master ROLLOK in his Testament ordained, that all his Books, which
after should be imprinted, should be dedicated unto you: that whosoever got
commodity thereof, next after GOD, might give the honor and thanks unto you.

Thirdly, through your care, endeavor, and expenses only these whole Sermons
were gathered in from them that wrote them, through your procurement only
they were reuised, corrected, and made fit for the Printing: by your means
only now they see the light, which without you had been buried in darkness.

Lastly, if it were free for us to make choice of a patron, we would make
choice of none but you, to testify our thankfulness for your great
undeserved kindness showed unto us particularly, yea, and to all these whom
the LORD has set in His service.

So that in all respects reason requires, that all these Sermons should be
published under your patronage and protection: For whereas your name was not
prefixed unto the first eleven, when they were first imprinted: (seeing by your
endeavor, charges, and expenses only they were first set forth) now this
occasion being presented, we might justly have been blamed, if that
ouer-sight by us had not been amended.

Finally, Sir, honor the LORD, and He will honor you, delight in His ways,
and He will give you your hearts desire, weary not to do good unto the
Saints, and He will recompense you, and at last, will crown all your good
deeds with glory.

The LORD make you to go on from grace to grace, and in all things direct you
by His Spirit, that ye may be long happy in this life, and for ever happy
in the life to come, Amen. Edinburgh, the 22. of January, Anno Dom. 1616.

Yours in the Lord, H. C. W. A.

THE FIRST SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. V. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle
be destroyed, we have a building given of GOD, that is, an house not made
with hands, but eternal in the Heavens:

For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from
Heaven.

Because that if we be clothed, we shall not be found naked:

For indeed, we that are in this tabernacle, sigh, and are burdened because
we would not be unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality might
be swallowed up of life.


IN the Chapter immediately going before, the Apostle Paul has been speaking
of the afflictions that he suffered in his own person* and has declared,
that there was two things that held him up in those afflictions, the one thing
present, the other thing to come. The thing present, the power of God, the life
of Jesus, this held him up in such sort (says he) that when he was dying
under affliction in the body, yet the life of Jesus was manifest in him, and
he was living in soul: and the more his body was decaying and wearing away,
the more the inner-man, that spiritual life that flows from Christ, grew and
was renewed. Woe to that man that dies altogether! thou must die, and this
body and life must be separated, the* body must go to dust, but look that
soul and body go not together: look that as thou find the body and life
natural to decay, so thou find that spiritual life that flows from the
Lord of life, to grow, or else of necessity thou must have a woeful
departure. This is the thing present that held him up. Another thing, and
greater, which was not present, but to come, held him up under a^l the
afflictions that were laid upon him, which he utters in th^se words, The
momentanean lightness of affliction works unto us an everlasting weight of
glory that passes in excellency. These are the words of the Apostle,
wherein he would learn us, that after all these afflictions are done and
ended, there abides a glory after this life, that passes in infinite degrees
above all the afflictions that ever came to man in this life.

Will ye look to the nature of the afflictions, First, they are light, that
is one property: then they last but for a moment, that is another property:
the weight of them is light* the time of their during is but a moment: but the
glory (mark every word of the Apostle) the glory (says he) passes in
excellency. It is not only excellent, but i^ excels in excellency,
excellent above excellency, an heap above an help, mounting up to an infinite
heap. Then look to the weight thereof, it is not light* but it is heavy: the
afflictions were as light as a fether, or as the wind, in comparison of this
glory, but the glory is heavy and weighty, a weight of glory that passes
in excellency, this is the first property. Then look to the time, the
afflictions were but for a moment. And if thou should live a thousand
years, and be afflicted as many years (for all thy days, and thy best
days, if thou should live never so well, ^re but days of affliction) all
the thousand years are but a moment in respect of that eternity that
follows. Then let your eye be ever upon eternity of joy, or eternity of
pain, eternity either of torment or of rest. Affliction is but for a moment,
this glory that passes in excellency is eternal in time. Lo, how great
things are spoken in few words! A glory passing in weight and eternity. And
when he has told you all that he can, he has not attained to the thousand
part of the greatness of that glory: never man thought of it as it is, nor it
could never enter into the heart of man that excellent glory that is prepared
for them that love God, 1. Cor. 2. 9. When he has set down these two points in
ye end of the chap. preceding, he goes forward, and he shows what he is
doing in the mean time whilst he gets this excellent glory. Learn to do
as he is doing, he says, Mine eyes are not upon the world, my look is not
set upon these visible things, which me^ have so great pleasure into; but mine
eyes are lifted up, and I am looking to things invisible, that the mortal eye
of man cannot see, because al these things visible are but temporal, and will
decay. If it were a kingdom, and thou begin to rest or repose upon it* it will
decay, and thou shall fall down together with it, and perish everlastingly:
But the things invisible are eternal, and he who leans and reposeth thereon,
shall get eternity. Look to the condition of those things whereupon thou
reposest in this world: for if they be things heavenly, spiritual and
eternal, thou shall be heavenly, spiritual and eternal: And as ever thou
would wish to see that glory, look that thine eye be set thereon in this
earth, look that thine eye be mounted up above all these earthly things, and
that thou keep the heavenly things in thy sight: forget them not, for if thou
die and they be out of thy sight, thou shall never see them: Take ple^sure to
look to that excellent glory, and thou shall obtain it, otherwise not.

Now I come to the text: I shall let you see the disposition of the Apostle,
and what he esteems of this life present, whereof we account so much, and
whereupon our hearts and minds are so set to keep it: All our terror is for
the parting of the soul from the body: look to Paul what he does, and behold
his disposition, either in life or death: Brethren, we have the more need to
take heed to these things, because we shall all be put to the proof, happy
is he that can be prepared! The Apostle having spoken this, that his eye was
set on that heavenly glory; it might have been said, thou set thine eye
upon a life above: but take heed Paul, thou shall die in the mean time, is not
life and death two contraries? thou must die, and that body of thine must be
dissolved: look thou ever to rise agine? think thou any other thing but
to be disappointed of life? look thou that that body of thine, being
dissolved in dust, shall rise again to glory? This is a sore temptation, and
sundry thinks after this manner. The Apostle answers, We know that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building given of
God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. Learn a
lesson here: Ye see while a man is looking to heaven, he will not be without
temptation, no not Paul himself, nor none other man nor woman, that have their
conversation in heaven: And the special temptation of him who would feign have
life, is death, and the dreadful sight of death, and death is ever in his eye:
He was never borne but death will tempt him, death will be terrible to flesh
and blood, and when he is looking up to that light and glory in heaven, it
will come in betwixt his eye and the sight of heaven, as it were a terrible
black cloud, and sometime will sunder him and that sight of Heaven. As when a
man is looking up to the Sun, a cloud will come, even suddenly, and take
the sight of the Sun from him: Even so, when a man is looking up to the Sun
of righteousness, CHRIST JESUS, that cloud of death will come in* and catch the
sight of CHRIST from him. This is our estate here, and there is none acquainted
with Heavenly things, but he will find this in experience, as PAVL did. But
what is the remedy? In the first word of the Text that we have read he s^ieth,
We know, and we are assured, for the word imports a full assurance, and
faith, and a full persuasion. Then the remedy against this temptation of death
is only Faith, a full persuasion, and light in the mind of the knowledge of
the glory of GOD in the face of CHRIST, with a gryping and apprehension
thereof: this is the only remedy. The man that lies in ignorance, and has
not this knowledge, he is oppressed by death. So ever seek, and seek
earnestly for light, CHRIST is light: and let your pleasure be in light, for
death is darkness, and smoothe^^th the soul, except it be lightened with
this light that comme^h from the face of JESUS. But to be more special, what
light and knowledge must this be? what assurance must this be? Thou must know
and be assured, not that thou will be free from death: nay, beguile not thy
self, die thou must, and therefore resolve thy self to die: so it must not be
such an assurance as to be persuaded that thou shall not die, opponing thy self
to death, saying, I will not die, and I shall not die. Then what assurance and
knowledge must this be? Ever this, that after I am dead I shall rise again to
life. It is true, O death, thou shall cease upon my body, and thou shall not
leave it till it be dissolved into dust, but when thou have gotten this body
dissolved, I shall recover a new glorious body. There is the meeting of this
temptation, assure thy self of life after death. Seek this assurance, and
labor to pierce, with the eye of Faith through the clouds of temptation, to see
that life in Christ, which is hid up above those clouds. Seek that eye of
Faith, to pierce in through those clouds, to show thee that life and the Sun
of righteousness, Christ Jesus. Now, the words would be weighed particularly:
and first, mark a description of this death, and of the temptations that
would separate thee from that life eternal. The words are these, If our
earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved. Then what is death? a
dissolution and loosing of a thing that was joined together, a dissoluing and
scattering of the parts of it: it is not an utter destruction of it, the thing
that it dissolueth, it destroys not utterly: It lies not in the hands of
death to destroy the thing it dissolueth, it may well loose it and cast it
asunder, but it cannot destroy it. Then death is a dissolution, and not a
destruction: a dissoluing, whereof? not of the soul, it lies not in the power
of death to loose thy soul or sunder the parts thereof, thou have that
advantage: Death will dissolve and loose thine house the lodging that thou
dwell in, that is, this body which clotheth thy soul: Thou art termed by
thy soul, and the soul properly makes a man to be a man, it is ye chief
part of man, and the body is called the lodging of the soul, and the soul
dwells in it as in an house: So death is the dissolution of the body, of the
house* which it loses into powder: yea, it will loose all the members and
parts of the house. O! but mark, when it comes to powder and ashes, it
lies not in the hands of death to destroy the powder and ashes of the body,
but that powder and ashes in despite of death will be gathered and set together
in a more glorious form of body than ever it was before. Yet look how the
Apostle describes this house: First from the matter, secondly from the form
thereof: As for the matter, he calls it our earthly house. This body is but
claye, even a lump of that claye and earth whereupon thou go, esteem of it
as thou will: ye see the matter of this body is vile and contemptible: as for
the form thereof, it is an house, not an house that has a foundation, or
builded on a ground-stone, but a tabernacle and flitting tent: it is set down
here to day, tomorrow taken up, and set down in another place: thy body is a
pauilion, that men transport hither and thither as they please. Then thou see
that thy body is a thing little worth, whether thou look to the matter whereof
it is made (of the earth) or to the form thereof, an unstable tent or pauilion.
Now mark this well, brethren, who speaks this? it is Paul: how speaks he
it? by faith: speaks the body this? no: what then? the soul that dwells
in the body, as in a lodging speaks it. The soul is speaking of the body,
the faithful soul of Paul is speaking of his frail body. Then learn how
little faith counts of death: Learn also how little the faithful soul
counts of the body, yea* even then when it is dwelling in the body, it will
lightly the lodging thereof: it will call it a lump of claye, a tabernacle, a
tent, a frail house: it will count no more thereof, than a glorious king will
count of a cottage, he having many fair palaces. We Will, brethren, it is faith
that does this, it is not the soul alone that can count so lightly of death,
or of the frail body: if thou have only the soul in the body, and want this
faith, the soul will think the body sweet to dwell in: It is faith, and the
faithful soul that does the turn: and there is not a better argument than
this, to see if thy soul be faithful or not. Look what estimation thou have
of thy body and carcass, what account thou make thereof, I say to thee, if
thou have thy chief pleasure in esteeming of thy body, decking and feeding it,
following thine appetite, wallowing in the lust thereof, if thou live in such
estimation of thy body, I say, thou have a faithless soul remaining within
thy body. Woe to that faithless man, that has none other pleasure, not can
gripe nor seek to none other thing but to the pleasing of that fleshly body,
without regard of the precious soul: alas! in pleasuring thy body, thou
losest thy soul, thou make thy body thy Heaven, and thou testifiest plainly
that thou want that light and sense of that Heavenly body, which shall be
after this life. Thus far for the description of the death of the body, which
is the house of the soul, learning us to esteem of the soul and body, as
they are indeed, and that not with a fleshly sense, but with the Spiritual
eyes of Faith.

Now we come to the life that is contrary to death. There is two parts of
man, his soul and body: this glory, of the which we speak, is not the
glory of the soul only, but the glory of the body likewise, a glory
belonging both to soul and body. We (says he) shall get a building, not a
silly house, as this earthly body was, but a fair building. He calls the
body, which we have presently, an house: but the body which we shall get, he
terms it a building: Thou gottest this body from nature, that other is above
nature: nature cannot give thee that other body, GOD shall give thee it above
nature, and against nature. What building is this? It is an house, not builded
with the hands of men, it is builded with GODS own hand: the LORD immediately
with his own hand builded up this building. The former house of this body was
unstable, and had no abiding, for this body passes away: but this second
building is an house that shall never fall nor slit, but shall be eternal:
When thou shall get this building, thou shall not need to be afraid for the
dissolution thereof, it shall never be dissolved. Where shall this building be
builded? men regard much situation in building: this house in the which we dwell
here, it is builded in the earth, and it is a tabernacle pitched sometimes in
this place, and sometimes in that place, but the situatio^ of this building
shall be in the Heaven: for I assure thee, when a man is once glorified, and
enters into that glory, he shall no more return to the earth. The earth
cannot bear a glorified person. Christ being glorified, could not abide in
the earth, but He went to that glorious mansion in the Heavens. Thou shall no
sooner be glorified, but thou shall mount up to Heaven as CHRIST did. Well
then, there is the glory, and there is no word here, but it aggregeth that
passing glory. Every word l^tteth us see the greatness of that glory, and
yet it is not all told. Nay, Paul cannot tell thee all the glory that shall
be in the glorified body, he has given but a little inckling of it. It is
but a building whereof he tells thee: Yet mark, Who is this that speaks
this? It is Paul. How speaks he it? by faith. Is it his mouth that speaks
it? no: it is the soul that lodges in the body, that falls out in the
extolling of that building that it shall dwell in. As a silly man, in a
cottage, appointed to glory should say, I am now sitting in a silly house,
but I shall once sit in a glorious Palace. So mark, Faith will cause the soul
mount up above the body, and whilst the soul is in the body, Faith and Hope
will lift it up, and put it (in a manner) into Heaven. Therefore this same Paul
says in the third Chapt. to the Phillip. and the 30 verse. By Faith and Hope
he had his conversation in Heaven, while he was yet dwelling on the earth.
Get therefore Faith and Hope, that enters thee into the possession of that
glory, and before the soul be severed from the body, they will (in a manner)
put thee in possession thereof. It is the too-looke to heaven that makes the
soul of Paul to rejoice in this glory. The cottager that has not a too-looke
to a better house, is a fool to despise his cottage, but he that has a
too-looke to a better, who can blame him to despise this cottage? I will tell
thee my counsel, before thou dislodge out of this body, for as frail as it
is, be assured of a better, go not out of the house door, except thou know
that thou shall enter into a glorious house. I assure thee if thou be not
provided for a better house, and have not Faith and Hope of a better than that
which thou lodgest in, thou shall enter in a worse, thou shall get that body
again which was evil before, but then it shall be a thousand times worse:
for the soul shall be shot into that body again, and then thou shall be
shot both soul and body into that foul dungeon of Hell. So, brethren, look
for a glorious building, and thou that esteemest not of this body, be
careful for a better. A vain prodigal man will cast his soul out of this
body, and in the mean time will not be provided for a better lodging
thereto. He is not esteemed a man in these days, that will not hazard and cast
out his life for an evil cause and quarrel. Trustest thou that that soul of
thine shall get any better lodging hereafter, and thou not provided thereof by
Faith and Hope here? nay, nay. O blessed is that man that dies in a good
cause! And what better cause can be than Christ's cause, who is the God of
life? Assure thee, thou that wilt die for Christ's cause, thou shall get a
building in Heaven: thou that take no care of this life for Christ's cause,
death shall be advantage to thee. The Lord grant us a too-looking to that
Heavenly building, and an assurance of that Heavenly life. Thus much for the
assurance that Paul has, that he shall dwell in Heaven.

Now in the verse following, learn how he groundeth this assurance, and
what warrande he has for him: Faith is not a word, as to say, (I believe) and
Hope is not a word, as to say, (I hope) Nay, but thou must have a warrant of
thy salvation in this life or else I assure thee, in the Name of GOD, thou
shall never get Heaven: It is a strait way to come to Heaven, and it is
wondrous hard to get the assurance of it: It is no small matter to get an
assurance of life everlasting after death. Then look what warrandes this man
PAVLE had, that thou may preasse to have the like. The first ground of his
assurance is in this second verse, For this cause (says he) we sigh,
desiring to be clothed, to put on, as it were, a garment: Wherewith? With our
house which is from Heaven. These are his words. Then his first warrande and
ground of his assurance is a desire of that same glory. What sort of desire? An
earrest desire, with sighing and sobbing: not a cold desire, but day and night
crying and sobbing for life. Think thou so easily to get Heaven, that can
never say earnestly in thine heart, GOD give me that Heavenly life: no, thou will be disappointed: It is the violent that enters into Heaven, Matthew. 11.
12. as ye will see a man violently thrust in at a door. Thou that would
go to Heaven, make thee for thronging through till all thy gut^es be almost
thrust out. Paul, in the eight chapter to the Romans. and the 22. and 23.
verses, uses these arguments against those wicked men that cannot sigh for
Heaven: First, he takes his argument from the elements, the senseless and
dumb reatures, which sobbe and groan for the revelation of the sons of GOD,
and travel for that time, as a woman in her birt^* O miserable man! The earth
shall condemn thee, the ^loore thou sit on is sighing, and would feign
have that carcass of thine to Heaven: The waters, the air, the heavens, all
sighing for that last deliverance: the glory appertains to thee, and yet
thou art laughing: Alas! what shall betide thee? The other argument he takes
from the sighing of men, who have gotten the Spirit of GOD: We also (says he)
who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves,
waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body. Thou that have not
gotten the Spirit shall never sigh for Heaven: flesh and blood will never shed
one tear for Heaven. It must only be the Spirit of JESUS, that must fetch
up the sigh out of the heart, and the tear in the eye, Roman. 8. 26. So he
takes his argument from them who have gotten a sense of the Spirit of GOD, and
redemption of the body to prove the certainty of that Heavenly Kingdom and
glory. Now, there cannot be a surer argument to us that ever we shall
obtain glory, than this sighing in heart for it, and this earnest desire
thereof. If thou find thine heart desirous of glory, a sure argument thou shall
be partaker of glory. It is said, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled, Matthew. 5. 6. Seek thou for CHRIST'S
righteousness and thy glory, assure thee thou shall get a sweet filling.
Mark it, I say to thee, thou have not only through this earnest desire of
glory, an assurance that thou shall reign in glory, but (look to your
experience) that desire is not so soon begun of that life and glory, but so
soon also the soul of the faithful begins to rise with joye. Who ever yet
was he that gave a sigh from his heart, raised up by the Spirit of Christ,
that felt not with that sigh a joye in his heart? Learn it by your experience.
This lets us see, that the desire and thirst of glory puts us in present
possession of a part of glory. Ere thou come to it desire it earnestly, and I
promise thee, in the Name of the Father, thou shall be presently put in
possession of a part of that Heavenly inheritance. It is true thou shall not
get it al here, yet there is none other Heaven after this life, but that Heaven
which thou gettest begun in thee in this life. Always, look ever for that
joye that is by sight: There are two joys, the one by sight, the other by
faith, 2. Cor. 5. 6. The joy by faith is in our pilgrimage in this life: The
joy by sight is after this life, when with our eyes we shall see Christ: The
joy by faith is to look to Christ a far of, and yet we rejoice, and love Him
that is far absent, 1. Pet. 1. 8. Faith has a joy that it enjoys, by
speaking and thinking: Sight has the joy that it enjoys by presence: The
joy of the eye great in quantity, and the fullness of joy: The joy of faith
not so great, for it is the joy of a pilgrim, not as yet come to his home.
The joy of the sight is when we shall see our glorious Lord, face to face,
whom we see only now by faith. 1 Cor 13 12. This is the fulness of joy. The joy
of Faith, which enduring our pilgrimage, is not so full. O how great shall be
the joy at the perfect seeing of Christ! Think never to have the joy by sight
after this life, except in this life thou have the joy by faith, as the
earnest-penny of the other, and except by Faith thou once get a joy before thou
depart from this life, thou shall never see the face of Christ, nor have joy in
him. So brethren, it is a good thing to have that desire of Heaven: Sigh and
sob, and desire with Paul for Heaven: for it is a Charter and Evidence of thine
everlasting inheritance: and never earthly lord had a surer charter of his
land, than thou that have a desire of heaven, have of thine inheritance in
heaven: for these earthly evidences of land are without the^ in their kists but
this evidence of thine is written and ingraffed in thine heart. Now, when
extremity is threatened, it is time to seek thy warrands of this heave^ly in
heritance: this present country is good forthee, and the best country that ever
thou shall see, except thou find this warrant of sighing, and desire for that
heave^ly inheritance. And therefore let scorners and mockers scorn as they will,
the children of God must power forth tears: And this is it that y^ Lord has
been desiring these many days past, he has benegently drawing out of us this
sense, but now He begins to press it out of us, that our eyes might burst
out in tears: and thou that can not sob, and desire in these miserable days
to be dissolved, thou have no true matter of joy. Woe be to them that have
none heart to sigh for the troubles of Christ's Church, but are ever ready to
execute judgment against Gods servants when the Lord is visiting them. Well,
the Lord shall wring out tears out of them in His wrath, that will not sob in
the time of the danger and trouble of His Church. Then what is it that Pavle
sigheth for? And what desires he? He desires a new clothing to be put one
above as a clothing that is, he would keep this same body in substance, and
cast off this filthy garment of sinand death, and put on that glorious shape of
the body of Christ. The reason is set down, For when the Lord shall cloth us,
we shall not be found naked. So this body shall remain in substance but O the
glory and immortality of it! Mark the nature of the lodging which we shall
receive, it shall not be another body in substance, than this body which we have
here in earth. The same body in substance we shall have in heaven, which we
have here. Herein only is the difference, this body is vile, it is mortal,
full of sin and wickedness, unglorious, ignominious, full of corruption,
weak infirm, But when this body shall be changed in heaven, it shall not be
changed in substance, but in quality Paul. 1 Cor. 15. 42. 43. 44. Says, The
body is sawn in corruption, and is raised again in incorruption, and is
raised again in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, and is raised in
glory: it is sown in weakness, and is raised in power: (The weakest body
in Heaven, shall be stronger than the strongest man in earth) Then (says he)
it is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body. So the change
is in quality, and therefore he says to the Philippians, chap. 3. verse. 21.
When CHRIST comes, He shall transform (not abolish, but transform) in
quality, our vile bodies like to His own glorious body. Christ keeps in ye
Heaven that same very body which he had in the earth, and thou shall keep the
same body in Heaven, which thou have in earth, but it shall be altered in
quality, as far as ye Heaven and earth is different. Brethren, this ministers
comfort: there is none of us, but naturally we love this body: then let this
comfort thee, that suppose thy soul shall be for a time without this body,
yet thou shall get it again. Another comfort: death cannot destroy it, the
grave shall not be able to swallow up that body, but the grave shall keep it,
and the dust and substance thereof till the coming of Christ, and then it
shall be compelled to render it again. Life shall swallow up death, but death
(nor the grave) shall not be able to swallow up the body of God^ Elect: But
the reprobate shall be swallowed up of death, both in soul and body. In the
8. chap. to the ROMANS, the 10. and 11. verses, Paul ministers these two
consolations against death, He says, The body must die, because of sin:
but he subjoyneth, The soul in the mean time shall live: and the Spirit of
Jesus shall take it and cover it with that blood: And albeit it was a sinful
soul, yet as soon as the Father blinketh upon it, wimpled and wrapped, as it
were, in the blood of Jesus, immediately he bids it pass to glory. He
goes forward: And where it might have been said, shall we have no consolation
in the body? He answers, If the Spirit of Him that raised Jesus from the
dead, dwell in your mortal body: what then? He, that is, GOD the Father, that
raised up Christ from the dead, He, by His Spirit, shall raise your bodies:
that same body that is dead and laid in grave, that same body, by Gods Spirit
(for the Spirit of Jesus, and the Spirit of the Father is all one) shall be
raised up Learn then, if this holy Spirit of God once take lodging in you, He
shall never leave you in soul nor body, He shall accompany the body in the
grave, and conuoy the soul to Heaven: The Spirit of Jesus shall go with ye
soul, and lift it up: The earth gets the body, when the soul is separated
from it, yet the Holy Spirit shall go to the grave with the body, and shall
remain with it in the grave, and with the least part of the dust thereof: And
when Christ shall come, He shall gather it together, and make it a whole body.
So, happy are they that have once lodged this guest in their souls: for,
neither fire nor water, nor none other power, ever shall be able to destroy
them, because that Holy Spirit ever remains with the^. Now in the next verse,
because it might have been said and objected, Thou would not want the body*
why sighest thou then? and what means this desire, if thou would keep the
body? We (the faithful) that are in this tabernacle, we sigh, and are
burdened, (but mark our desire) because we would not be unclothed, (as some
will say, Soul to God, and bones to the dunghill, in contempt of the body:
but think thou to be glorified in Heaven, without a body? No) but would be
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of Life. As if he would
say, I would have this fair cloak of glory put upon this body, that it might
consume and swallow up all this stink of sin that is in the body. Learn
then first, the body as it is now is a burden. He says, We that are in
this tabernacle sigh, and are burdened: It is a load laid upon the back of
the soul, it is a tabernacle, but a burthenable tabernacle, as an house
smoothering him down, and he holding the same upon his shoulders, that
appearantly it would be better for him to be out of it. Learn secondly the
estate of them that dwell in this tabernacle: If the body be a burden, then
the soul must sigh and groan as a man under a heavy burden: And the body is
nothing but an house of mourning to the faithful soul, as long as it dwells
therein: The wanton light man thinks this body which he bears about, to be
no burden, and will run and leap with it, as though this carcass were as
light as a fether: Alas! he feels not the burden, he is senseless, and
like one in a fever, and in a rage, that knows not what he does, nor what
he suffers: A mountain is lying upon him, and he feels it not. Woe to
those men that are so wanton under this misery! Amend in time or the LORD
shall thrust thee down to Hell. Fie on thee, that dwell in Bethania, the
house of mourning and can not mourn: Mourn in time, or else I assure thee,
thou shall mourn for ever. This being the condition of men who dwell in this
tabernacle, sighing and desiring, as a wom^n with child, to be relieved, what
is the end of this desire? The end of the mourning of the Godly, is not that
they would be quite of the house, as many desire, that were wrong: for many
will mourn under this house desperately, and the body will be a burden to
the soul in them, and their life will be unpleasant to them: they will think
to get a relief of the burden by the want of this present life, and will put
hand in themselves: but then begins their everlasting mourning, for they
never knew what mourning was till that end come. So then, this is not the way
to be delivered of the burden, but the way is, To seek to put on a clothing
on this body, and here is the end of our desire. It is clothed with
mortality, and that is all the matter of thy mourning: It is not the substance
of the body that causes thee to mourn, but sin, that possesses thy body,
and corrupts the marowe of thy bones, death accompanying sin. Then this
mortality being an accident of sin, which is the chief cause thereof: the
remedy is, Seek to be clothed with the life that comes from Christ: Suck
in, by Faith, a drop of that life of Christ. This will not destroy thy body,
but it will destroy the death and sin that possesses thy body. And the life
of Jesus Christ in a moment will swallowe up all that death and sin, and all
that misery that lay on thee: There is the way to dwell with ease in the
body: Seek not to destroy the body, But seek the slaughter of that sin
and death that lies upon thy body, otherwise soul and body both shall
perish, the house shall fall down, and the man that lodged in the house shall
be destroyed.

Remember then, Life and Death are not matters to be scorned withal, they are
not words, nay, nay: Think gravely of them, and before thy soul be
dislodged, look that thou be prepared for a better life: Look that thou
find the LORD of Life CHRIST JESUS by His Spirit working the death of
mortality in thee, and the beginning of the Life that shall last for ever. The
LORD by His Spirit work these things in your hearts. To whom be all Praise,
Honor, and Glory, for ever and ever,

AMEN.
THE SECOND SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. V. And He that has created us for this thing, is GOD, who also
has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

Therefore, we are always bold, though we know that Whilst we are at home
in the body, we are absent from the LORD.

(For we walk by faith, and not by sight.)

Nevertheless, we are bold, and love rather to remove out of the body, and
to dwell with the LORD.


BRethren, ye that were present the last day, heard what was the purpose of
Paul in this place. First he begins to comfort himself and all others that
are to die, and to be dissolved, against death, and the terrors of death. He
(as he says in the chap. preceding and 18. verse.) is looking up to Heaven,
and whilst he is looking up to Heaven, to see that end that he was once to
attain to, there comes in betwixt his sight and the light of that glory and
life, a cloud of death, to have caught away out of his eyes (if it had been
possible) all too-looke to life everlasting. The remedic against it, we showed
you was Faith, and a constant Hope, with a sharp, earnest, and steadfast
looking, eue^ to pierce in throrow death, and that cloud of death, and through
death to get a sight of that life, and light of glory, which lies hid up in
Heaven beyond death. We know (says the Apostle) and are assured, that our
bodies and the earthly house of this tabernacle, shall be dissolved, yet we
shall get a building for an house, a building that is from God, not made with
men's hands, but an eternal building, that is situated in the Heavens above the
carth. When he has set down this remedy, he begins to comfort himself and
others, by a sure Faith, that after death he shall live again, after the
dissolution of his mortal body, he shall receive a glorious body. The first
argument of his assurance is from the desire he had of life, sighing with an
earnest desire of that Kingdom which is from Heaven. This desire never
disappointed man: Never was there any man that had an earnest desire of life
and glory, and had the true knowledge and mean to attain to this glory,
that was disappointed of his desire: but who ever desired most earnestly to be
glorified, most certainly they live now in Heaven, and at this hour they are
glorified there: and none there shall be that shall have this desire, and
strive to throng into Heaven violently, Mat. 11. 12. but they shall enjoy
Heaven after their departing. Now in the Text which we have read, we follow
out the assurances and warrandes which the Apostle has of the glory of the
life to come. The second assurance and warrant of the life to come is in the
first words, He (says the Apostle) that has created us for this thing, is
God, etc. The argument of the life to come in these words, is from the end of
our creation, GOD has created us to this end, to wit, That in the end this
mortality wherewith we are clothed, might be swallowed up of Life:
therefore, live must we in Heaven. This is the end of our creation, therefore
it cannot fail, but we must be glorified. Learn then, The manner of our
glorifying is this: It is GOD, not man, that has made us, and created us to
this end: It is impossible that GOD can be disappointed of the end which He
sets before Him of His work: man may be disappointed, for he will begin a
work for some purpose, but often times he will be disappointed of that
purpose: He will build an house to dwell in, but it may be he never dwell in
it, another will dwell therein. GOD, when He works a work to any end, it
is impossible that He can be disappointed. All the world, if they would stand
up, and oppone to GODS work, they cannot hinder it. That work that GOD
works in us, is such a work that tends to Life, as to the end thereof.
Who shall condemn us? (says the Apostle) it is God that justifies us, Roman.
8. 33. Will He justify thee? all the world shall not be able to condemn
thee: Will He save thee? all the world shall not be able to make thee
perish: So is it of His whole Church in general: Suppose all the world were
conspired against His Church, He will have it safe: and wonderfully works He
the salvation of His Church, and every member thereof: through death He
brings them to life: so that it is folly to men to strive against the works
of GOD. Yet look to the words, He that has created us to this end, is God.
What creation is this that he means of? Is this that first creation of Adam
and Eua? of every one of us in them that was at the beginning? Not so, that
creation failed. Indeed we were first created to live, and through that first
creation every one of us got a certain right to live for ever, but that right
we lost in our own default, we are fallen from that right of our creation in
the fall of Adam. So we must seek another creation, or else we shall never
see Life: for we have no right to that first creation, which was in all
Holiness, according to the image of GOD, Ephesians. 4. 24. If thou stick to that
first creation and old birthright, thou shall never see Life. Then the
Apostle means of another. What other making or creating of us is this? It is
our regeneration or renewing again, which is nothing else, but as it were, a
new birth and begetting, from the which we are called new creatures, 2. Corin.
5. 17. Then, Brethren, would thou have a sure argument that thou shall live
after this life? (and woe to thee, if thou live not after this life! woe to
them that ever saw this world, and they get not a life after this life! for
this life will away) Look if thou art regenerated and renewed, look if thou
art sanctified, and find a slaying of thy lusts within thee: Look if thou
find the life of God by his Spirit working within thee, not this natural
life, but this Heavenly and spiritual life begun in thee not by nature, but
by grace: If thou have this, thou have a warrant that thou shall live: and
albeit this natural life shall be taken from thee, thou shall get another
life everlasting in glory: but if thou find thy self not renewed by the
Spirit of grace, take this life from thee, thou shall not get life everlasting
in glory. So look if thou be a new creature, thou have gotten a greater
grace, than to be borne to an earthly kingdom, if so be thou may assure thy
self of lif everlasting. What is this newness in the new creature? This
newnes that is in the new creature, is nothing else but that same life which we
shall live in Heaven, and is begun here. This newness is only this new life of
regeneration, which life so long as thou live here (from the time that thou
have gotten a sponke thereof) piece and piece eats up the old and cankered
nature. The life of God within thee, will consume (even as thou consumest the
meat thou eatest) the old corruption which lies in thy nature: and in the
end, in the glorious resurrection of the dead, it shall be altogether
abolished. This life then, which is begun here, it shall open the mouth, and
swallow up death, and death thereafter shall have no more place. This life is
only eating up by little and little death here: but at that time it shall
swallowe it up wholly, and thou shall say with Paul, Death is swallowed up, 1.
Cor. 15. 54. So well is the soul that has a warrande of his new creation,
whether he die in his bed, or out of it, he shall die with joy. Then my
counsel is seeing death is daily threatened, let every one strive to get this
assurance of this new life begun in him here, that it may swallowe up death:
Woe be to them that have not this assurance! This is the second assurance of
life everlasting. I pray you mark these assurances, for Paul had such an
earnest desire, that he sought all assurances and warrandes of this life, and
he is reigning now in Heaven. So thou, who thirstest after life, learn at
him. Now rests the third warrande in the next words, Who also has given
us the earnest of the Spirit. Learn the words, for all the doctrine rises of
the words. Then the third warrant is the Spirit of Christ Jesus in thee. If
ever thou mindest to have life hereafter, thou must have Gods Spirit in thee:
not only thine own Spirit, but Gods Spirit, flowing from God through Jesus
Christ, and entering into thy body and soul. Behold the liberality of God,
when He by His Spirit has renewed thee, He will not take that Spirit from
thee, as a man will do, when he has builded a work, he will take his hand
from it, stand if it will or not: But the Lord does not so, He has renewed
thee by His Holy Spirit, which He puts within thee. O how the Lord
puts the third person of the Trinity in thee, and makes Him an
earnest-pennie to thee of Life everlasting: Because thy regeneration is
imperfect, and thou have not yet attained to that Life, therefore He lets
His Spirit abide in thee, assuring thee as an earnest-pennie, that whatsoever
God has promised, He shall perform it to thee, and thou shall not be
disappointed of a jot thereof. Such is the infidelity of our nature, that all
the promises, all the oaths which He makes to confirm His promises, all His
Sacraments which He has joined to His promises, cannot persuade us. But look
to this third warrande, Have thou the Spirit of God, if He be in thee, He
will be quick, working joye with sighs: He cannot be idle, He will be
working the work of regeneration both day and night: Then anger Him not,
Ephesians. 4. *30. Away with filthy cogitations, away with every rotten word,
away with every evil deed, labor to pleasure Him day and night, and strive
to keep Him, and thou shall hauea warrande of life in thy bosom, and when
thou art dying thou shall find such sweetness in death as is wonderful to
tell. None ever had the Spirit of God, but in death they had unspeakable joye.
Then seek to be in Christ, and get His Spirit within thee, and having gotten
this Spirit, keep Him diligently, and power out thine own spirit but never
Gods Spirit, for then in all distresses thou shall have comfort. Now to resume
all: Ye who take great pleasure in your Charters, the Evidences of your
inheritance and land, take heed to this, Your inheritance is in Heaven, and
thou art a fool, who think that thou have an inheritance in earth: For
either shall thou be pulled from it, or it shall be pulled from thee: Nay,
look as ever thou would be an inheriter, that thine inheritance be in
Heaven: Thou art the foolishest beggar, and the poorest that ever was, if thou
be a King, if thou think thine inheritance to be in earth: Having laid this
count with thy self, Mine inheritance is in Heaven, then next look that thou
have thine evidence. For thou shall never possess Heaven, except thou have the
evidence thereof laid up in thy charter kissed. Now thine evidences are the same
evidences that Paul had, and the same kind of evidences serve for all, it is an
inheritance that all men must get, one sort of charter must serve for one
inheritance. What then can be the charter and evidence? Can thou sigh for
that Heavenly inheritance? Can thou have a desire of it: There is thy first
evidence: Then find thou thy self to be renewed? Find thou CHRIST'S life
in thee? The life of Jesus is manifest in me, says Paul, 2. Cor. 4. 10.
Find thou the wicked life of this world reformed? There is the second
evidence. Yet more, find thou the worker of the desire, and the worker of
thy regeneration, the Spirit of Christ within thee, then keep him well: There
is the best evidence of all the evidences of thine inheritance: having these,
assure thy self of Heaven: but want thou these, or any of them, thou shall
never get that inheritance in Heaven. As these three are three evidences of
thine heavenly inheritance, so they are three props of Faith that gripe this
Heavenly life: They are the three pillars that hold up Faith, which is builded
upon them: cut one of these pillars away, and thou shall lose Faith and Hope.
But here it may be asked, Are all these three of the nature of the life to
come? I answer, As for the desire, sighing, and sobbing for that heavenly
inheritance, it ends with this life, and in that life to come all weeping
shall be taken away, REVEL. 21. 4. Mourn and groan in time, then hereafter
shall come joy, and pure joy. A troubled joy is ^eere in this life, but
hereafter there shall be a pure and solid joy, and nothing but joy. So this
mourning cease then, and is not of the nature of the life to come but as to
the new creature and regeneration, it is of the nature of the life to come, and
it is the beginnning and first part of that heavenly glory: so that our
heavenly glory shall be none other thing but the per^yting of our
regeneration: For when all this pelffrie shall be taken away, then we shall
fully be renewed. As to the Spirit, if ever he was powerful in earth, he
shall be more powerful in Heaven: so that the same Spirit that here dwelt in
thy body, shall then glorify thy body, and make it to shine brighter than the
Sun: Therefore let us seek this regeneration, and the Spirit of CHRIST: For
in these two stands the perfection and the glory of the life to come.

Now, when he has reckoned out all the warrands of life, whereby he assures
himself thereof, he concludes in the next ve^se, Then (says he) we have
confidence always: as if he would say, Having these warrandes, I have
confidence always, that is, I am assured of my glory: and yet the words
import not only an assurance* but the effect thereof, which is a sweet
security in the soul: for whenever any man is assured of life, then the
soul with sweetness will rest: then comes that peace of Conscience, assuring
us, whether we live, or we die, we are CHRIST'S: so this draws on that
boldness and confidence. Then look the nature, the beginning* and ^ising of
Faith: it is builded and stands upon these three pillars, An earnest desire
of life, Regeneration, and the Spirit of GOD: These are the three proppes
thereof, which are sensible to them who have faith, and we should be
acquainted with them. Then of this rises the sweet confidence of glory* and
security, the repose and rest of the soul and conscience, and from the soul
it comes up to the mouth and breaks out in a glorying. As this same Apostle
upon this confidence in his soul, breaks out and says? What shall sever us
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or pe^il, or sword? No* in all these things we are more
than victorious, through Him that loved us. Romans 8. 35. etc. So that faith
being builded upon these three pillars, security and confidence being builded
upon Faith, then boldn^sse in mouth will say, I defy all contrary powers* lay
the sword, lay fire, lay death before me, it will say, I defy them all: yea,
let all the Devils of H^ll come before a man* and his faith be well builded,
and confidence on faith, he will defy them all: yea, albeit they threate^
damnation to him: for it thou stand in Christ thou shall live: albeit thou must
be separated from this mortal life, yet all the world cannot separate thee
from the life of Christ. Seek this life now in time, that in trouble we may
say* that we will rest in Christ, and all the world shall not sever thee from
Him.

Yet to go forward in the words. The Apostle as yet has not the full
contentation in heart for all this assurance: For (says he) we know, that
while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the LORD. If we be at
home with a thing we are far from a better thing which is abroad. Alas! thou
being ^t home a^ thine house and fire, thou art far abroad from thine home
in Heaven: whilst we are at home in this mortal body we are strangers and
Pilgrims from the LORD.

Brethren, ye shall learn here a great difference between confidence and
contentation: It is one thing to have contentation, and another thing to have
confidence. This Apostle had confidence but not contentation. Thou art far
dec^aued that think thou have sufficient contentation in this world. Woe is
thee! yea, although thou have Heavenly graces, and if thou think thou have
contentation, either of glory, or of sight, all is nothing: Why? Because there
cannot, nor should not be contentation here: no, the best and most
confident man that lives, should not think he has contentation in this
pr^s^nt life. All thine holiness, faith, confidence and hope, should not give
thee full contentation. All the kingdoms, honors, and riches of this world,
which is nothing but dirt and pelffrie, in respect of those Heavenly things,
should not give thee full contentation. And yet the worldly fool will say in
his heart, I have contentation and sufficiency. O! but what said CHRIST to
him that decreed with his heart to make wide barnes? Fool, this night thy soul
shall be taken from thee, Lu^e* 12. 20. Away with an opinion of contentation in
this earth, and thou be a king of all the earth: Will thou have contentation
without CHRIST? Will thou hau^ sufficiency* and not have Him who is thy life
and glory? When thou art a pilgrim from CHRIST, and wandering from thy
country and inheritance, will thou say thou have thine hearts desire? Had
ever pilgrim full contentation during the time of his pilgrimage? Then no
contentation to the faithful soul, but in CHRIST. I shall never think
co^tentation to be in my soul, till I see CHRIST face to face: I give thee the
same counsel, yea, and if I had all spiritual graces, in never so great a
measure yet no co^tentation for my soul, till I see CHRIST: for all our
blessedness stands in the sight of CHRIST, and thou can not see CHRIST
here, because thou art absent from Him: For* as long as I am at home (speaking
of the soul so long as it is closed here within this earthly tabernacle) I am
absent from CHRIST: And this prison of my body so closes me about, that I
cannot see CHRIST.

Brethren, it is this mortal body that is clothed with sin and mortality,
wherewith we must be clothed as long as we are here, that holds us from the
sight of CHRIST. It is impossible so long as thou art clothed with the sinful
body, to get that full sight of JESUS, albeit He were standing on the earth,
clothed with His glory. So thou must be unclothed of this mortality, ere
thou can see Him: And there is the ground wherefore we should think no
contentation whilst we are in this body: Because so long as we dwell in this
mortal body, we shall never see CHRIST, nor get a full fruition of His
countenance. Therefore, Brethren, take not so much pleasure and delight in this
mortal body* for I assure thee, it is but a prison, holding the faithful
soul, and the eye of the faithful soul from the sight of CHRIST, but as soon
as it shall be loosed from it, it shall mount immediately with joye to
CHRIST, and there get full contentation in His face. ye think, so long as ye
want these earthly things, ye cannot get contentation: (I speak not of the
wicked, but even of the regenerated man) but when the soul gets this
glorious presence of CHRIST in Heaven, it shall have joye in infinite degrees
greater than ever it had in earth. And albeit the body shall lie here in
grave, and ignominy for a time, yet all that shall be recompensed by the
glorious sight of CHRIST, which the soul shall enjoye in the Heavens, being
separated from the body. We think we can have none Heavenly glory and joy,
except we have this earthly body there: It is true indeed, the soul cannot
have so great joye, as if the soul and body were together: but it is also
true, that the soul being separated, has greater joye in Heaven, than the
soul and body can have together in this earth. Otherwise, how would Paul
have desired to have been dissolved, he having that confidence and
earnest-penny of glory, except he had desired that joye in the soul? Alas! we
are so senseless, that we think joye cannot come, except we get it in our
earthly body: And this is one part of our misery.

Now in the next verse (in a parenthesis) he casts in the cause why he is
absent from GOD, and a pilgrim here, and says, For we walk by faith, and
not by sight: As if he would say, All the sight which I have of Him is
afar of, look how far the Heavens are distant from the earth, also as far
is JESUS dista^t from the eye of the faithful soul: there is only a far
sight of Him here: all the sight of Heavenly glory which we have here, is
like a more, in respect of that sight we shall ge^: it is so far from thee
that it seems not to be the thousand part of that fulness that it is indeed:
Thou see it now as it were a more, but thou shall once see it as a mountain
in great fullness. So Paul says, I see my LORD, but afar of: there is a
great distance betwixt the eye of my soul and Him: and besides this farnes,
such a mist arises out of the stinking body of corruption betwixt my LORD and
me like a cloud, that it hides my LORDS face from me. So there are two
impedimentes, which hinder us from the full sight of CHRIST the first is the
far distance of place betwixt Him and me: the second is the smoke and mist of
my corruption that goes in betwixt me and Him, and takes the sight of my LORD
from me. Find ye not this in your selves by experience? In the beginning of an
hour thou shall have a sight of Him, and again ere the half hour be past,
the sight of Him is away let be a day or half a day. Then marvel not,
suppose Paul complains of this, that he cannot see CHRIST in respect of the
farnesse and smoke that comes betwixt them: Would to GOD we had a sense of
this! Who is he that once groneth for this, and says, Alas. I am a pilgrim,
it is a far sight which I have of my LORD: O! if my soul were loosed from my
body, that I might be with Him! Who can say this? No, we are all sleeping,
and there is none eye lifted up to CHRIST in this great mis^rie. Will thou
always cry peace in such a misery? at last thou shall be pressed down to
Hell.

Yet to insist upon this verse* We walk (says he) by faith and not by sight.
Ye see here then the condition of a Christian is walking, not sitting, nor
sleeping, he must be afoote This word is ever in the Apostles mouth, 1.
Thessal. ^. 6. Colloss. 4. 2. etc. Ever walking, a pilgrim must not sit down*
Thou art a pilgrim, upon thy journey toward another country, thou must not
sit down: for otherwise thou shall never come to thy journeys end. The
second thing which I mark here* This walking must not be in darkness, but
it must be in light. Woe to him that walks in darkness, for if he were
never so well occupied, he shall die in darkness: he that walks in
darkness, he shall get Hell, for H^ll is darkness: so that walking must be
in light. The light is of two sorts, they are both set down in ^hrse: The
first is the light and knowledge of ^^^^^: The second the light of presence and
sight. The knowledge of Faith is but a glimmering, in respect of the other
light that is by sight, when thou shall see CHRIST: in His presence is a
wonderful light: when He shall look to thee, and thou to Him, the beams of
His glory shall so strike on thee, and cause thee shine, that thou shall be
astonished. There is no soul* but as soon as it comes in His presence, it
will be astonished and marvel that ever there was such a light in CHRIST.
Faith has but a small light, but the light by presence is marvelous: H^e
shall translate us to a marueilou, light, 1. Pet. 2. 9. All the Angels wonder
at the light which is about the Lamb: and thy soul, when it shall come into
glory, shall stand wondering at such a glory: and thy body, when it shall
follow, shall wonder, and all shall be wondering at such a passing glory!
These are the two sights. Would GOD we could take heed to get a glaunce of
that Heavenly glory! then all the pleasures of this earth would be but
vanity, dirt, and pelffrie to us. The Lord yet open our eyes, to get a sight
of this glory.

These are two lights: and as there is two lights, so there is two kinds of
walking: The one is in this life* the other in Heaven in the life to come: In
this life, we have a small glimmering, without any Sun, a blincke of light,
environed about with darkness Therefore, because of the want of light, there
is such stumbling in our walking in this life: but when we shall walk in the
Heavens with that H^au^ly light of GOD, with the countenance of CHRIST before
our eyes, then no staggering, neither to this side, nor to that, because of
that light that is in the face of CHRIST ever shining in our eyes. The
darkness ye see is unpleasant, but the light is pleasant: It is a wonderful
thing, that we shall get leave to walk in that inaccessible light of GOD,
wherein the Father and the Son do walk. Brethren, think on these things,
for these are the chief points of all. All earthly things euanish when the
Sun goes down, and darkness comes: Therefore set your eyes upon that
glory, which never shall euanish nor decay, as ever ye would desire to reign
there: These days require this preparation. Certainly, preaching and hearing
will euanish, and preaching being taken away, faith will fail, and without
faith how can me^ attain to glory. Therefore, to keep in the glory of this
light, we should earnestly cry, LORD, GIVE US THIS WORD: For if it be taken
away, we shall be worse than they of Sodom and Gomorrha.

Now, the Apostle having showed this, he comes back again, and says,
Nevertheless we have confidence, etc. He that has confidence he will rejoice
to speak of it, and it swells so in his heart, that of necessity it must be
uttered, and he will say once, twice, thrice* I have confidence: ^u^ now with
confidence he joyneth another thing, to wit, his love to die, and to slit out
of the body, to reign with CHRIST. Love to die is the companion of
confidence. He says, I have confidence, but I love rather to remove out of
the body, and to dwell with the LORD. There are two good things, The one
confidence, the other light. The Apostle makes a choice here, he will leave
confidence here in the body, and he chooses to die, that he may attain to
the light: and in this respect he would change all the confidence he has with
death. Thou will not change a foot of earth with death, but the Apostle will
change confidence with death, and confidence is more preciou, than all ye
earth. Few will do this, and yet thou wi't die and thou had sworn it. Well
is that body that is so resolved to die as Paul was! But makes Paul a
choice of death for death it self? Certainly no man will choose death for
death it self for except the LORD lighten death, and transform it, it is an
entry to Hell: And if thou have none other respect in death but to be quite of
this miserable life, (as some will s^y, Would GOD I were dead, that I might be
quite of this misery) thou shall be in greater misery after death, than ever
thou was whilst thou was living. What then should be the special cause that
should move a man to say, (Would GOD I were dissolved) even this, I am
burdened with sin, I am burdened with mortality. This burden should be a
great motive: Well is the soul that is freede of sin: What pleasure is it to
a soul that would feign serve GOD, to live ever in sin? Nay, no pleasure.

This is the special motive that should move us to make choice of death, To
be with JESUS CHRIST, to dwell with Him, and to be in His company in the
participation of that glory that is in the countenance of CHRIST. For that
ca^se I would flit, that I might be with my LORD, and embrace that joye. So as
the misery of this world will put thee forward to GOD. so the sweetness of
CHRIST'S company will draw thee forward. Then to end, The Apostle has
preconceaued in himself a wonderful joye of that glory, when he saw it not
yet, so must we do. All his walking was by faith, and not by sight: but he
sees before the hand an Heavenly joy and pleasure, in respect of that
^ruition that he shall once get of the countenance of CHRIST. This should
learn thee to look ever for more than thou ^eest: think not that thou have
seen all the glory that shall come to thee and have felt all the pleasures
that are laid up for thee in Heaven: But think that there is greater joye and
glory there tha^ ever thou couldi hear of: for CHRIST him self never uttered
all the glory that is laid up for the Saints: All that we see here is but in
a mirror: All the glory of CHRIST in the Scripture, is but in a mirror: li^e
as when the Sun shines in the mirror, thou look not to the Sun that
shines, but to the glauncing thereof in the mirror. And as there is greater
shining in the Sun, than in the glauncing thereof which thou see* so think
ever there is greater glory in Heaven, than ever thou heard of in the
Scripture. Suppose not that thou can think of the joys of Heaven, as men on
earth think on earthly things: Who can think a thing greater than it is? No,
the glory of Heaven, and the joye with CHRIST, mounteth up above the reach of
thy faith and hope, and all thing that is able to conceive the same. It
mounteth up higher that the Heaven of Heavens is above the earth. Therefore,
think not with thy self, it is too much that I look for: Thou failest only
in narrowness, thy Faith and Hope is so narrow, that they cannot comprehend
the thousand part of that glory: And so we should say (I hope, and I
believe, more than I am able to comprehend.) And here is the cause that thou
can not get that full sight of glory that is laid up for thee. The weak
begun grace of Faith, and the Spirit of GOD in thee is not able to attain
to the thousand part of that glory.

The LORD give us grace to preconceaue this glory in some measure, that we
may seek the same, and say with PAVL, I have Faith and Hope, but that glory
passes all. The LORD grant us this, even for CHRIST'S sake, So be it.

THE THIRD SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. V. Where^ore also we covet, that both, dwelling at home, and
remoouing from home, we may be acceptable to Him.

For we must all appear before the judgment seat of CHRIST, that every man
may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that that he
has done, whether it be good or evil.

Knowing, therefore, that terror of the LORD, we persuade men, and we are
made manifest unto GOD and I trust also that we are made manifest in your
consciences.


We have heard, Brethren, these days past, the remedy that the Apostle
sets down against this temporal death, and the dissolution of the body. In
a word, it is a full assurance and persuasion of the heart, that when we are
dead, concerning the body, yet we shall live again, and shall receive at the
hands of God a more glorious body than ever this body was. It is an hard
matter to get this assurance, for the natural reason of man cannot, nor will
not persuade him, that he once being dead, the body being dissolved in
ashes, that ever that body shall be recovered again. Therefore, the Apostle
brings in three arguments of this assurance: The first is the earnest desire
that the Godly have in this life to be glorified: It is a thing impossible that
this desire can be in vain: He that gives thee a desire of glory and
sighing for it. He must give* thee the life and glory that is desired and
sighed for: For otherwise He would never give thee grace to sigh once for this
life and glory except He were purposed to put thee in possession of that
glory one day. The second argument is taken from our regen^ration, or the end
of our regeneration. GOD is He that makes us of new again, after we were
dismaide by the fall of Adam, He creates us of new again, to this end,
that we should live the first creation. It ended indeed, and we have lost
the right thereof, even in the first creation. We were created to live
everlastingly, yet we died. But the second creation in JESUS will never
break: but as in him we are renewed to life, live shall we in the Heavens
everlastingly, it can never fail. Peter says in his first epist. chap. 1.
verse. 3. We are regenerate again into that lively hope.

The third argument is the Spirit of CHRIST, whereby GOD works in us both the
desire and regeneration: having once given us that Spirit, He takes Him not
from us again, but lets Him dwell in soul and body, to be an
earnestpennie in us, assuring us He shall never leave us, till the whole
promises in CHRIST be fulfilled to us. And therefore He is called the Spirit of
truth. (Johan. 15. 26. Notwithstanding, of all this confidence and assurance,
vnder-propped with these three pillars, Desire, Regeneration, and the Spirit,
the Apostle has not full contentation of heart, and the reason is, because he
sees not the LORD. He is yet wandering as a pilgrim in this world, and has
not gotten that joyful countenance of CHRIST, in the which countenance is
only sacietie of pleasures: For assure you, the faithful heart shall never
have contentation till it see CHRIST. Therefore, to attain to this thing, and
to get the full satisfaction of the heart, he makes choice of death and
removing out of the body: he prefers it to all grace that can be had in
this life. He prefers it to that confidence and assurance* and to all other
graces that he can have in this body, that he might go up to that presence of
CHRIST. Thus far we have spoken hitherto.

Now to come to the text that we have presently read. The Apostle considering
that sight that once we shall see, and that presence that once we shall have
of ye LORD JESUS, which he has not gotten nor will not get, till the time it
please the LORD to call on him: (and none of us will get it, albeit we would
never so feign, till that the LORD call on us) he shows, therefore, what he
will do till that time come that he get that presence, an^ how he will be
occupied living here in this pilgrimage, what will be his study and care in
lif^ and death: Therefore (says he) also we covet, that ba^ dwelling at home,
and remoouing from home, we may b^ acceptable to Him. There is his care in the
mean^ time. All my care, would he say, so long as I live i^ this earth, shall
be, to be acceptable to my Lord, to whom I go, that I may be the welcomer
when I come.

Yet, Brethren, because the words are weighty, every word would be weighed: We
covet, says he, there is the first word, and in the first language this word
imports not only a common desire, but an ambition: So by this word he
utters that he is griedy of honor, and ambitious: for there i^ an holy
ambition that is lawful, that is requisite, that is needful in every
Christian man, even in the purest man that is. But to come to the honor which
he coueteth: We covet (says he) that we may be acceptable: There is the
honor, to be acceptable, to be counted and liked of. The worldly man that
hunteth after the honor of the world, he desires to be esteemed of, to be
had in admiration, and to be in grace. So is it with the man of God the honor
which he desires is esteematio^, he would be accounted of, he would be in
grace and good liking, and if it were possible, he would be esteemed above all
the men in the world: but whom would he have to esteem of him? The worldly
ambitious man would be accounted of by men, he has no regard of GODS
estimation of him, he would have the Prince accounting of him above all
Courtiers: he would have the people accounting much of him. But the man of
GOD, that has this holy ambition and griedinesse of honor, he cares not
for the account and estimation of men, neither seeks his praise of men, but
of GOD, and CHRIST, with whom he must dwell after this life: he desires in
this pilgrimage, to be assured, that CHRIST has a liking of him, that after
this life he may reign with CHRIST as a king for ever: That is his honor.

To go forward in the words: When seeks he to be acceptable to CHRIST? at
what time? There is two times: One time of living, and another time of dying: A
time when the soul dwells in the body, and another time when she flitteth.
The ambitious holy man seeks to be acceptable to the LORD at both these
times, both dwelling at home, and flitting from home. All the honor of the
worldly man is in this life, and whilst the soul is dwelling in this body:
But once laid down in his bed, and let death assail him, there he lays
down his honor: and if ye tell him of the honor which he was seeking, he
will spitte at it. But the godly man, if ever he was griedy of honor in this
life, in the hour of his death he is griedier thereof, and the nearer death,
the griedier of the honor of CHRIST: he can have no contentation in heart,
till he know his soul is acceptable to that LORD whom to he is going. As for
the means whereby he seeks to come to this honor, ye will hear of them in
the next verse hereafter.

This same Apostle (2. Timoth. 2. 15.) sets them down also: when he has
desired Timothi^ to study to approve himself to GOD, immediately he
subjoyneth, If thou would be approved, be a worke-man: thou will not get
this acceptance by driving over thy life in idleness, or sluggishnesse: let
every man, in whatsoever estate, be a worke-man. The worldly man is clyming to
his honor by unlawful means, by flattery, by falsehood, etc. but it ends
in misery. But the godly man, let him seek to be approved by the King of
kings, being a faithful worke-man in his calling, and diligent therein. There
is the mean of thine acceptance in this life. In thy dying, and when all thy
senses, thy tongue, thine hand, and all fails th^e and art not able to work,
yet suffer with patience, and set thine heart patiently to suffer death, that
in thy dying GOD may be glorified, and so thou may consecrate both death and
life to Him.

Mark here a lesson. Paul of before he makes a choice to go and dwell with
Christ: he would feign have been dead: but here is another desire, which must
go before that, and thou must have the like desire, before thou desire to flit
out of this body and to be with CHRIST. First desire, whilst thou art in this
body, to be acceptable to Him, and then desire to flit, otherwise not: for
certainly, if thou die, before thou be acceptable to GOD in thy life, thou
shall not be welcome to Him, and he shall be the most terrible sight to thee
that ever thou saw: I shall never desire to see Him when I die, if I desire not
to be acceptable to Him first in life and death. Therefore, study by a
faithful discharge of thy duty here on earth, to be acceptable to thy
LORD, beguile not thy self.

Learn again here. When he has made a choice to go and dwell with the
LORD, he desires that he may live a godly life here first: then the lesson
is, A godly life here is a too-looke to that life which we shall have in
CHRIST, which makes a faithful Pilgrim desire to be with CHRIST. It is an
easy thing to have an eye to the life to come, if thou study to live well in
this life. And on the other part, it is the hope of that life and glory to
come, and an eye to Heaven that makes a Pilgrim to live well in this life:
where this eye to Heaven is not, there is no good life. Wherefore should we
speak further? Alas! these evil lives of men, these murders, adulteries,
thefts, tell us plainly, there is no sight of Heaven, nor regard of the life
to come. Thou that passest thy time, taking thy pleasure in the displeasing of
GOD, testifiest, that thine eye was never on Heaven, that the eye of thy soul
was never lifted up above thy body, and assure thy self, if thou live on so,
thou shall never see Heaven.

Now in the next verse, he subjoyneth another argument, moving him to be
ambitious to be with that LORD of life. The first argument was, because he
was to dwell with that LORD in Heaven. The second is, that terrible Judgment
that all flesh shall see, except they endeavor themselves to serve GOD in this
life: For (says he) we must all appear before the Iudgement-seate of
CHRIST. Learn a lesson of the pith of this argument. As there is a force in
the hope of the life to come, so there is a force in the fear of a terrible
Judgment, to move a man to live well here. Look how needful the one is to
cause thee to live well in this life* as needful also is the other. Hope of
life is needful, fear of judgeme^t is needful: what should be the cause of
this? know thou not thy nature, how backward and froward it is? so that
except thou be pricked forward with terrors of judgment, thou will never
address thy self to Heaven, but wilt linguer and sit down by the way.

Brethren, There are two things in Heaven, and two things in earth, both
serving to move us to live well here in this life: In Heaven there is two
seats, one of Grace, which is called, the Throne of grace: The other a seat
of Judgment, a Tribunal: Fie on all tribunals in the earth, in respect of
that Heavenly Tribunal! The Throne of grace is spoken of to the Hebrews,
Chapt. 4. verse. 16. Let us go boldly to the Throne of grace that we may get
mercy. But this will not suffice, except the Tribunal of judgment be also
before thee, to draw thee forward: both must be before thee: and as thou
look to the Throne of grace with the one eye, so look to the Throne of
judgment with the other eye. There are also in like manner two things in
earth, to draw thee forward: The one, the Gospel of grace, The other, the Law
threatening judgment. The Gospel drawing thee lovingly to GOD, the Law
threatening thee to go forward, or else thou shall die. The Gospel gently
alluring thee forward, promising that thou shall get life: The Law standing
about the Gospel as a fire, to terrify thee, and if thou go out of the right
way, it will burn thee. It will not be the Gospel alone that will serve the
turn. Indeed, if there were no canker in thee, the Gospel would serve the
turn: but in respect of this wicked canker in thy nature, thou must be
threatened with the Law. See thou not thy nature? fairnes will not serve the
turn, thou must be pulled forward by the hair, or else thou will fall into
damnation. Take me away the rebukes of the Law, if thou be a king or a
Monarch, it is but a dead Gospel to thee, such is the corrupt nature of man:
Take away the canker of the nature of man, I shall speak nothing of the Law:
but as long as this canker remains* the Law must threaten all, from the king
to the beggar. I were a false Doctor, if I used not the threatening of the Law
to rebuke this canker of nature. Who is more holy than Paul was? He* looking
up to Heaven, seeing the Mercie-seate, likewise sees the Iudgement-seate, and
if he had not seen the Iudgement-seate, and been terrified therewith, he
should never have gotten a sight of that Mercie-seate: so must it be with us,
we must see that Iudgement-seate, as well as that Mercie-seate. This is
wonderful: He was even now speaking of CHRIST as a sweet LORD, and feign
would be at Him, and now again he sets Him up as a Judge to terrify
men. Is this the LORD, at whom he would be? Who desires to appear before a
terrible Judge? Who has life and death in his hands? Take heed: this is
Paul's meaning: The LORD JESUS He is both terrible to men, and joyous to men,
and He must be both joyous and merciful indeed, to thee who endeavors thy
self to please Him in this life: Terrible to them who endeavors them not to
please Him in this life. Would thou have Him merciful to thee, study then
to live well serve Him sincerely in thy calling. Will thou have Him terrible to
thee, thou shall indeed find Him terrible to thee, and thou shall shake and
tremble at His countenance, in case thou seek not to please Him in this life.
And this shall be the first sight that ever the wicked, who desired not to
please Him in this life, shall get of Him. Heaven and Hell are thought jests
and mocks now adays: and this Tribunal is not looked too, but certainly thou
must appear, either before the Throne of Mercy, or the Tribunal of Judgment.

Yet to go forward in the words: I shall only touch them, without discoursing
on that general judgment. Then first here to let you see the terriblenesse
of that judgment, there is an Appearance whereof Esaias, in his 45. Chapter,
and the 23. verse thereof, and Paul, Roman. 14. 11. speaks: As I live
(says the LORD) all knees shall how to Me, and all things shall confess
Me to be GOD. There is the reverence that shall be at that appearance, all
kings in the earth shall bow their knees: and the tongue that would not speak
in this earth to GODS glory shall then be compelled to speak to His glory.
Then there is first an appearance: Secondly an necessity, Thou must appear:
Thirdly, an universality, all shall appear, without exception, all shall be
called and all must answer, Hic sum, I AM HERE: None shall be away, man nor
woman, rich nor poor, from Adam the first man, to the last man borne on the
earth. Then fourthly. The seat before the which this appearance must be, is a
Tribunal: the Judge is CHRIST, JEHOVAH, GOD not man only: all knees shall bow
to Him as GOD, and not only to CHRIST as GOD, but to CHRIST in our nature, as
man, he shall sit as a glorious Judge, as it is said, John, 5. 22. The Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. And as there
shall be one appearance of all, so there must be one receiving: none shall
appear but something they shall receive. What shall be received? A reward of
thy actions and doings in thy body, which reward shall appertain to the
body as well as to the soul, because thou did them in the body. As to the
quality of the reward, it is proportional to that which thou have done in
the body, be it good or evil: if it be good, thou shall be rewarded with
glory: if evil, thou shall be rewarded with ignominy and shame.

To insist something upon the last words, because the Papists stick to them,
and think they have an advantage of this place: when they hear that every
one shall receive according to the things which they have done in the flesh,
incontinent they conclude, ERGO, works merits. I answer, Evil works
indeed merit damnation, and damnation shall be thy portion for them, if thou
be out of JESUS: but good works have no merit: in all thy good works there
is no deserving, although they were ten thousand more than they are. There is
force enough in an evil work to condemn thee, but in a thousand good works
no force to save. The Apostle says not here, They shall receive a reward
for that which they have done, but according as they have done: he says not
Propter, making works a cause, but Secundum, that is, according to the
testification of the works. But to leave the larger insisting in this, as more
pertinent to another place, and to come to our purpose.

Weigh the words, for every word is a word of weight, importing a terrible
Judgment, an Appearing, a necessity of appearing, an universal appearing
without exception, no respect of persons, of the king, more than of the beggar,
no mitigation of the severity of the Judge, etc. CHRIST will have no
mitigation, but if thou be a reprobate, thou will be handled severely,
albeit thou be a king. The judgment then, being so terrible, the Judge,
CHRIST, must also be terrible: And so the Apostle says, Knowing, therefore,
that terror of the LORD, etc.

And all this is to learn every soul, not so to presume of the mercy of
CHRIST, that thou shall think to find Him merciful in that day, except that
thou have studied to be acceptable unto Him in this life, and can say, LORD,
I EMPLOY MY SELF IN SERVING THEE. Away with that presumption of mercy, which
makes the lowne, when he is mu^thering and committing adultery, to say, GOD
is merciful. Having set down the terrible Judgment, he concludes what he
will do in his own person. Is the judgment and Judge so terrible? I will be
wise: the LORD give us this wisdom. Knowing (says Paul) that terror of the
LORD I will do my duty in this life. My duty is to preach, to bring men to
the faith in CHRIST: I will walk in the discharge of that duty night and
day. He says, Knowing perfectly that terror of the LORD: It is not a blind
terror that will make a man to do his duty in this life, but it is the
knowledge of a Tribunal: to believe that there is a Judge and a Tribunal in
Heaven, and that there is a most terrible day abiding. And if a man believed
that there is a Tribunal in Heaven, a terrible Judge sitting there to take
account of his doings in earth, for all the world he would not offend that
GOD: but this cannot sink in the heart of man: He will say, there is a
general judgment, but this is from the mouth only, and not from the heart:
and surely, as long as a man continues in sin, albeit he should swear that
there is a Tribunal. it is a token he knows it not. The words of judgment
avail nothing: it is the believing, and sure knowledge that there is a
judgment, and a terrible Judge to sinners in Heaven, that does the turn.
Therefore, seek persuasion, and look to that Article of thy Creed, that the
Judge shall come, and take account both of the quick and the dead: Believe it,
and then it shall draw thee to live a godly life. Knowing, therefore, that
terror of the LORD, we persuade men, or cause them believe. He says not, I
go to play the part of a king, or of a politic man, I am busy in this or
that turn that appertains not to my calling: No, but according to my
calling, I preach the Gospel, to persuade men to believe in CHRIST, that they
may be saved. To speak the truth, it is not thy laboring and doing in any
other man's calling, that will profit thee, but thou art ordained by GOD to do
thy duty in thine own calling: and when the account of thy deeds shall be
taken in that Great day, he shall not say, what have thou done in another man's
calling? but, what have thou done in thine own? I made thee a Minister, how
have thou traueled in that vocation? Therefore I say, as every man would be
ready to give an account of his doings, let every man be diligent in his
own vocation, seeking the glory of GOD therein.

Now it might have been said to Paul, Thou boastest much of thy doing and
preaching: but look with what sincerity thou have been occupied, and with
what uprightness of heart thou have been preaching in thy life time? He
answers, and first he takes GOD to be witness of the sincerity of his
heart in discharging his Ministry: and then he takes the Corinthians, among
whom he had traueled, to be witness also of his sincerity. As for GOD, he
says, We are made manifest unto GOD: And as for men, I trust also I am made
manifest in your consciences. He takes first GOD to be witness, who knows
the heart, and then the Corinthians, who saw his actions.

Then, Brethren, it is not enough for a Minister, that preaches CHRIST as
Paul does, for to persuade men to believe in CHRIST, to speak outwardly to
men, as I am now speaking to you, but he must look in the mean time, that
inwardly his heart be set upon GOD, that is, look that he approve his heart
in sincerity to GOD, who sees the heart. Men mark the words that come out
of the mouth, but GOD marketh the sincerity of the heart, to see with what
sincerity the man speaks. This that I speak of Paul in his calling, I mean
of all other men in their callings. Do thou any thing outwardly to men,
look that thou do it inwardly in thine heart, with sincerity to GOD,
otherwise thou losest all thy travel, albeit it were never so good in the
presence of men. Of this it follows, al these are but vain voices, to stand
up and say, I have done this thing or that thing. To speak to men, who know
not the heart, except in the mean time, as thou art speaking unto men, thou
may draw the LORD to be witness (as Paul does) to the sincerity of
thine heart, and may say, I have been traueiling, with what sincerity the
LORD knows: that which I have done, I have done it in sincerity: not being
content to call GOD only to be witness, he turns him to the Corinthians,
and he appealeth their consciences to bear record of his sincerity in his
doing, and he says, As for you, Corinthians (speaking sparingly) I trust.
etc. He was assured of GODS testimony, but he trusted, that the Corinthians
also would bear him record, that he had traneiled truly: He says, in
your consciences. It is to be marked, that he appealeth to their consciences,
not their mouths, but their consciences: for the mouth of man will give one
testimony, but the conscience will give another: And when the conscience will
be saying, the man has spoken truly and in sincerity, the mouth in the
mean time will be backebiting him, and the conscience will say, thou lie
mouth. Speak, therefore, ever according to conscience for if thy conscience
speak one thing, and thy mouth another, thou shall be challenged of a lie. It
is true indeed, men know not the heart of man, as when a Minister is
speaking, ye cannot judge of his heart, the LORD judges it, yet a faithful
and sincere man, he will utter sometime the inward sincerity of his heart in
his words and deeds, that all that sees and hears him, will look in
therethorowe, and see the inward sincerity of the heart, and give an outward
confession of it.

Now, Brethren, then in this example of Paul, ye have such a protestation, as
the faithful Pastor should make in the hour of his death, and which should
be his testament. There is two things in his Ministry, the outward speaking,
and the inward sincerity of the heart. If he would protest of his
faithfulness, look that he protest as PAVLE did: First outwardly, I have
used all diligence in discharging all the outward parts of my calling, I have
kept nothing abacke: and then inwardly, As for my sincerity, First I take GOD
to be witness, who knows and only sees mine heart, with what sincerity I
have spoken, and then I take you to witness, that have been conversant with
me, so far as ye can know the inward sincerity of mine heart, by my
living and outward actions. Would to GOD we could have this sincerity. And
I pray the LORD grant me this sincerity: and I beseech Him, that as He
has been with me since the beginning of my Ministry, so He would never
leave me, until the time I finish my course with joye. to His glory, and
comfort of His CHVRCH, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD,

To whom, with the FATHER, and the Holy GHOST, be all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, both now and evermore, So be it.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. V. For we praise not our selves again unto you, but give you
an occasion to rejoice of us, that ye may have to answer against them, who
rejoice in the face, and not in the heart.

For whether we be out of our wit, we are it to GOD, or whether we be in
our right mind, we are it unto you.

For that love of CHRIST constrains us.

Because we thus judge, that if one be dead for all, then were all dead, and
He died for all, that they that live, should not hence forth live unto
themselves, but unto Him who died for them, and rose again.


TO repeat shortly that which we have heard in this Chapter, We heard first
of that assurance of glory and life everlasting, which is the only remedy
against death and the dissolution of this body. We heard secondly of the
three warrandes of this assurance of life and glory: The first, the earnest
desire which the heart had of that glory and life* The second, Regeneration
and renewing: The third, the Holy Spirit, who is the worker of all grace in
our hearts, and who never leaves us, but abides in us, as an assured
earnest-pennie of the full accomplishment of all that glory promised to us in
the word of GOD. And yet for all this we heard that the Apostle had not that
contentation nor full satisfaction of his heart* because he is yet a pilgrim,
living here by confidence, and has not gotten the full presence of his LORD,
he chooses to leave all the things in this life, and therefore, he takes
resolution what he will do in life and death, to the end, that when he
comes to his LORD in the Heavens, he may be welcome. The thing he
resolves to do is this, he endeavors himself in his calling to be
acceptable to Him in life and death: and he will consecrate all the actions
and sufferinges of both to Him. Beside that glory to come, which moves him to
study to be acceptable to his LORD, he sets down another motive, a
terrible Tribunal which abides him and all men and women, who study not to
be acceptable to the LORD. The soul shall not so soon depart out of the
body, but it shall also as soon be presented before that Tribunal, and
shall receive that dolorous sentence, if they have not studied to be
acceptable to Him. Therefore, the Apostle concludes, Knowing, therefore, that
terror of the LORDm we travel in our calling to preach Christ, and to bring
men to faith, and that not for the fashion, but in sincerity of heart: so that
we take God (who sees the heart) to be witness to us of our sincerity. And
as to you, Corinthians, upon whom we have bestowed our labor, we appeal to
your consciences, and we take you to be witness of that same sincerity of
our calling. This is the sum of all which ye have heard hitherto in this
Chapter.

Now to come to this Text which we have read: In the first verse, the Apostle
having spoken of his sincerity in preaching, the Corinthians, who had not that
liking of him which they should have had, might have objected, Well Paul, yet
vauntest thou of thy self? thou have once vaunted of thy self (as appears
in the second and third Chapters preceding) and yet art thou commending thy
self? He answers, no, I commend not my self again, I vaunted not of my
self before, nor now neither: but when I said, We are made manifest to GOD,
and I trust also that we are made manifest in your consciences: in these words
I give you occasion to glory of me, and not so much for my cause as for the
cause of false flattering Apostles, who glory in their outward doings, without
sincerity of the heart: the repressing of these men's vain glorying, is the
cause of this my speaking. This is the meaning of this verse.

Then, this Text being plain, learn these lessons: I mark first in the
person of the Corinthians, who objecteth this vaunting to the Apostle,
mistaking his words. Scarce may a godly man speak a word or two of the grace
which the Lord has given him, and that not to his own praise, but to the
praise of his God, when he is mistaken by evil men, who set themselves to
wryth every word that is spoken: And if ever there was an age in ye which this
vice reigned, I am assured (and experience proves it) none age may be
compared, in that case, to this age: Yea, a godly man can do nothing, but
incontinent he is mistaken: he can speak nothing but he is misconstrued, and
especially the Ministers in their callings, among all men their words are most
misco^strued* the day rises not, but there is an evident experience of this
point, and every one sees it. Therefore, what remedy? but patience: all this
judging is but for a time, tarry a little while, and keep a good conscience in
the mean time, and we shall see another judgeme^t, when He shall come who
judges rightly.

Then secondly, learn in the person of Paul: he will not have it so much as
once seeming, that he pra^seth himself: every good man, and especially a
Minister should flee all occasion of vain glory: Yea, Christian modesty, and
soberness require, that every man though they were endued with the greatest
graces in the world, yet they should speak and think of themselves soberly:
the more they have, the greater graces that God has given the^, the less they
should account of themselves: yea, suppose they be something in the sight of
God* yet looking to the naughtiness that abides in this cankred nature* they
should say of themselves (I am nothing) for The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 8. 2 and
Gal. 6. 3. He that thinks himself something, he is nothing and Phil. 2. 3.
Let every man account another man better than himself. If a man will meditate
on his own estate, either by night or by day, let him think of his
infirmities, his sins and naughtines: will he rejoice of himself in his own
mind? look to Paul what he says. 2. Corin. 12. 9. I will rejoice in mine
infirmities, that the power of Jesus may dwell in me. The power of God never
dwelt in a proud nor ambitious heart, but in an humble heart: God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble* 1. Pet. 5. 5. So Paul, when he was
musing of himself, albeit he had seen great visions, 2. Cor. 12. he
complains of his infirmity to the Lord: the Lord answers, My grace is
sufficient for thee, my power is made perfect through weakness. Then thou that
would be strong in God* be weak in thy self: think night and day of thine
infirmity and misery by sin. I mark again in the words of the Apostle: A godly
man may rejoice and glory in the grace of God: Why should not the grace of God
be gloried in? The Apostle, 2. Cor. chap. 18. verse. 5. when he has spoken of
that Heavenly revelation, Of such a man I will rejoice, says he, of my self
will I not rejoice, except it be of mine infirmity. Then may not a godly man
speak of him self? Yes, he may speak of himself, as the instrument of God,
as the dispenser of the grace of God, as Paul did here. To what end? That
they, unto whom the Lord has made him a good instrument, upon whom he has
bestowed his travels, may glorify God, and render unto him the honor of a
Minister. Paul says, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Let a man count of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. And so a Minister
should have honor, and they upon whom he has bestowed his travels, and the
grace which God has given him, should honor him, and they are as greatly
indebted to give it him, as any debt that ever they ought to pay. Therefore,
the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12. 11. I have been foolish in glorying, but ye
have compelled me, because I should have been commended by you. It is a point
of sacrilege to take any honor from them that God has given them. Now
wherefore is this, that The Apostle would have them glorying of him? Not so much
for his own cause as for the cause of false Teachers, who rejoiced in the
face, and not in the heart, that is, not in inward sincerity, but in outward
things, having a fair show of eloquence and fair words. Then learn, ambition
must not be borne with: it is pernicious both to the man in whom it is, and to
other men who have ado with him. This vain glorying is a kind of blasphemy,
for that which thou take to thy self in thy vain glorying, thou reauest God
of it* in what calling soever thou be. Therefore, th^^ vain vaunting of our
selves is a vice, which among all vices should be most repressed. Alace that
stinking flesh should stand up and reaue God of his glory! Now, would thou
have a mean to repress this v^unting in the mouth of an ambitious man? When
he is vaunting of these outward graces and benefits, as an empty vessel,
sounding without sincerity in his heart, cast thou up in his teeth the
sincerity of the heart: say, vain man* all thy speech is in thy face, and not
in thine heart. Set up the heart against the face, and it shall shame it. It
avails not to speak of any thing that thou can do, except thou have
inward sincerity in the heart: For these outward things shall euanish, and
dare not appear before God in that great day: but sincerity remains for
ever.

To come to the next verse: Yet they will not let him be: yet they will object
unto him his foolishness. Who will vaunt of himself but a fool? Paul, thou
art a fool, thou braggest of thy self. The Apostle answers with modesty,
Whether we be out of our wit, we are it to GOD, or whether we be in our
right mind, we are it unto you. There is the Apostles answer.

Then, Brethren that which God counts wisdom, the world counts it
foolishness, and that which the world counts wisdom, God counts it
foolishness. Was there any foolish talking here, when the Apostle says, We
are manifest to God, and I doubt not but we are manifest also to your
consciences? Was there any bragging here? So the wisdom of God is foolishnes
to the world, and shall be, as long as corrupt nature is within us: And the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3. 19. The wisdom of the world is foolishnes with God.
But the question cannot now be decided what the true wisdom is, and what false
wisdom i^: the end will prove. True wisdom is justified of her own children,
Matt. 11. 19. Well, the end will show, and espec^ally that day when all things
shall be revealed. Foolishness shall stand up, and all the world shall see it
to be foolishnes: Wisdom shall stand up, and all the world shall see it to
be Wisdom, and then it shall have the own approbation. So that these me^,
that will be counted wise in this world, will be compelled to utter these
words of them, whom they esteemed fools in this world, Are these the men,
whose lives we counted foolishnes? And I beseech God to open our eyes to see
this true wisdom and especially in things concerning religion, which wisdom
only will abide approbation. Secondly learn, Paul here yields to them, and
says, Let me be mad, I am mad to God: my God is before mine e^es, and I care
not to be mad to this world: And as for you, if I be in my right mind, it is
to you: Ye Corinthia^s* have nothing to lay to my charge, for I have done my
duty faithfully to you. Brethren, see ye not here the care which we should
have of the glory of God and of the Church of God and her salvation? It should
cause a man of this calling that Paul was of, to be ravished in spirit, and to
be content to be counted a fool in this world, that God may be glorified, and
men helped forward to Heaven. If God be glorified in my madness, what regard I
to be mad? what respect is to be made of a man in this world? and what if men
go to ruin and decay, so that God be glorified? But alas! there is such a
selfeloue ingraffed in the heart of every man, that we will not suffer God to
be honored, except it may stand with our honor. and we will say, I will not
be esteemed a fool, I will not be disgraced: if it may stand with mine honor
and profit I will glorify Him: but if His honor and mine stand not together,
I will chiefly have respect to mine own honor. So it will never be well* till
we get this cankred self-love submitting it self to the glory of God. And
it should be the greatest endeavor that ever we should have in this world, to
cast out this self-love, that we may be content, that God may be glorified,
although it were to our dishonor* yea* though it were with our destruction. It
is not self-love that brings honor and glory, only honor is of God* and
thou shall never get honor except thou cast away self-love, that God may be
glorified.

Then to go forward: Paul must have something for him, why he will be mad for
Gods cause: he will not be mad without some reason: therefore, in the next
verse he says, For the love of God constrains us: as if he would say, I am
constrained to this foolishness, and a charge is laid on me to do so. I am
bound and obliged so to do: that is, to be a mad man for the glory of my GOD.
And from whence comes this necessity? It is the love of God, says he,
that constrains me: this band that binds me is the love of Christ not the
love which I bear to Him (that is too weak) but the love which H^e bears to
me, it bindoth all my senses, and urges me to honor my God with my whole
body. These are the words. Then the very necessity which lies on thee to
be a mad man for GODS cause, it is not a thing whereof thou can free thy
self: there is a necessity aid on thee to be counted mad for Christ's cause.
Then, if there be a necessity laid on us to do this (albeit it be to our
own dishonor) what if we do it not, but will shake off this yoke? Then I
tell thee, in place of it, another necessity must come in, a necessity of
woe. Paul says, 1. Cor. 9. 16. Woe to me if I preach not the Gospel. God
has laid this necessity on me to preach, and if I cast it off, another
necessity of woe shall be laid on me Alas! this world thinks all this
worshipping of God to be voluntary, that men may serve GOD as they please, and
that men may preach as they please, this way, or that way, and speak here,
and hold their tongue there, as they will. But I say to thee, Will thou free
me of that necessity that lies on me? Art thou able to take it off my back?
If thou be not able, then for GODS sake let me preach the Gospel with
freedom and sincerity of heart. I tell thee, There is such a necessity laid
upon the shoulders of the Ministers to utter every thing which the Lord puts
into their mouths, that if thou shake off this necessity another necessity of
woe shall be laid upon them. And this shall be their cry on their dead-bed,
Woe to me, that I preached not the Gospel truly.

Yet to go forward. From whence comes this necessity? He says* It is the
love of GOD that constrains me It is the love of Christ which He showed in
His suffering for me, that binds me. So, it was the love of Christ toward
Paul that moved him patiently to be called mad for Christ's cause. Christ, for
the love which He did bear to us, suffered Himself not only to be called mad,
but to be called a Devil, Matt. 12. 24. He suffered the extremity of pain
and ignominy for our sakes: and all the reuilinges and reproaches that should
have lighted upon us, He took them upon Him. Such was His love toward us.
Then, wilt not thou suffer to be called a mad man for His cause? If thou
would have a part of ye inheritance which Christ conquered, thou must be
bound, a necessity must be laid upon thee, and if thou be loosed, thou art
loosed from the love of JESUS, and then woe and everlasting destruction shall
come upon thee. I see then, all our service of Christ* is of necessity. Then
what pleasure can be in the service of CHRIST, if it be constrained service?
The thing I am compelled to do, I will have little pleasure in the doing of
it: In deed it is true, thou art not loose, but bound: From the time that thou
enterest into the Church of Christ, thou enterest into bonds: but there is a
great difference betwixt band and band: one band will bind thee and force thee
to do a thing, whether thou will, or wilt not: Another band will only lead
thee the right way, which thou art to go.

Brethren, this band that Paul speaks of in this place, it is a sweet band
the band of the love of Christ, and it binds thee sweetly and lovingly to
discharge thy duty toward God: and all thy duty by this band is voluntary:
and he who is bound with this ba^d, will rejoice more to be called a fool for
Christ's sake, than to be esteemed a king upon the earth. But thou must take
heed where this band is that binds thee, that it may lead thee to do thy
duty willingly: If the love of Christ, which is the band, be outwith thee
only sounding in thine ear (as when it is told thee, Christ loves thee) I
tell thee it will not bind thee. All the preaching in the world will not bind
thee, if it be without thee: Paul says, therefore, Rom* 5. 5. The love of God
is spread abroad in our hearts, through the holy Spirit that is given us. Then,
that that love may bind thine heart it must be powered in thee, and when it
enters into the heart, it loses ye heart with such a sweetness to do Gods
will as is unspeakable: it binds the heart with an exceeding joye. Would to
God we had a taste of this love! All is but words. There ca^ be no such
sweetness as that is, from once the Spirit has powered the love of Christ in
thine heart, then let all our travels be* when we hear of these things, to get
a sense of the love of Christ in our hearts. All the powers in the world will
not move thee to do thy duty so much as the feeling of this love of Christ
toward thee. And nothing will be able to stay thee from Christ, and
honoring Him (and it were with thine own ignominy) if once thou have a sense
of it.

In the next verse he gives two reasons why the love of Christ constrained
him: The first reason is taken from that misery that Christ found him in, when
he suffered for him: The second is taken from the end of the death of Jesus.
As to the first, this was our miserable estate before Christ loved us, we were
all dead: how proves he that? If one be dead for all, then were all dead: if
thou had not been dead, in vain Christ died for thee: if thou had been but
half dead (as the Papists say, who vaunt of their free will) the Son of God
had never died for thee: if Paul had had this free will, and so been half
dead, Christ had never died for him: and if there were none other argument but
this, To import that there is not a free will, nor sponke of godliness in me^ by
nature, it is sufficient to say, Christ has died for all: we were without all
sponk of free will to good, when Christ came.

Mark the force of the argument. It is from that miserable estate and
spiritual death wherein CHRIST found us, when He began to bestow His love
upon us. We were dead spirituallie in sin, dead in trespasses. What is this
corporal death to be respected, if thou be dead in sin, thou art worse
than a carrion.

This spiritual death should move us to think that the love of Christ was
wonderful toward us: it should ever make us aggrege that love wherewith He
has loved us: He died for thee, who was dead in sin and trespasses, and so
an enemy to Him. Who is he, says the Apostle, that will die for his
enemies? Roman. 5. 7. Thou being dead in sin, thou liuedst in sin* and so
liuedst an enemy to the life of CHRIST. And therefore, thine heart can never
sufficiently aggrege the benefits of His death. Men are miserable, but alas!
they feel it not: thou have no want nor scant of misery, but thou want
sense: and the less feeling thou have of thy deadnes, the greater is thy
deadness: for the sense of death is the beginning of life: the more thou
want the sense of death, thou art ever the deader: the liuelier the sinner
is, leaping and playing in his wantonness, the deader is he in soul: For he
has a burden upon his back, that will press him through the earth, and make
him sink to Hell one day: and in the mean time, he is running to his
mischief and villainy, and knows not that he has death everlasting upon
his back. O woe be to that miserable catiue, although he be a king! Alas! men
are dead in sin, and half in Hell, and will not consider it. It is a
pitiful thing to consider how there is no sense of this infernal misery,
that follows upon this death: When it is told them, The LORD has died for
them, they will make none account of it. The word of the Cross of Christ has
been to the multitude of this Land but* a vain sound, and they have never
esteemed of such a mercy. And therefore what wonder is it to see these
vexations! O SCOTLAND! thou shall get another wakening, thou have so long
contemned grace, which is ye most precious thing that ever was. The Lord cannot
be Lord, if He suffer so long contempt and lightlying of Christ and His love
unpunished.

The second argument is taken from the end and purpose that Christ had in
dying: looked He to this end, that thou should play thee, and follow thine
own lust? that thou should abuse that life, which He had bought so dear
with His precious blood? No, his purpose was, that not only in his death and
satisfaction thou should be justified and counted just but also that thou
should be sanctified, that thou sholdest cast off the works of uncleanness,
and dedicate thy life in holiness to him: it is said, Romans 14. 9. that he rose
again, that he might be Lord over thy life: For there was never man, that had
such a right to an earthly thing, as Christ has to thy life* then do what
ever may pleasnte him, if it were to die a thousand times, if it were to be a
fool for His cause, what ever may pleasure Him set thee to do it, or of
necessity thou shall lose that life of thine: But here is the misery: Me^ know
not wherefore Christ died: Will ye ask men and women, when they are bathing
themselves in wickedness, if they will go to Heaven? they will answer, yes,
they will go to Heaven before their feet be cold. But, vain lowne, thou
never knewst Christ's purpose in dying for thee, His purpose was, that thou
should be a new man, and thou should not live to thine own self, but to
Him. And the end shall prove (if thou proceed so* living to thy self, and not
to Him who died for thee) that the death of Christ had never force in thee.
Therefore, look if thou live to Christ: and if thou do so, then assure thy
self Christ died for thee. Look if in the morning thou can say, Lord, thou
died for me, I will give thee my life, and consecrate to Thee this day, all
mine actions, and all that I have. Well is the soul that can say this way.
Then all turns to this, Seeing Christ died for me, I will take this
resolution, I will live to Him al my days. The Lord grant us this resolution,
that we may live to Him in this life, that herafter we may live with Him in
Heaven for ever: To whom, with the FATHER, and the Holy GHOST, be all Honor,
Praise, and Glory, both now and evermore, So be it.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. V. Wherefore hencfoorth know we no man after the flesh: yea,
though we have known CHRIST after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him
no more.

Therefore, if any man be in CHRIST, he is a new creature: old things are
passed away: Behold, all things are become new.

And all things are of GOD, who has reconciled us unto Himself by JESUS
CHRIST, and has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation.


Ye heard the last day, in the last part of this Chapter, the reasons set
down wherefore a man is bound and oblished in conscience to live to God, to
consecrate his life, his death, and all his actions to Jesus Christ: to wit,
First the love of Christ constrains and oblisheth us so to love Him again,
that we be content even to be foolish to this world for His sake. Another
argument was taken from our own estate wherein we were when He showed this love
of His upon us, we were dead in sin and trespasses. So this miserable
condition that we did lie in, which was the beginning of Hell and everlasting
damnation, should move us never to think on pleasing of our selves, but
only to pleasure Him who has delivered us from such damnation. The third
argument was taken from the purpose which the Lord had in dying for us: to wit,
that the life that was bought by His death should be consecrated to Him, and
employed in His service: for, being once redeemed by Him, we are no more our
own men* but His who has bought us. And therefore, as the servant sets his
eye upon his lord, waiting to pleasure him: even so in all our actions with our
whole mind we should be set to pleasure our Lord, who bought us, when we
were bond-slaues to sin and Sath in. Otherwise we shall fall abacke to that
damnation from which we were redeemed.

Now to come to this Text that we have read: in the first verse thereof we have
the resolution of the Apostle Paul, and the purpose which he takes
concerning this matter. Seeing CHRIST his LORD has set Himself to please him,
and to redeem him from death, and to purchase life to him: his resolution is
to give Him again that life which He has purchased to him to employ the
whole life of him in the service of that Lord who has redeemed him. Therefore,
Brethren, before I go forward, learn a lesson of this general. If this was
the purpos(...) CHRIST in dying for us, and in dying so shameful a death, that
we for whom He died should live to Him, and not to our selves, our purpose
should be on the other part to give Him this life that He has bought so
dearly: give Him it, or else thou shall give it to a worse man. Employ it in
His service, or else thou shall employ it in the service of a worse man. And
every one should say for their own parts as Paul did for his part, Has
Christ died for me to this purpose, that I should live to Him, then will I take
purpose, and will resolve in mine heart to give Him the life that He has
purchased to me by His death: this was His purpose in His death concerning
me, I will not disappoint Him of His purpose: that life that He has won to
me, I will consecrate it to His service. It is true, thou can never
disappoint the Lord of His purpose, His purpose stands immooueable: the man
to whom He looked in His death, he must live: and every man, for whom Christ
died, was in His eyes when He died. No godly man was out of His mind in His
suffering, but He said in His heart. I will die for this man, and for this
woman, that they may live to me. So He will not be disappointed: But look
thou disappoint not thy self: If thou say, Christ died for me, and in the
mean time thou will not give thy life to Him, but wilt live to thy lusts, and
not to Him, thou of necessity in the end shall bring thy self to a miserable
point. There is nothing in the world that a man should take more heed to, than
to the life to come, to their manner of living here, and to the actions that
they have in hand, and the things about the which they are occupied in their
conversation: for if thou have a conscience, thy conscience will tell thee by
thine actions what part thou have in CHRIST: if in thine actions thou be
serving Him, thy conscience will tell thee thou have a part in the LORD, whom
thou art serving: and thou in the mean time (if thou be but eating thy
dinner) if thou do it to His glory, thou shall find a sweet apprehension
of the death of CHRIST, and it shall raise a great joye in thine heart. But by
the contrary, if thou be evil occupied, and about to do an evil deed, thy
conscience within thee will give thee a secret warning, and will say, O man!
thy work testifies thou have nothing ado with CHRIST, and thou shall find in
thine heart no comfort of Christ's death, nor of His resurrection. So it is good
to be well occupied, every man in his own calling, and in all his doings ever
to have CHRIST before his eyes, who has given him this life. Would thou
then try whether the deeds that thou do, be service done to ye Lord or
not, I shall tell thee how thou shall know (I will not speak of outward
tokens) but look day and night within thy self to thine own heart* what thou
feel there: feel thou a conscience by night and by day, testifying to
thee that thou art upon a good course, and serving CHRIST, who died for thee,
it is well with thee: if thy conscience be rightly informed, and thou find in
the mean time a sweet apprehension of CHRIST'S death, passion, and rising, it
is well: But if thou feel not this testimony of a good conscience, but
rather a displeasure and grudging in thy soul, all is wrong. Well art thou, if
thou find in all thy doings a sweet apprehension of CHRIST'S death and
resurrection: if thou find it not, woe is thee, leave that deed, away with
it: Away with all business that will not furnish a joye of conscience in
CHRIST, and will not make thee to say, CHRIST is mine, I am doing Him service.

Now, to come to the purpose: The special point of service that should be
given to CHRIST is set down in these words: From henceforth know we no man
after the flesh: These are the words, weigh them. The special point of service
set down here, is the right estimation of men, among whom we live in y^ world.
It is no small matter to esteem of men and women as we should do. The rule
whereby the Apostle will esteem of them, is not in the flesh, nor by fleshly
doing, that is, by none^ outward thing: All these outward things as kindred,
nobility, beauty, wisdom, worldly eloquence, riches, honor, etc. with all
the rest of these things which men hold in admiration, are nothing. This is not
the rule of the Apostle, nor we should not by that rule esteem of them. How
then? What is contrary to the flesh? the spirit. What is contrary to nature?
grace. What is contrary to the old man? regeneration. Then what ought to be
the rule according to the which we should judge of men? the spirit, grace, and
regeneration. But ye will say, Are not all these worldly things benefits of
God? should not men be esteemed of for them? I answer, The Apostle speaks
not simply of them, but in comparison, in respect of the spiritual graces. The
nobility of the king is but dung in respect of the least drop of the blood
of Christ: the least sponke of grace is worth whole nature: the least portion
of Heavenly glory is worth all the glory in the world: the least sponke of
regeneration is worth all the genealogies that can be in this world. When
Christ comes with His spirit, grace, and regeneration, all these earthly
prerogatives vanish as the mist.

Then mark: There is the special point of service done to Jesus, discern
betwixt dead men and living men in this world: Dead men are they who are
natural men and no more. Have thou no more but nature, with all the
prerogatives that can follow nature, thou art dead, although thou be a king.
Living men are they who are borne again by Christ. Have thou the Spirit of
Christ, thou live: want thou the Spirit of Christ, thou art but dead. So
there is a special point of Christ's service, discern betwixt living men and
dead men thou art in the midst of them, and living men on the one hand, and
dead men on the other hand: Discern betwixt them: Count not of the dead man,
although he had all the prerogatives under Heaven: If he have no more but
nature, call him not blessed. The living man is he that has the Spirit of
Christ in him, albeit he be a beggar: and the men who make an account of their
worldly prerogatives, and follow nature and the old generation, are but
natural men: thou that accountest of dead men, thou art dead thy self, and as
thou art dead, so all thine estimation is of dead men.

To go forward to the words: He amplifieth this by the example of Christ,
and says, How beit I accounted once of Christ after the flesh, before* ^
knew Him, well, yet from henceforth I will know, Him no more after the
flesh: and therefore, why should we know men after the flesh, who are
inferiors to Christ, the head of all flesh.

Now ^o speak of this Lord: When He was in this world, He was clothed with
these earthly prerogatives as other men: yea; I think He had these outward
prerogatives in His own person in greatest measure above all men* For never
man descended of a more excellent raze and genealogy than He did. Then look
to his beauty, albeit it be not set down in the Scripture, yet I think
there was never man so fair in beauty as He: He was most wise, and most
eloquent of all me^, and therefore ye Apostles held Him in admiration for these
prerogatives. But from once by His glorious resurrection (as the Apostle
^aieth, Roman. 1. 4.) He was declared mightily to be the Son of GOD: then
all these thing, euanished, and the only admiration remained of that glory
which He declared by His resurrection. All these earthly prerogatives (says
Paul) then passed out of their eyes, and the graces of CHRIST only remained
to be marueiled at. The lesson is plain. The LORD JESUS is the rule of the
estimation of all flesh. In thine estimation hold thine eye always upon
CHRIST, or else thou shall fall. First cast thine eyes up to Heaven, and then
ca^^ down thine eyes on man, who is but a worm on the ear^^. Look up to a
glorious GOD, JESUS the Mediator, and then to a worm on this earth, though he
be a king, and say, Those things that I will not count of in JESUS, which He
had being in G^^l^e and in the earth, I will not count of them in thee that
art but a worm, I will not do it. But by the contrary, that thing which I
esteem of in Him, that passing glory which is in Him, when I look to thee,
and see a glaunce thereof in thee, indeed for that little resemblance which I
see in thee, like to my LORD, resembling Him in grace, I will esteem of thee:
otherwise, I may well give thee this worldly reverence, b^^ if thou want
this resemblance, I will never count thee happy, albeit thou had all the
earthly prerogatives in the world. And certainly, they who hold men in
^miration for their earthly prerogatives, never ^^^^ CHRIST, nor His glory.
Thou that wilt see a Tribunal, a Monarch here, and marvel thereat, thou
never saw the Tribunal of CHRIST. So the thing that causes people to esteem
of men for their earthly prerogatives, is, because they see not the glory and
graces of CHRIST. Would the people have esteemed so much of Herod, if they had
known the Majesty of the Great GOD, when they called him a god? Acts, 12. 22.
No, not for all the world: and therefore, seek a sight of the glory of GOD,
if ye would rightly esteem of men, and give them only their own place.

Now to go forward: Ye have heard of the purpose that the Apostle takes in
serving of his LORD, by the right esteeming of men in this world, among whom
he lives. In the next verse he comes to the estate of this world and
shows what alteration was made in the world, by the alteration made in the
person of JESUS: for when JESUS altered, all creatures altered with Him: when
He went from the earth to the Heaven, and left behind Him all these earthly
pleasures, there followed a wonderful change and alteration in all the
creatures.

But to come to the words: He first speaks of the estate of man, and
secondly of the estate of the rest of the creatures in the earth. As for man,
h^^ says, Therefore, if any man be in Christ, let him ^^^ a new creature.
Mark this, If any man be in CHRIST, he is a new creature: he is changed,
he is altered, and wonderfully altered: he is changed from an old creature to
a new creature: from an old dead creature, to a new living creature: from
nature to grace, from death to life, from Hell to Heaven. What should become of
an old rotten stok, but be casten into the fire. So if thou had continued an
old rotten creature, thou had been brunt in that fire which is
unquenchable. He sets down the means how this change is made* First thou
must be in Christ: as ever thou saw an impe ingraffed in a tree, so thou must
be planted and ingraffed in Him: Being planted in Him, then comes that fresh
sap out of Him into thee, and transformeth thee, and makes thee a new
creature. Then learn of this first, look the force of the alteration of
JESUS, when He altered from earthly things to Heavenly glory, man
especially altered with Him. Then look secondly the dignity of man, among
all creatures he has the first place of changing* and Christ was first
effectual in man to make him a new creature. And this preferment has man
above all the Heavens and above all the creatures. The manner how this comes to
pass is this: Ere thou be altered, thou must be raised up to Him, and joined
with Him, and ingraffed in Him as an impe in a tree: then He and thou, and thou
and He, being made one* the glory that is in Jesus spreads her self oued
thee, and covers thee. But if thou be not in Him, thou shall never get any
part of His glory. Look that thou be in Him by faith (for faith ingraffeth
thee in Him) and being in Him, thou shall get a part of His glory: and yet
thou art but a creature, and not a creator. The difference is in newness, thou
was made before old, but now made new, green and lively, being once
ingraffed and planted in Christ thou art flourishing. It is true, all these
things are not seen yet, and this flourishing of us in Christ is not found yet
perfectly: and this conjunction of Him with us is not so sensible as it shall
be: but this shall once be found true, we shall find that we were the sons
of God, and new creatures, when we were on this earth: and we shall get the
accomplishment of our felicity in Heaven, when we are reigning in glory with
Him. Now, as to the rest of the creatures, he says, Old things are past by,
behold, all things are become new. He says, Behold: Mark the word: hereby
stirring up their hearts to see the alteration and renewing of these creatures,
seeing it is a thing difficill to be believed by men. There is no creature,
neither Angel nor man, no, the dumb and senseless creatures, as the Heaven,
earth, fire, water, a^^e, but they were all benefited by that change made in
Christ; and by His glorious resurrection and ascension they received some
alteration, from the worse to the better. The Angels who were before in glory,
were bettered, and their glory was augmented by the rising of Christ. The
Apostle ( Ephesians. 1. 10. and 3. 10. and Col. 1. 20.) shows t^^^. But to speak
of the inferior creatures, and their estate, of this Heaven, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Earth, Water, etc. that were created for the use of man, these
creatures from the beginning ever altered with man. When man was created in the
beginning in perfection, these creatures were in their perfection, the Heaven
in his perfection, the Sun in his perfection, etc. When man fell, they fell
also, the Heaven fell from his perfection, etc. the earth was accursed for man
( Romans 8. 20.) As man grew old that is, as he grew in sin, unto the time
that sin came to the height (which fell in that same period of time when
CHRIST came into the world: then the Apostle says sin superabounded, and
all was under sin. And surely I think if the LORD had not come at that
period of time when the world superabounded in sin, and sin was come to the
height, the world had presently perished) So, I say, as men grew old by
sin, the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and all the rest of the creatures
grew old. Alas^man by sin defiles the air, the Heavens, etc. When thou, O
man, for whom all the rest of the creatures were made, runnest forward in
offending thy Creator, thou drawest on all the rest of the creatures after
thee. And again, at the coming of CHRIST the old creatures began to be made
new creatures, and the creatures that were made to the use of man, were
benefited with that benefit of man, and got a renewing, as man their lord was
renewed. Again, after CHRIST'S coming, when man began of new to degenerate
and grow old, then the creatures also began to grow old. So man growing in
sin, draws after him the creatures, and as he decays, the earth and all
creatures decay also: and therefore Paul ( Romans 8. 19. 22.) says, that the
senseless and dumb creatures groan and make a moan for sin, mourning as a
woman traueiling of birth, and feign would be delivered: so the earth would
feign be quite of thee, O sinful man, that art made of the earth, and treadest
on y^ belly of the earth: she groneth under the weight of thee for sin: Fie on
thee, that can not groan for sin: thou shall either groan here in this life,
and get relief, or thou shall groan after this life for ever without relief.
This is the groaning that the poor creature makes for the bearing of thee, and
the earth would ^aine serve God in her own kind, but she is made subject to
thy vanity ( Romans 8. 20) and therefore she groneth: so the senseless creatures
are weary, and cry, Lord, put an end to this vanity, and are crying this day
this same hour: But man; for whom the earth and all is made subject to this
misery and vanity, is going playing him on the earth without groaning. Well,
at last, when the sons of GOD shall be revealed, and shall be glorified (
Coloss. Chap. 3. verse. 4.) then the earth which groned with them when they
groned, shall be glorified with them, and then the Sun and the Moon shall
receive newness, and (as Peter says, 2. epist. 3. (...)*) The sons of God
shall receive this same Heaven in substance, but it shall be new, and the earth
shall be new, and then the earth shall be no longer capable of a sinful man.
Thou sinner shall not get leave to look to this Heaven, only the sons of God
that shall be glorified shall get this privilege, they shall be kings of this
new earth. Ye see then the estate of the creatures euanisheth according to
man's estate, and alters as man does* and in the end the creatures shall
have the participatio^ with man of that glory which they longed for. This for
the opening up of the Text. Learn here: ye see ye creatures get renewing as
well as man, but (mark the difference) in the second room: Man is first
renewed, then the creatures are renewed: Man has his preferment first, next
the creatures are renewed, but not after that manner that man is renewed and
preferred: for man is first graffed in Christ* and he is made one with Him.
Jesus the Head, ye Church, the body, and every faithful man and woman's member
of that body, Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. But the creatures, when they are renewed, they
are not ingraffed in Christ: The Heaven, when it is renewed is not called to
that honor to be ingraffed in Christ, it is no part of the body of Christ: The
earth when it is renewed, is no part of the body of Christ. No, no such
conjunction is betwixt Christ and those creatures, as is betwixt Him and His
Church. Then, seeing these creatures that are renewed with man, are not
honored with that conjunction which is with Christ the Lord, it must follow,
that the glory of the creatures is not equal with y^ glory of man. When the
Heavens shall be made new and very glorious, yet all shall be nothing to that
glory of man. Thou, O man, shall shine in body above the glory of the Sun by a
thousand stages, Matthew. 13. 43. The conjunction of Christ not being so made
with the creatures, as it is with man, the glory of them cannot be compared
with ye glory of man, but all the glory of the creatures shall be as a
participatio^ of the glory of man. Thou man, shall be glorified with the glory
of Jesus Christ himself: the creatures shall be glorified but with thy glory.
All this tells us what glory we should look for, seeing this Lord that
makes this renovation, is so glorious. It is certain that at the coming of
Christ in the world, and His passing up to the Heavens, a renewing of all the
creatures in the world was made, al things were renewed. This is a ground that
we must hold if we believe that Christ came in the world, and has ascended to
glory Alas! this is not perceived, and in my self I cannot see it as I would,
and the most godly complain, that they cannot see this effectualnesse of
Christ's glory. The cause is, the deadness that abides in us sin cannot be
gotten out of this world, till the Lord come again: it dwells in us. and
reigns in the world, and the Devil, the prince of this world, reigns by it
(for where sin reigns, he reigns) yea, it oppresses ye godly heart, that
they can scarcely feel in themselves this renouation: so weighty is sin: who
sees it? There is a glimmering of this new creation, but who has this
glimmering? None, but that new soul: an unregenerate man never saw this
regeneration, neither in himself nor in others, and he cannot suffer to hear
of a regenerate and sanctified man, he will laugh, as though there could not
be such a thing as regeneration: because the scorner himself is unrenewed,
therefore he cannot weigh GODS graces in others: So long as thou art
unregenerate, thou can not but scorn regeneration, yea, and persecute the
regenerate man, and so rash thine head against a wall: For the LORD has made
him inviolable, and the Temple of His Spirit, and therefore He shall destroy
thee, that art the unregenerate man: yea, and destroyed shall every man be
that dasheth himself against the Church of JESUS, that is, the renewed body,
that body, as an yro^ wall, shall bruise them. Experience tells this. Who
ever was he that rashed against the Church, but the Church has beaten him
into powder? Meddle not with ye Saints of God: although it were but one Saint
renewed by the grace of God, he is sufficient to destroy and bruise a whole
kingdom that rasheth on him. The Lord open men's eye, to see this. For all the
world would not I be one to make opposition to one of the Saints of GOD. The
LORD therefore save men, and learn them to account of this renouation, as they
would have a portion thereof, and be glorified at the coming of Christ.

Now to end shortly. The Apostle when he has spoken of the renewing of all
creatures made by JESUS the Mediator (for all flows out of him) in the next
verse he rises, and mounteth up (O how he that is carried with the Spirit
of Christ will rise, when he is speaking of JESUS) he rises up to a light
inaccessible, he sees God the Father sitting in his Throne and Majesty, and
the work of this renewing flowing from him, through Christ the Mediator, and
rising up to the Father of Christ, he says, And all things are of GOD, etc.
Our lesson is, All graces come from Christ the Mediator, our regeneration
flows out of his life, but the fountain of all is the Father of Heaven, the
Father of Jesus: and therefore, when thou find the grace flowing from Jesus,
raise up thy soul, and look through to the glorious Fountain, sitting in his
Majesty and say. All glory be to ye Father, I acknowledge all goodness to come
from thee, O Father, thou have given all graces to me through thy Son Christ.
Now when he has risen up to the Father, he comes down again to two degrees,
which are the ^^wayes whereby the regeneration is wrought: The first is the
reconciliatio^ to the Father through Christ the Mediator by his death. The
second is this Ministry, base and contemptible in the eyes of men, this
dispensation of the mysteries of GOD that he has put into the hands of his
Ministers, to be distributed to the people.

Well, Brethren, a man must come to this regeneration by degrees, as a man
stepping up a ladder* If thou would be renewed in Christ, thou must climb
and go up by degrees: The first is the Ministry of reconciliation: The second
is the reconciliation it self in Christ: The third and last is the fountain
of regeneration, God the Father. Will thou run up, and miss one of these
s^eps? No, it is not possible, for thou shall never get regeneration before God
be friended with thee: thou art His enemy, thou must be frie^ded with Him,
before thou be renewed. Well then, thou will say, I must be friended with
Him, but I need not thy ministry, can I not come to Heaven, but by hearing
thee pre^ch? I say, thou can not, I lay this necessity before thee, and I
charge thee, and I bind thee to this ministry. Imagine thou another means to
attain to this glory, contemn thou this ministry in the silliest person to
whom God has given it, I shall make a straw bar the gates of Heaven in thy
teeth: yea, albeit thou be a Monarch, thou shall never get reconciliation
without this Ministry. The Lord wake^ our consciences, that we may embrace the
ordinance of God: we shall never be wise in God, except first we become
fools, that we may be wise. Then seeing this necessity is of the Ministry,
to make a reconciliation with our God, and this reconciliation must pass, by a
proclamation of peace, to the miserable world. and pass by the mouth of this
contemned Ministry. The Lord waken these our senseless hearts, that we may
reverence and esteem of this Ministry more than we have done. The Lord grant
us this for Christ's sake: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be
all Glory and Honor for evermore,

AMEN.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
I. COR. CHAP. II. And we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, who come to naught.

But we speak the wisdom of GOD in a mystery, even the ^id wisdom which
God ordained before the world, unto our glory.

Which none of the princes of this world knew, for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

But as it is written, The eye has not seen, the care has not heard, neither
has entered in^^ the heart of man, the things that God has prepared for the^
that l^ue him.


IN the Text immediately preceding (well-beloued in the LORD JESUS) the
Apostle has been renouncing the wisdom of man, in uttering of the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST, thinking it not worthy that any man's faith should be builded on
it: For that faith that is builded on it, cannot stand, because ye wisdom of
man is a false foundation, and the thing that is builded on a false foundation
cannot stand.

Now to come to this Text which we have read presently. It might have been
said to the Apostle, Who counts of thy wisdom? thou esteemest not of man's
wisdom nor eloquence, but who counts of thee, or of thy wisdom either?
He answers in the 6. verse, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
etc. That is, Who soever are perfect in ye Church of God, or whosoever are come
to a degree of perfection, or preasse to perfection, aspiring above nature,
above humane things, to see things Heavenly and spiritual, these men account of
my wisdom, in the sight of these I am wise, and in their audience I speak
wisdom, howbeit earthly men think all that I speak but folly. This is the
meaning and the effect of the Apostles answer shortly. As to this word of
perfection, I will not iusist in it. A full perfection is not here meaned, but
a striving to perfection. No man nor woman in this life is perfect, but the
perfectest of us all that lives in this world, one lie are striving to
perfection, through infinite infirmities. Therefore, this word of perfection
is not to be understood of that consummate perfection which we shall have in
that other life, but as it is opponed unto them that have no perfection, no
spiritual nor Heavenly sight or knowledge of things Heavenly and spiritual.
Then, there is the lesson in one word: Ye know the sentence spoken commonly,
Wisdom is justified of her own children ( Mat. 11. 19) Let the world account
of it as they will, wisdom shall ever be wisdom to them that have any wisdom
fools will never count that Heavenly wisdom to be wisdom, nor the wise of
this world will never esteem of it. Much consists in the disposition of the
hearts of the hearers: that which is wisdom to one, is mere folly to
another, and all because the disposition is diverse and contrary. Set together a
man that is Heavenly minded* and a man that is only earthly minded* speak the
wisdom of God to them both, and wisdom to the Heavenly minded man shall be
wisdom, to the earthly minded man it shall be foolishness: The speech of the
Cross, says the Apostle in the 1. chap. of this epi. verse. 18. to them that
perish* is foolishness, but to them that are saved, it is the wisdom and
power of GOD Art thou one that art ordained to be saved? The Gospel of Jesus
Christ shall be wisdom and only wisdom unto thee. And therefore, seeing
there stands so much in the disposition of the hearer, before thou come to
hear, look to thy disposition, leave thine earthly mind behind thee lest thou
receive thine own damnation: and bring an heavenly mind with thee, that ye
wisdom of God may be ye power of salvation to thee: there has been long
hearing and teaching among us in this Town, bu^ the issue of things testify,
that there has been an evil disposition in the hearts of the multitude, the
present trouble of this Town tells what has been the disposition of many:
for what ever be the work of men herein, yet no question the Lord has His
work in it, to spoil thee for thine ingratitude, and evil disposition of
thine heart, of the liberty of His glorious Gospel: and if this Gospel go
away, then shame and confusion shall light, not only upon this Town but also
on the whole Land, and every estate thereof.

Then to go forward. The Apostle falls out in an high description and
commendation of this wisdom which ^ee preached, which is the wisdom of God.
Mark it: he says, Not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this
world, who come to naught. In this description there is nothing that may
commend any science or wisdom of this world, which is not brought in here
to the commendation of this Heavenly wisdom. Sciences and wisdom use to be
commended from the Authors, from them that invented them: they use to be
commended from their secrecy and hidnesse, in that they are hidden up in a
mystery from the eyes of men: they use to be commended from the end and use
for the which they were ordained: they use to be commended from their
sublimitie and subtilitie: when they pass the capacity of men, men hold them
in admiration, and wonder at them: they use to be commended from their subject
which they entreat of, if it be a worthy subject, it is a worthy science.
These things recommend* unto us Sciences invented by the brain of man. All
these things are in an higher degree in the wisdom of God, than ever they
were in any worldly science.

Now mark every word: The Apostle begins his commendation at the Author:
and first he lets you see who is not the Author: then he lets you see in
very deed who is the Author of this wisdom. (All this is spoken of the
Gospel, which we preach to you, and therefore note every circumstance, mark
the excellency of this Gospel, which the Apostle to the Philippians, chap. 3.
verse. 8. calls the eminency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which mounteth
above all knowledge in this world) Then whom says he not to be the Author of
it? This world never found it out; never invented it, it came never from ye
heads of worldly men. Indeed it is true this world is wise in her own kind;
Luke 16. 8. and this world, and all the men thereof, from the beginning of it
unto this hour, has been occupied in counsels, in laying of plottes, in
setting down purposes, and taking consultation, they have been very busy:
But amongst all the things that ever man advised upon* there was never found so
much as one thought in the head of a man, of the remedy against sin and
death: but sitting from the beginning in their counsels, they sat like as
many damned creatures, without any thought how they should be relieved of
that damnation: and this is that Heavenly wisdom spoken of here, that tells
us of the remedy against sin, death, and damnation, wherein we lie. Yea,
Brethren, let be they had not any thought of this matter, they did nothing in all their wise consultatio^s, for the most part, but inuolued themselves more
and more in their guiltiness, and augmented their damnation, wherein all men
were fallen by Adam. Then it was not the world that found it out. O! but there
are some Princes in the world that pass others in wisdom: there are wise and
high spirited men that will put order to others, and with their wit will
compass Heaven and earth, that will search out the deepnesse of nature, and
be occupied in high things: it may be that these men have found out this
wisdom. The Apostle meets this: No, says he, none of the princes of this
world, whether Jews or Gentiles, found out this wisdom. All the great
Monarchs, all the Philosophers, with their wisdom, and philosophy, never
thought once on such a thing: it is true indeed, there is some in this world
that have ever been occupied in hie things above the reach of the common sort
of people, sitting on high places, searching into the deepnes of nature: but
among all their occupations* high conceits and devises, there was never so much
as a thought or suspi^ion or a dream of that only remedy against sin and
death, of that only way and means of salvation, and delivery of a lost
sinner. A wonderful thing! condemned men sitting in such occupations, without
any thought of their damnation. Emperors condemned men! and yet never such a
thing as a thought how they should be relieved of their condemnation! It is
true, the Philosophers among the nations aspired to a wisdom and knowledge of
God to know Him, and some of them labored to set down a science of Him. Plato
traueiled much on this purpose, and therefore he was called Divine: but all
their knowledge was of GOD the Creator, as He created this world, and by His
providence governs it. But will ye speak of GOD the Redeemer in His Son
Jesus Christ, they had never such a thing as a thought of Him: and yet for all
the business that they had about the Creation; and GOD the Creator, what were
they? fools, and euanished in their own cogitations, and as ye may read,
Romans 1. 22. 23. in stead of the true God they set up an idol to be
worshipped. Then seeing they found it not out, and seeing it is so necessary
for all men, eue^ for Princes (for they shall never see life except they get a
part of this wisdom) they are bound to keep that wisdom, in sincerity,
and not to prejudge her liberty one whit: but to maintain her and keep her
from all her enemies, that would pervert her. Thou foundest her not out, keep
her therefore in her liberty. The Lord grant that men may be occupied this way
in their counsels, not in impairing, but in preserving the liberty of this
wisdom, that only must save them: Thy kingdom, thy life, thine honor and
all these earthly riches will away, only this wisdom will abide.

Then this wisdom is not found out by this world* or by the Princes thereof.
Yet before we come to the Author whereof it is come, ye have a reason
wherefore she cannot be of the Princes of the world, who come to naught, they
are abolished, they euanish, she is eternal, and will never have end. A
perishing head, will never invent a science that will last for ever, albeit his
head were never so quick and so curious but as the head perishes and goes to
grave, so shall the wisdom thereof die in her own time: And therefore there
was never any Art nor Science invented by the brain of man, which shall not
die and perish, because they are all come of perishing heads: howbeit the head
die and the wisdom remain for a space, yet that science and wisdom shall
also die in her own time. Aristotle is dead, his wisdom abides yet, but it
shall die. Plato is dead, his wisdom abides yet, but it shall also die. But
the immortal GOD, when He finds out a wisdom, it shall be immortal also.
In the first Epistle of Peter (Chap. 1. verse. 23.) there are two things joined
together. The immortal seed of the word, and a living and immortal God, who
abides for ever. The seed of the word is immortal: and wherefore is it
immortal? Because it comes from a God that abides for ever. If it be once
sown in thine heart it shall never die out of thine heart: No, this word shall
go to Heaven with thee, and there it shall spring out in a wonderful glory,
and shall abide in him who found it out, and in thee in whom it is sown for
ever. Then if the world be not the author of it, who has found it out? We
speak (says the Apostle) not our own wisdom, but the wisdom of God. Paul
invented it not, never a man that preached this Gospel was the author of it,
the Lord who is only wise, found it out.

Then mark, Brethren: If God of His infinite mercy (after thou made that
foul fall in Adam, and fell from grace and innocence) had not found out to
thee the only means of thy deliverance from death and sin, thou had never
risen again: for thou had never so much as once a thought of the way of thy
redemption. Adam, when he had fallen, and hid himself in an hole, had not so
much as one cogitation of his deliverance: That God that created thee without
thee, redeemed thee also without thee: when He made thee of nothing in the
beginning, He called not thee to the counsel, because thou was not: no more
was thou on the counsel of thy redemption, when He took purpose to redeem
thee: No, there was never an Angel on the counsel of thy redemption. And this
is that that is spoken, Romans 11. 34, Who has known the mind of the Lord? or
who has given* Him counsel? No, all is of Him, and all is from Him only: He
is the only finder out, as well of thy redemption, as of thy creation, that
the only glory may be given unto Him. I might speak something here against
the enemies of the truth, but I will not insist. If thou take any part of
that work to thy self, thou bereauest God of a part of His glory. Therefore
seeing thou have neither art nor part in it, let Him have the only glory
for ever and ever.

Now follows the second part of the commendation of the Gospel, In a
mystery. It is in a mystery, it was hid up. Sciences use to be commended
because of their secrecy: for men will say, O! it is a mystical and secret
thing, therefore it is a commendable and precious thing. But if ever any
science or wisdom in the world, merited commendation, through the secrecy
of it, especially this wisdom of GOD, for there was never so secret a
wisdom, so many ages, from Adam till CHRIST came, all closed up in a
mystery, and hidden from the world, and if there was any blinke of it, it was
very obscure.

Brethren, there are sundry wisdoms of God: There is a wisdom of the
creation and gouernament of the world, and there is a wisdom of God of the
redemption of the world once created, and making defection from that blessed
estate of creation. As for the wisdom of creation, as soon as ever the
world was created, this wisdom brake forth, and was revealed, and made
known to men, and it shines yet in the creatures: look to them, thou shall
see the image of that wisdom shining in them: and more than this, man
received this wisdom of creation written in his heart. So this wisdom was
not kept close, but made patent to the eyes of men and Angels to look upon it.

But as for the wisdom of God of the redemption of the world, in the creation
He neither vtred it in word nor writing, He wrote not one letter of it in the
heart of man in the creation. But after the fall of Adam He gave an inkling of
it, but very obscure. Now, wherefore was this that the Lord hid up this
wisdom? Thereby no doubt He would testify to the world, that this wisdom
contained a precious thing, a jewel: there was enclosed in it the whole
treasure of Heaven. The treasure of Heaven is Christ Jesus, who is enclosed in
this mystery and therefore, the Lord would not reveal it, till Jesus Christ
came into the world. Is it revealed now? It has been revealed ever since
CHRIST came into the world, and this day in SCOTLAND that treasure is laid
open, if we had eyes to see it. Abraham, nor David, nor all the godly Kings
and Fathers were never in so blessed an estate as thou art. But if thou repent
not, and receive not this wisdom, the greater is thy damnation: For ever the
greater the benefit be, the greater is the condemnation, if it be not
receaned: And many at that day shall say, Would to GOD we had never heard of
this Gospel Well* keep it as ye will, there is no glory but it, and take it
away, farewell the glory and welfare of the Land: yea, I say more, There is
no glory in this world but it.

Now, the Apostle stands not here, but passes forward in the praise of
this wisdom: He has praised it from the Author, who is God only: from the
secrecy, that it is a mystery hidden up so long: he comes now to the time
when it was found out, which God had determined before the world. Sciences use
to be commended from their antiquity: men say, O* it is an old Science, it
was sound out by the Egyptians, therefore, a commendable Science. But there
was never wisdom that might be compared in antiquity to this wisdom. Will thou ask how old is this wisdom? I ask another question, How old is God
Himself? This Gospel is even as old as GOD Himself: the Gospel is from all
Eternity, as the glorious GOD is without beginning from all Eternity. Then
this Gospel that is preached this day, is no nou^ltie.

This is that wisdom and doctrine that GOD predestined from all Eternity,
howbeit the enemies in contempt call it a new doctrine. Thou art a liar,
although thou be the Pope, I speak it to the glory of God, this Gospel that
is preached in SCOTLAND, was from all Eternity.

The words import more. It is not only from all Eternity, but it is
grounded upon an Eternal counsel. The glorious Trinity set down in a
glorious counsel this doctrine of salvation. And therefore, seeing this
doctrine is set on so solid a foundation, who will shake it? Shake it let see
off her foundation, and thrust at it, It will shake thee, and drive thee into
Hell. I tell thee, it has saved many men from the beginning, but it is also
true, it has slain many one: beware that it slaye thee not: for it is the
stro^gest thing that ever was. Thou may well banish this Gospel, and put it
out of SCOTLAND, but thou shall never put it out of the world, so long as there
is a soul to be builded by it: But when she is out of SCOTLAND and ENGLAND
both, she can go, and it were, to all these new found Lands, and abide
there.

Yet mark how he rises in his terms (I never heard any Philosopher in all
his Declamatio^s rise so highly in his praises of any Science, as the Apostle
does in praising of this wisdom, and it is not the eloquence of man, but the
eloquence of the Spirit of God, that raises him. And yet he has not told
all her glory. No, we shall never see it all, till we see the Lord Jesus, who
is the subject of this Gospel.) Sciences have their commendation from their
end: it is a good science that has a good end, and invented for the weal of
man, for his profit, and pleasure, and glory: But this science in this
mounteth above all the sciences in the world: for all the Sciences in the
world will not make thee mount up* nor raise thee one footbredth from the
earth, although thou be a Monarch: they may well get thee a piece of honor
here, but it shall all be earthly honor. O! but the Science whereof our God is
the Author, this wisdom of our redemption makes thee to mount, draws thee
up, in a word, glorifieth thee All that ever learn in her school shall be
glorified, will thou learn this wisdom, she shall glorify thee in the
Heavens. For why? she is the power of God to salvation, Roman. 1. 16. and as
he speaks, 2. Cor. 3. 18. will thou look in her but as in a mirror, to the
glory of GOD in her, she shall transform thee from glory to glory in that
same Image. What more? All the wisdom in the world without this wisdom, is
like as much poison, to swell up thine heart in pride against GOD and man.

Shall I come to the particulars? Art thou a Lawier? and have the knowledge of
the Common Laws? If thy science of the Law be not seasoned with this
wisdom, it is mere poison to thee. Art thou a Mediciner, perfect in that
Science, and have read all Hippocrates and Galene, and all the rest of them,
and have not this wisdom, thou art poisoned for all thy Medicine. Is thine
head full of policy, and have thou many plottes and conceits in it, and have
thou not this wisdom? thou have an empty and poisoned head. Art thou a
Philosopher, and can count all the Stars, and can search out all the
mineralles, and can go down to the Center of the Earth. yea, and it were
down to Hell, and have not this wisdom, thou art poisoned. What need I to
speak further? If thou have no apprehension of this wisdom, that only
sanctifies thee, and all thy Sciences, and makes them profitable unto thee,
thou art a miserable body, and woe to thee for ever. Would to God the world
saw this, but alas, this humane wisdom and the glory of this world pulls
CHRIST out of their eyes, and obscureth this Heavenly glory. But woe is thee!
that ever thou saw this light, if thou gettest not a part of that Heavenly
glory.

Yet he stays not here, but look how he climbeth up, and exalts this
Heavenly wisdom. Sciences use to be commended for their subtility and
sublimity. O, says the Philosopher, it is an high and subtle Science,
therefore it is praise worthy. Mathematikes are subtle, and are full of
subtle demonstrations, therefore they are worthy Sciences. But, Brethren,
there was never Science comparable in sublimity to this Wisdom of GOD, who is
only wise. As far as the head of GOD passes thy brain, as far does this
wisdom that is come of GODS head, pass all the wisdom that thou can invent,
and it were a thousand years: and therefore The Apostle says, This wisdom
none of the Princes of this world have known: No, not after she was revealed
and came into the world, when they saw her, they knew not what she m^ned. The
Philosophers, who sca^ned in curiousnes when this wisdom came to them, they
knew no more in it than children and infants. Look ho^^ little a child can
conceive of any humane sciences, as little also could they conceive of this
wisdom. Read in the Acts, chap. 17. verse. 18. when Paul came to Athens, and
preached it unto them, they said, What a sower of words is this? they thought
he had nothing but words. This is a marvelous secrecy: they could not find
her out when she was found out to their hands, they knew not what she means.
There is not a science found out by man* bu^ I shall get a natural man that
will comprehend it, and often times he will go beyond the author himself: But
to this day there was never ^ natural man that could comprehe^d the wisdom of
this Gospel. For why? she is spiritual, supernatural, and above nature, and
therefore the natural wit could never be able to comprehend her. I say more
to you, the more a man has of natural wit and judgment, the prouder he is
in his wit, and stroke his own head, and think he has a wise brain, the
more he counts of his own wisdom the more shall this wisdom of the
Gospel be foolishness unto him: and ever the wise^^ of the world accounts
the Gospel the greatest foolishness. I had rather take in hand to teach an
idiot the Gospel, and cause him to conceive it, ^^ God would give me grace,
than to take an high headed worldling that is puffed up with the pride of
nature, to drive into-him one word of it. Silly ones, who have no conceit of
their natural wisdom, will swallow it up but a proud headed body cannot be
capable of it. Therefore, the Apostle in this same first Epi. to the Cor. 3.
18. says veri^ well, Will thou be wise? be a soole, that thou may be
wise. Renounce that reason of thine, and take it captive, and make it a slave,
otherwise thou shall never see GOD to thy consolation: for thy natural reason
is an enemy to God, and His wisdom, Roman 8.7. He gives a reason in the end
of the verse, that testifies, that the Prince; of this world knew not this
wisdom, yea, not when it was laid open to them. He says. For had they known
it, (namely that great Prince Herod, and Pilate that Roman President) they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. They had not done such indignity
to Him as to nail Him to an ignominious cross. How aggree these two together.
The Lord of glory, and an ignominious cross? How stand these two, The King
of glory, and such a shameful death? Because they knew not His glory, they
exponed Him to such an ignominious death. Thou that can not see the glory of
God in the Gospel, thou will commit the most ignominious, the most villainous
thing in the world. No, if Christ were here, thou would crucify Him
again. And therefore, find not fault with Herod nor Pilate, Or any of them
that crucified Him, and think not that thou had been free of it if thou
had been there. No, I tell thee, Thou that see not the glory of the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, if such a deed were to be done, thou would have a
share in it. It will not be speaking that will seru: the turn. Let men speak
of this Gospel, and all this wisdom, what they will, their deeds will ever
bewraye them. I will not give one penny for thy mouth, for thy tongue, for thy
speaking, yea, for thy preaching, if thou have not deeds also in thy calling.

Art thou a King? Art thou a Counselor? Art thou a Minister? If I see not good
deeds in thine own calling, all thy words are but wind. When thou have
stood up, and told that thou know CHRIST, and understand His word and
Gospe^l, and then in thy life wilt be an enemy to CHRIST, and wilt dishonor
Him, and His Gospel in thy calling, thy doings bewraye and utter what stuff
is within thee. The god of this world, and thy malicious heart, have put out
thine ^yes, thou have a blind mind, wherefrom thy deeds proceed. Will thou
crucify JESUS CHRIST, and expone Him to ignominy any way, and persecute and
trouble Him in His members, and then wilt stand up and say, thou know
CHRIST, thy doings testify to ye world, that thou art a liar. The LORD open
men's eyes to know what it is to deal with CHRIST, or His members. As ever
thou would testify to the world, that thou know CHRIST, honor Him and
His Ministers both, and honor His members: for whatsoever is done to one of
them in the earth, good or evil, He counts it all done unto Himself. Saul,
Saul, Why persecutest thou Me? says He to Paul, Act. 9. 4.

He stands not here, but goes forward in her commendation: mark the words,
and I beseech you to weigh them, that seeing the eminency of this Gospel, ye
may learn to stoup and give obedience to it. Sciences are commended from their
subjectes whereof they entreat: if they have a glorious subject, they are
accounted high, and accurate sciences: but their was never science that had
such a fair and glorious subject, as this Gospel which we preach. What is the
subject of it? I cannot tell it in better words than are here set down: The
things which the eye has not seen, neither the ear has heard, neither
entered into man's heart. All sciences of this world, and wisdom found out by
man, are of things either visible, that are seen with ye eye, or of things
audible, heard with the ear, or of things intelligible, understood with the
mind. If I cannot see thine invention, if I cannot hear it, at the least I
will get some apprehension of it in my mind, I have that advantage. But as for
the subject of this wisdom, thy natural eye never saw it, thy natural care
never heard it, and it never entered into thy natural heart: and therefore
whosoever will see these things, he must seek an cye that is more than natural,
that is supernatural, that is spiritual: seek an ear that is supernatural
and spiritual. Go to the heart, content not thy self with a natural heart:
seek an heart that is spiritual and supernatural: For gaze with thine eye as
thou will, lay to thine ear as thou will, if thou should hear an hundredth
Preachings, if thou have but a natural care, and a natural eye, thou shall
neither see not hear: but in hearing thou shall not hear, and in
understanding thou shall not understand, as the Prophet Esaias in the sixth
Chapter and ninth verse says. Therefore, seek at GOD an Heavenly ear, and
an Heavenly eye, and say, LORD, give me an Heavenly ear, and an Heavenly
eye, that I may conceive these things and apprehende them.

Now, in the end of the verse he brings them down for as high as they
were, and tells what they are, Which GOD (says he) has prepared for them
that love Him. They are predestined from all Eternity, and they are prepared
in time, for so many only as love the LORD. Therefore, love JESUS, and thou
shall get a part of them. The lesson is this. Wonderful are the things that
GOD has prepared for them that love the LORD JESUS. But how shall I know that
such high and sublime things are prepared for me? Art thou marked with this
token? and carriest thou it about with thee? Love thou the LORD? how beit not
so well as thou would. (Accursed be he that loves not the LORD: let him
be an Anathema Maranatha, as the Apostle says in the sixteenth Chapter and
the two and twenty verse of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.) Love thou
Him, assure thy self, howbeit thou can not get such a love to Him, or such a
sight of these things, as thou would have, they are prepared for thee.
Only, thou art to take heed to see if that love of GOD be in thine heart.
Go not to search what is in Heaven, and think not to get a full sight of that
glory in this life, that is laid up for thee: But rest on Him, yea, though it
were half blindlinges. Well is the soul that can love the LORD JESUS.

I will end here, and will recommende to every soul that Love of JESUS, as
ever they would see the things that the eye never saw, nor the ear never
heard, nor has ever entered into the heart of man, to their everlasting
comfort and consolation, at the coming of the LORD JESUS: To whom, with the
FATHER and the Holy GHOST, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever and
ever, world without end, So be it.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
I. COR. CHAP. II. But GOD has revealed them unto us by His Spirit: for the
Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of GOD.

For what man knows the things of man, except the spirit of a man, which is
in him? Even so the things of GOD knows no man, but the Spirit of GOD.

Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is
of GOD, that we may know the things that are given to us of GOD.


THE last day, Brethren, we heard a clear description and commendation of that
wisdom which ` Paul spoke and preached, which is none other, in effect, but
this same blessed EVANGELL that is preached to you. We showed you that there
was nothing that might commend a science or wisdom in this world, but it
concurred with him to the commendation, praise, and glory of this wisdom that
is here described. The author of it is not the world, nor the Princes of the
world, but God the maker of the world: The secrecy of it, was hidden up in a
mystery so many ages, from the creation to the coming of Christ, and
manifestation of Him in the nature of man: The antiquity of it, it was
predestined from all Eternity: The end of it, our glory: The sublimitie and
highness of it, when it was revealed at the cumming of CHRIST, none of the
Princes of this world could understand it, for if they had known it, they had
not crucified the LORD of glory. The subject of it, the things which the eye
never saw, the ear never heard, which never entered into the heart of man,
and yet for all this, prepared for them that love the LORD.

Now to come to the Text which we have in hand. It might have been asked of
the Apostle, If such things as were never seen, never heard of, nor never
entered into the heart of man, were contained in that wisdom which he taught,
what profit have we by that wisdom? what profit have we of the things
whereof we are not capable? The Apostle meets this in the first verse which
we have read, But (says he) God has revealed them unto us by His Spirit: It
is true indeed, they pass the sight of our eyes, they surmount above our
hearing, they pass the capacity of our mind, yet that LORD has dimitted
Himself unto us, and by His Spirit He has revealed those things to us the
silly ones of ye world, not to the princes of ye world, but to the silly
simple ones. He has revealed them not by our spirit, but by His own Spirit.
There is the sum of the answer shortly: He gives the reason in the next
part of the verse, and lets us see, that the Spirit of Jesus is able to
reveal all these high and hidden things to us* setting out the nature of the
Holy Spirit: For (says he) the Spirit searches all things, yea, the
deep things of God. The Spirit is a searcher, and he is a searcher of all
things created in Heaven and earth. Nothing can escape him, but he will se^rch
into the secretest things in the world, and into the secretest parts of thine
heart. What more? He is a searcher of the God of glory Himself, and will
pierce into the infinite deepnesse that is in God. He being such a Spirit as
this, is he not able to reueal the things whereof we are not capable? There is
the meaning of the whole verse shortly.

Then we see these things contained in the Heavenly wisdom, as the riches of
God in JESUS CHRIST, our remission of sin, our justification, our
regeneration, our salvation, and life everlasting, even common things which
ye hear of daily, together with Jesus Christ the Mediator, in whom and
through whom all things are wrought, are the things which the ear has not
heard, nor the eye has not seen, neither have they e^^ered into the heart of
man. Yet we see that these things pass not so the capacity of man, nor they
are not so altogether hidden from man, but they are revealed. And they are
revealed* to whom? To them for whom they are prepared. They are revealed* when?
even in this life: there is none for whom they are prepared from all Eternity,
but in this life, before the soul go out of the body, they shall receive
some revelation and understanding of these same things: and thou that gettest
no revelation of them in this life, and gettest not a sight of them ere the
soul go out of the body, I will say to thee, They were never prepared for
thee: Remission of sins was never prepared for thee, Justification before the
Tribunal of GOD, Regeneration, Life everlasting was never prepared for thee.
There is not a better token of life after this life, than a blink of life in
this life, if it were but a glimmering (for the best of us has but a
glimmering) a blinke of JESUS Christ, and of the graces that are in Him in this
life, is the surest token that thou can have of the life to come. And by the
contrary, There is not a worse token of darkness after this life, than to
have thine eyes so closed, that thou have no blinke here of that life to come.
And when thou die, having no sight of the life to come, thou shall die a
miserable catiue, and a faggot for the fire of H^ll.

Let us go forward to the rest. God has revealed them by His Spirit. Now ye
see here a revelation by the Spirit^ Mark it: I shall tarry somewhat upon
these words. Ye heard before of a revelation by the word which is this
wisdom. Now ye hear of a revelation by the Spirit: It is not enough to
receive a revelation by the word, though it were never so fair and so soundly
preached, it will never do thee good, it is nothing but as if thou would
hold a light before a blind man, and say to him, Man, see thou not this
light? Will thou bid a blind man judge of colors? thou scornest him. Even so,
all the speaking of the Scriptures unto men is but scorning of them, except
they get this revelation of the Holy Spirit. What is this revelation of the
Spirit? I shall tell you what it is. With that preaching of the word, which is
the first revelation, the Spirit of JESUS comes down, and seateth Himself
in thine eye, and opens thine eye to see the things which are spoken comes
to thine ear, and opens thine ear to hear the things which are spoken,
enters into thine heart, and makes thee to conceive the things which thou
see and hear, and makes thee capable of them, of the which thou art no
more capable by nature, than the very stone in the pillar: speak to thee, and
to the stone, all is alike, till this alteration be made in thy soul.

Then, Brethren, There are two reu^lations, The first by ye word, when it is
preached: The second by the Spirit, when that Holy Spirit concurreth with the
word. I will tell you the difference of them, The first will be common to all:
the word is preached alike to all. O! but the other revelation is not so
common, but is only made to some secret ones of ye Lord. That blessed Spirit
will not light upon every man and woman, but only upon some secret persons,
upon whom the Lord has pity. We read in the 16. Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles* that there is a meeting of many: many are gathered together, Paul
the Apostle the Preacher, he reuealeth the graces of the word to all alike:
among all the rest we read of one special person called Lydia (there was
never a word spoken of the rest) it is said of her namely, that the Lord opened
the heart of Lydia, to receive that which Paul preached: the Spirit of JESUS
opened her heart, not Paul: the Spirit of JESUS only is the reuealer: be never
content with hearing only: fie on thee, if thou think thou have done enough,
when thou have sitten an hour or two, hearing, if thou find not the sweet
operation of the Spirit to open thine heart with such a sweetness as is
unspeakable. And therefore fix not your eyes so much on men, as upon the Lord,
who sends the Spirit, and cry ever* Lord, give me ye Spirit, or else all is
but wind: blessed is that body that gets the Spirit, for the word will never
do good without the Spirit.

Yet I go forward, and I mark the reason: The Spirit searches all things,
yea, the deepnesse of GOD. These are the words. There is a great deepnesse in
these words, if we could attain to it. The first thing that I take up here,
is this, Great is that deepnesse and that profundity that is in our God. Paul,
in the 3. chap. to the Ephesians. and the 18. verse, considering that deepenesse
falls out in these words, That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may
be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length
(meaning of God, for He is both broad and long) and the depth (He is deep)
and the height (He is high also) Infinite in length, infinite in breadth,
infinite in height, infinite in deepnesse, what would ye have? He Himself is
(as it were) a bottomless Deep. There is never a property in Him, as we call
them, but all is an infinite deepnesse, the wisdom of GOD, an infinite and
endless deepnesse: His power, an endless deepenesse. And therefore the
Apostle ( Romans 11. 34.) falls out in an admiration of the deepenesse both of
the wisdom, and of the knowledge of GOD.

Well then, Brethren, it is no wonder, albeit it was said in the verse going
before, that the things that are prepared for them that love Him, the eye has
never seen, the ear has never heard, neither have they entered into the
heart of man: Why? Because all these things are hidden up in a bottomless
deepnesse, that is, in GOD. What wonder then, that thou can not see them?
that the eye of a worm, creeping upon the earth, cannot see them? that the
ear of a worm cannot hear them? and that the heart of a worm cannot be
capable of them? It is true indeed, y^ Gospel speaks of them al unto us, yet
the word is not sufficient to show them* they are not so in the word, but they
abide still in that deepnes: the mercy is not so revealed in ye word, and
brought down from Heaven, but yet it remains still in that deepnes: remission
of sins is not so revealed in the word, but yet it abides still in that
deepenesse. And therefore, the word, when it speaks of these things,
whither sends it thee unto? When it speaks of the mercy of GOD in Jesus
Christ, of the justice of God, of Life everlasting, whither does it direct
thee? Evermore to this deepnesse. Go thy ways (says the word) to the
deepnesse of GOD, and see all these things plainly. Therefore, the same
Apostle says, ( Coloss. 3. 1. 3.) Seek the things which are above, where
thy life is hidden with Christ in God. Where is thy life then? I am speaking of
it now: but where is it? It is hidden up in that deepnesse of God. The word
should not hold down thine eye, but lift it up to seek all those mercies
that are above with God. Ye may see then, these things that concern our
salvation in Jesus Christ, our remission of sins, our justification, our
salvation (these are even the things, to speak them plainly, whereof the
Apostle means) they are incomprehensible to the wit of man* to the eye of
man, to the judgment of man, to the nature of man. He will stand up, and
talk of his nature* of his engine, an high spirited man his wit will compass
all the world. O! but thy wit reached never up here to search this deepnesse.
Therefore, by nature there is none assurance of remission of sins, of
salvation, of life, if thou have no more but nature, (scorn as thou will)
although thou be a Monarch, thou shall never get assurance of life, but die
like a desperate dog* Art thou able to pierce in to the deepnesse of the sea,
that has a bottom? or to the deepnes of the earth that is finite? No, thou will never see one foot into it, albeit thou be never so clear of sight: and
then, O fool, will thou strive to reach up to a bottomless deepnesse that is in
God, with thy wit and thy conception, when thou can not attain to a finite
thing?

Now, Brethren, I have spoken of God, and of His deepnes: next we have to speak
of the Spirit* of the searching of the Spirit: I shall only touch it shortly as
far as the Text will furnish, and not digress in amplifying of these common
heads. I mark then of this Text: As there is an infinite deepnesse in God, so
there is a searcher of it, it wants not a searcher. The only searcher of
this deepnes, is the Spirit of God: every spirit is a searcher: it is the
nature of a spirit ever to pierce in, and to search: for it is a subtle
thing, and will pierce in very subtilely to the secrets of things. The spirit
of an Angel is a searcher, and a subtle thing: the spirit of the Devil is
subtle, and will pierce in subtilely, he will pierce in to thine heart, and
insinuate himself therein: likewise, the spirit of a man is a subtle spirit,
and a searcher also: he will search out the things that are in heaven* and in
the sea, and in the earth: for, he is wonderfully inclined to searching. But
all the spirits, except the Spirit of that Holy One, search only the
creatures. The spirit of an Angel, of the devil, of a man, search but the
creatures: As for the Creator, no spirit is able to search in Him but His own
Spirit, yea, they know nothing in Him, but so much as He will reveal unto
them. As for man, he is very busy* but for all his business, he could never
yet search out his own heart ^^there is a mystery of sin lying in the
foldes of his heart, which he shall never see, except this Spirit enter in,
and give him light. But the blessed Spirit of God and of Jesus Christ (he is
the Spirit both of the Father and of the Son, for one Spirit proceeds from
both) He searches the Father, He searches the Son, He discovers all And
no man can be a good searcher, or a sanctified searcher, except he have this
Spirit. If thy spirit be not sanctified by this Spirit, which is the only
searcher and sanctifier of all things, all thy searching is but vanity.

Now to go forward. Before He was called a searcher, and now He is called a
reuealer: First He searches out, then He reuealeth unto us, There is the
order: He reuealeth the hidden things in God, because He Himself of His own
nature is a searcher of them: and before that ever He reveal them, He
searches them out first. The^, he that will be a reuealer, and will set
himself to reveal those things to men (I speak it in plain talk) he that will
be a Preacher of these hidden things to others, look that first he be a
searcher, and let him be occupied in searching, and heartily beseech GOD,
that the Holy Spirit would lead him in to those things that have none
access: For he is not fit to be a Preacher of the Gospel, that searches
not with all his might, first to see these things in God, which he speaks to
others. Woe to him that comes in of purpose to speak the things to others
which he never saw nor felt first in his own heart. David says, ( Psalm 116.
10.) I believed, and therefore I spoke. Paul afterward says, We believe
and therefore we speak, 2. Cor. 4. 13. What is this belief? None other
thing, but, before he speak to others, to get an assurance of them in his
own heart. Now look the manner of the revealing of these things. The Spirit,
he reuealeth, because he opens our hearts, and takes away the veil off
our hearts, to let us see them: otherwise in vain were it to lay them before
us. I see another manner of this revelation, and therefore look what more the
Spirit does: He is not content only to take the veil from thine heart, but
he takes thy soul by the hand, (as it were) and leads it in through the
deepnesse of God, he will ravish it out of the body, (as it were) and lead it
in to that light which has none access, and will say, Lo there is the
mercy, lo, there is the righteousness, lo, there is the everlasting Life,
which is spoken of, see thou not them all in Him? So he will point out every
thing in God. Therefore, no doctrine avails without this Holy Spirit, seeing
He alone takes the veil from our hearts, and leads us in to see the
things which are spoken of. There is no perfect Doctor but the Spirit of
Jesus only: There is no creature, although he be an Angel, that can take the
veil off thine heart, to let thee see, that can bore thine care, to let thee
hear perfectly: And therefore, in preaching depend not upon the mouth of men,
but only upon the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Yet I shall make the matter more plain, and show how the Spirit will take
thee, and let thee see the things which are in God. I will use a supposition
which cannot be, yet it will make the matter more clear. I suppose that my
spirit or soul entered into thee, if my spirit or my soul be in thee, there
would be nothing within me, but thou would see it, all my thoughts would
be patent to thee.

Now to apply this. This is no supposition. God will put His Spirit into a
man or woman: for if His Spirit be not in us, woe be unto us for ever and ever.
If God put His Spirit into any of us must it not follow of necessity, that
we must see in God at least the things which concern our weal and salvation.
That spirit in me, in thee, must reveal to me, to thee, the things which
lie in the very deepnesse of God, which concern our weal and salvation: and
that man that has the Spirit of God, will see the very heart of God, and His
mind, he will see the remission of his sins in the mind of GOD, and all by
the benefit of the Spirit of JESUS that dwells in him. Mark this ye that
account so lightly of the Spirit of Jesus, in whom consists the only
felicity of man: For if thou want His Spirit, woe to thee, thou shall go to
Hell. So we have a great vantage here, that by the benefit of the Spirit,
we see the things that are in GOD.

But, Brethren, God has as great an advantage of us: for if Gods Spirit be in
us, by His Spirit He sees all that is in our hearts: for if my spirit were
in thee (as I spoke before) as thou would see all that is in mine heart, so
I would see all that is in thy soul, and the least thought of thine heart
would be patent unto me: so, much more that Spirit sees the least motion and
thought of the heart of man, in whom He is, and will present them all to the
Father, and lay them open before Him. So al serves to this end, that we should
take heed to the least thought of our hearts, and beware to think one thought
to displease Him: for the Spirit, as He is called the searcher of the deepnesse
of God, so He is called the searcher of the hearts of men. There is not one
thought, nor one groan in thine heart, or one motion of joy in thy soul, but
He reports all to the Father. We have need to take heed to all the motions
of our hearts, and never to think one thought, but that which we think is
acceptable to the Father, and never to anger the Spirit (as ye Apostle says
Ephesians. 4. 30.) neither in word or thought. And therefore, as thou would keep
Him and not anger Him, study to sanctification, and sanctification shall bring
on salvation, for it is ye very means that shall make thee to see God: look
what The Apostle says, Heb. 12. 14. Without sanctification no man shall see
GOD. Now upon all this discourse I mark shortly: There were never two things
so straightly joined together as God and man is: there was never such kindred
betwixt two things in ye world, as is betwixt the God of glory, and an earthly
man: thou will count thy kindred with this man, and that man, if thou be joined
with him in blood or alliance. But I ask this question, Is his spirit within
thee? is his soul within thee? or is thy soul in him? Indeed it is true, the
affection may go out of thee to him, but give thou him thy spirit with thy
affection? or gives he thee his spirit with his affection? know thou ye
thought of his heart? or knows he the thought of thine heart? who will say
it? O! but God with His affection gives thee His Spirit within thee, that thou
may know the thought of His heart, and He of thine. This is the conjunction
that is betwixt God and thee: there is a narrow conjunction indeed betwixt ye
members of that mystical body, for they are conjoined together by ye Spirit of
Christ, and by love, but no member puts his spirit into another member:
there is ye other co^junction betwixt the head and the members of the natural
body: for the soul will, as it were, come down, and the spirit of the head
to the members, and they will understand the thought of the head, and the head
will understand the thought of the members, but there was never such a
conjunction betwixt the members and the head, as is betwixt God and man, and
all conjunctions among men, are but a pendicle of that which is betwixt GOD and
man. In this conjunction with thy GOD, and with thine Head, JESUS, (for thou
art joined with GOD in Him) stands thy felicity and blessedness.

To come to the next verse. It might have been said to the Apostle, Thou
dedicatest all to the Spirit of God, may not the spirit of man do something
in this purpose? may not my spirit search in to God, and discover the deepnes
that is in Him? He answers, Noman can see the things that are in God, but
His own Spirit. Then he declares his answer by a comparison, Even as no man
can see the things which are in man but by the spirit of a man, so nothing can
search the things which are in God, but the Spirit of God. Thou can not see
the things that are in me. only I my self will see the things that are in
me: even so no man can see the things that are in God but only His own Spirit.

Now the Apostle here he meets the very, pride of the heart of man, that
he will conciet of himself, that he by his spirit will search the things that
are in God. Paul had this experience in the Corinthians, who were but carnal,
they took upon them to judge upon his doctrine that was spiritual. Have thou
but that spirit which is carnal? albeit thou be a Monarch, thou art too
bold to take upon thee to judge of things which are spiritual, and spoken
spirituallie.

This same is the pride of the Papists this day. There will come out a
Thomist, a Scotist, who has the spirit of a man only, and a very subtle, or
rather a Sophistical spirit, an humane. Philosopher, and he will judge of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and turn it over into humane Philosophy. They have
turned the Gospel of Jesus to Aristotle, all their writings are but
spiritlesse. There is not so much as a smell of the Spirit of Jesus in them
all: But, O that terrible judgment that abides such Doctors as are profane
polluters of the Gospel of Jesus Christ! There is none of us all, but if a man
would stand up and say to me, or to thee, I know thine heart, and what is in
thine heart, we would be angry at him. Then, will not that glorious God be
angry at a profane villane, that will say, he will search in to that
profunditie, having only his own spirit?

Brethren, when I was younger than I am, if I had seen one of great engine,
and great capacity, and great graces, I thought immediately he would
comprehend the whole Bible, but I protest before God, that the longer I live, I
think ever the less of the wit of man, I had rather have ye least sponk of
the Spirit of Christ, nor all the engine and knowledge of ye world: No, a silly
body that has ye Spirit of Jesus will conceive more of spiritual things, than
all the high headed bodies in the world. Therefore, always renounce thine
own wit, and be a fool, that thou may be wise.

Another thing I mark here. When he has magnified the Spirit, and made Him
the searcher of all the deepnesse of God, see how he holds off him the
proud conceits of men: he will not let thee touch him, or his privileges,
that is, to search the deepnesse of God. Therefore, if ye will speak of God,
to His honor, (He is inviolable) save him from the proud conceits of men.
Hold proud men off God, and let them not touch Him, or violate that inviolable
Majesty, or else thou shall be guilty, if He be violated by thy default.
Alas! wherefore art thou set in this world, but to preach His glory? and to
keep it inuiolate from the injuries of all flesh in the world. Look what he
does next in the last verse, when he has, as it were, holden off GOD the
proud conceits of men, who would take upon them to search in to the
deepnesse of God, what does he? He draws that Spirit to himself, and
says, Now we have received, not the spirit of the World, but the Spirit
which is of God. whereby he learneth thee this lesson: It avails thee not to
magnify, to glorify God and His Spirit, except in the end thou take that
Spirit to thy self, and may challenge Christ and His Spirit, as thine own
property. Men have spoken very highly of Christ, and have had little ado
with Him. Speak thou not of Him so, but as thou speak of Him to His praise,
take Him to thy self: otherwise, in all thy speaking of Him, thou art but a
very babbler, if thou have not that Spirit within thee: For the Apostle says,
No man can call Jesus Lord, except he have the Spirit of Jesus, 1. Cor. 12. 3.
Therefore, as thou would save thy self from profaning of God, and of His
Spirit, and of His graces, when thou art praising and magnifying Him, look
that thou have the Spirit, that thou may say to thy self, This Spirit whom
I praise, is mine: this God, whom I have been magnifying, and all His graces,
is mine. In the end of the verse he sets down the end wherefore GOD has
given us this Spirit. The end is this, To make us to know the things which are
given unto us by God. I see here the Spirit of Jesus, when He makes our eye to
look in to that deepnesse of God, to that store of mercy, He will let us see
nothing in GOD, but mere grace and mercy. As this Euangell preaches nothing
but mere grace and mercy, so the Spirit of Jesus, when He lets thee see all the hidden things in GOD, He lets thee see nothing but mere mercy and
grace. And therefore, he that will tell the people of the merits of men, or of
the Saints, that they are not justified by mere grace, but must ad to their
own deseruings, I will tell you my judgment of such a man, suppose he be never
so glorious a Doctor, never so sacond or so learned, he never spoke by the
Spirit of JESUS. Papist Doctors, who lead men to lean to their own merits,
and to the merits of Saints, never spoke nor wrote by the Spirit of Jesus:
For the Spirit of Jesus lets thee see nothing in God but mee^e mercy: for
one merit of man will destroy all grace: so contratie is the Spirit of God,
and the spirit of man, the grace of Christ, and the merit of man, And this is
ye spirit that men strive to put amongst us again: for if they bring in
Papistrie amongst us again, farewell ye Spirit of Jesus. No, I speak it from
mine heart, if that Idolatry come in again, I shall stand up in my last
Preaching, and say, Farewell the Spirit of Jesus: For, no more than Hell can
accompany Heaven, no more can that blessed Spirit of Jesus accompany that
dirt and dung of man's doctrine. Therefore, as thou would keep the Spirit of
Jesus, hold abacke these men, for thou shall not enjoye them both in despite
of thine heart. The Lord Jesus cannot remain amongst Idolaters: and if thou
have not His Spirit, thou art not His, ( Roman. 8. 9.) if thou be not His,
thou art the Devils, and shall go to everlasting damnation. Therefore I say
over again* Hold them away, as thou would keep that blessed Spirit of
JESUS CHRIST: To whom with the FATHER and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor,
Praise, Power, Glory, and Dominion, both now and ever world without end,

AMEN.
THE EIGHT SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. IIII. If our Gospel be then hidden, it is hidden to them that
are lost:

In whom the god of this world has blinded the minds, that is, of the
Infideles, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image
of God, should not shine unto them.

For we preach not our selves, but CHRIST JESUS the LORD, and our selves your
servants for JESUS sake.


IN the verse immediately going before this Text which we have read in your
audience, the Apostle has been speaking of that sincerity, of that
plainness which he used in the preaching of the Gospel of CHRIST, which he
uttered with such an evidence, that whosoever heard him, might understand him,
might have seen the light of the Gospel, and have apprehended it. Now
because this people of Corinth were stiff-necked, hard to conceive, full of
conceits, and liked nothing but humane wisdom and eloquence, scorning and
mocking the evidence of the Spirit: Therefore, some of them might have objected
immediately, Paul, thou speak of thy plainness in uttering the Gospel,
yet for thy plainness there is many amongst us who know not what thou
speak, thy Gospel is hidden to many, many understand thee not. The
Apostle meets this in the first words which we have read, If our Gospel be
hidden, it is hidden to them that perish. A sore sentence: as if he would
say, Corinthians, blame me not, nor my Gospel, the fault is in that miserable
corruption which is in you: ye cannot see the light of my gospel, because ye
are adjudged to perdition and damnation: so the blame is in your blindness,
who are appointed to damnation before all eternity. So this verse being plain,
let us observe some lessons. The first is this: There has been, and is, many
in the world, in all ages, that never saw, sees, nor shall see the light of
the Gospel. Ye have an example of these Corinthians, howbeit the Gospel should
shine clearer than ye Sun at noone time of the day, it shall never be seen
of them, it will be hidden to them, howbeit it should be as a book laid open
before them, yet it will be a clasped book to them. Let every man beware of
himself, for this is a necessity laid upon the multitude of this world. A
multitude has been in all ages, a multitude is in this age, a multitude shall
be in every age to come, who shall never see the light of the Gospel. The next
lesson is: These folk have this property, and disposition, (being pleasurers
of themselves) they are ever quarreling with the Gospel, amongst all the
hearers of the world they are the most quarrellous, they, I say, who get the
least good of it, are always the most quarrellous, and evermore laying the
fault either upon the Gospel, or upon the teachers thereof, because they
neither get light nor consolation thereby. Beware of this quarrellous
complexion. I mark thirdly, where is the fault, or in whom? They blame the
Gospel, and the teachers thereof, but where is the fault indeed? Paul tells
thee here, If my Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to them that perish. That
perdition and destruction whereunto thou art appointed from all eternity, is
the cause wherefore thou receiuest no consolation, no light in thy soul through
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thou layest the fault where it is not, thou art
like a blind man, that will stand up against the Sun, shining at the noone
time of the day, and accuse it because it shines not, when in the mean time
it is shining upon the face of him. Thou art a vessel of perdition, if there
be not a remedy, and because the sentence is past, therefore, as when a
thief or a murderer is once condemned to death, the gracious presence of the
Prince is with-drawne from him, that he may look on him no more: Even so, if
once a creature be adjudged to death, the gracious countenance of Jesus Christ
is with-drawne from him, lest he should behold it in the Gospel.

Another thing follows: There are many tokens of damnation, that men and
women are adjudged to death: Amongst the rest this is a sure token, If the
Gospel be hidden to thee, even as it is preached in SCOTLAND, (we have
neither Peter nor Paul to teach unto us) yet if it be hidden to thee, if thou
receive neither light nor consolation by it, as it is now preached, if thou
continue so till thy life be in thy lips, as we speak, till the last gasp,
thou have a seal in thine own bosom of everlasting damnation: thine heart is
marked with the mark of perdition: yea, if thou be a king, thou art a vessel
ordained for shame and ignominy.

Then, Brethren, learn here: seeing there must be a number that must perish,
and a number of all estates in the world must die, that must go to Hell,
ordained from all eternity to perdition, beguile not your selves, and seeing
to this number the Gospel must be hidden, and must be a closed book, they can
never have consolation of it. Then thou that delitest to walk in the light of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, think thou not evil of this Gospel, think thou
not evil of this Ministry. Join these two together, that cannot be
severed, the Gospel and the Ministry. Thou that think evil of ye
Ministry, thou think evil of the Gospel: be thou not ashamed of the
Ministers, nor of their bonds, nor of their captivity, nor of their death,
nor of no cross that can be laid upon them: (the 2. Epist. to Timot. and the
8. Chapter) For the multitude of the world thinks shame of the Gospel, and
of the Ministers thereof, when affliction once comes upon them. Thou that
love the Gospel, keep thy comfort in thine own bosom, and assure thy self,
there is none other way to Heaven: and knowing well, that this must be the
hazard of the Gospel, and of the Ministers, take all these troubles for sure
tokens of the truth of God. I love not the Gospel that has the countenance
of the Princes of this world, and has the confluence of the multitude. The
Princes and multitude of this world has ever borne the pure Gospel of Jesus
Christ at hatred. Thus sarre for the first cause, wherefore the Gospel of
Jesus Christ is hidden from many, to wit, that perdition whereunto they are
adjudged from all eternity.

Now take up in the next verse another cause wherefore the Gospel is hidden to
many, In whom (says he) the god of this world has blinded their minds. The
second cause is excecation, blind-folding* putting out of the eyes, and all to
this end, that they should not get a sight of the glorious light of the
Gospel, and so be saved. But how comes this to pass? how are they blinded?
I shall tell you: Once being adjudged to die, and ordained in the counsel of
God to perdition, in comes the god of this world, that is, the Devil, whom
this world makes a god of, the God of Heaven sends him. Whom to sends
He him? Unto that catiue, that miserable creature that is ordained for
perdition, as a torturer, and persecuter, an hangman, to put that eternal
decree in execution. And what does he when he comes in? The first turn
that ever he does, he binds him. What binds he, his hands or his
feet* No, he lets them louse, and lets him work on with them his own
ruin, and run on unto his own perdition: But he binds his eyes, or
rather, pulls them out, that the miserable body may not see the gracious
face of Christ. Wherefore is he sent unto him? The cause is not only in the
ordinance of God, but in the catiue himself, that maliciously repineth to the
light, and will not receive the Gospel, therefore the GOD of Heaven sends
the Devil to put out his eyes, that he should not see. Mark then the lesson:
They that are adjudged to die and to perdition in the world to come, in this
world, ere ever they go out of this life, they are bound like thieues and
murderers, to be presented bound to that damnation that is to ensue: they are
reserved in chains till that great Day. What chains are these? Chains of
darkness, their eyes are plucked out, that blindlinges, in that great Day,
they may be cast into Hell, into that Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone for ever. There is never a soul y^ goes to damnation in the world
to come, but in this life it is blinded: Ye know the Ethnickes saying, Quos
perdere vult IVPITER, iis mentem solet adimere. It is a true saying: and
therefore, take up a sure note of perdition to come, excecation, blindness: so
that if thou can not see that gracious face of CHRIST in the Gospel at no
time, for all thine hearing, for all this Ministry that is in the world, take
heed to thy self, and fear that everlasting damnation. Be never at quiet
night nor day, till thou see a light in thy mind by the Gospel: otherwise
thy conscience shall condemn, thee as a vessel of perdition. The Gospel is
not sent for nothing: either shall it be unto thee a savor of life unto Life,
or a savor of death unto Death, and this shall be justified one day: And
except thou get light, thou shall curse the time that ever thou heard the
Gospel, when it comes to that damnation. Another thing mark here: When
comes the god of this world to blind men? (Look to the order of the Text)
The first cause is counted perdition and GODS ordinance, then comes in the
Devil. When comes in the Devil? When GOD has first said the word, I will
have this body perishing, and will be glorified in his perdition; then
comes in the torturer, and plucketh out his eyes. So the Devil is nothing to
GOD, but a persecuter, a minister of His wrath, when He is angry, than is the
lowne at hand, as a slave, to put in execution that wrath. But it is a sore
pity to consider the miserable body on whom this wrath is executed! When the
hangman comes to bind the hands of a body, that body is sorrowful and
sad: but when the Devil is binding thee, thou art merry in the mean time:
and when he is a Devil to thee, thou think he is a God to thee. Thou never
rejoycest, but in blindness: look to experience, The multitude of this Land is
never merrier, than when he is binding them, and drawing them to filthiness,
to murder and villainy, to gluttony and drunkenness: Count not of such a
man: but say, or think, if thou dare not say it, O miserable cat^ue! the
Devil is blinding thee, and leading thee to perdition.

Now mark in the third room, the causes which hasten this damnation, and
which must pass before the god of this world come as a torturer to put in
execution the sentence of GOD. There must go before this excecation, and that
damnation that follows this excecation, a cause in thy self, thou must ever
be the causer of thine own death: notwithstanding the ordinance of God, yet
thou never perishest till thou be worthy of thine own death, and merit thine
own damnation. What brings on this blindness? A malicious, false, infidel
heart, repugning to the Gospel, for thou first despisest it, and rejectest it
so maliciously and despite^ull^e, that in a manner, thou would spit on the
face of Christ Jesus, which shines in the Gospel. This hasteneth the wrath:
For when the Lord sees the despitefulnes of thine heart, that thou will not
see not look in the light when it is offered to thee, and holden up before
thine eyes: then He sends His torturer and says, Go thy ways, Satan, and
pluck out the eyes of this body: then he plucketh out the eyes of thy mind
immediately, and God gives thee over to a reprobate sense: and this is it
which the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 28. It pleased them not to
retain God in knowledge, therefore God gave them over to a reprobate sense.
And Ephesians. 4. 18. Having (says he) their cogitations darkened, and being
strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the hardness of their hearts. There plainly he lets us see that the
hardness and malice of their hearts brings on this ignorance and
blindness. Therefore, beware of this malice, and put it out of thine heart, or
else thou shall be carried blindlinges to everlasting damnation, suppose thou
be an Earl or a King: what regard has GOD of persons?

Now, Brethren, there are some words that I must weigh to you, as the Lord
shall give me the grace, and I shall repeat them, and mark ye with me, if they
be not weighty, That the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the
image of God should not shine unto the^, or spread His beams upon them: ye
know, and any man yt has knowledge knows, that this might have been spoken
in fewer and baser words, but the Apo. co^tents not himself with base words in
such a matter, but says, that ye light of the glorious gospel, etc. Well, is
there one word here in vain? and is there any change of words made for
nothing? are simple base words changed into glorious words for nothing? no
(alas! we cannot see this) and it is one of the things in the world that I
would fainest have you to understand, what moves the Apostles and Prophets to
use such an high language, and set up a thing in such glorious terms, the
which they might utter in baser terms. Think not that the men of God,
Prophets and Apostles, have spoken (as we say) hyperbolice, great and lofty
words, greater than the matter. These words are borrowed words, and they are
borrowed from the most glorious thing in the earth, and yet they attain not to
the thousand part of the things which by them he would express. All the high
words that a man can use to express ye glory of Christ, are not able to
express the thousand part of that glory.

But to come to the purpose. Ye have set down first in glorious terms the
effect of the Gospel: it is set down in shining and beams, thereafter ye have
set down the Gospel it self. To come to the first: The most glorious thing
that a man can see in this earth, is the shining of the Sunn, which the Lord
has fixed in the Heavens. The pleasandest thing that a man can look to, when
he has looked to all these earthly things, is the glauncing of the Sun in
a fair day. And therefore, ye see the glory of the Sun is described very
highly by David in the 19. Psalm. To apply this: Even so the effect of the
Gospel being the most glorious effect that ever was wrought: the Spirit of
God sets it out by the most glorious thing in the world, the spreading of
the Sun beams. And surely, suppose there were no more but this word [
Shyning] it lets us see a wonderful effect of the Gospel in the hearts of
men and women. Ye see by experience, the beams of the Sun, suppose they were
never so bright, will never alter the body which they shine upon, nor make it
bright like themselves: the sun has shined this long time in the world, but
yet by shining it could never so trans-change any creature, that it could
become as bright as the Sun it self. It may well let thee see the body that
is opacum (as we say) dark and obscure, so long as it shines, but as soon
as it is removed, the body is dark as it was before. But as to the Gospel:
The Gospel, with the beams of it, not only makes the object whereupon it
shines, to be seen, and to appear: but it does more, it transformeth the
soul of the man or woman into that same light and brightness that is in it:
That is to say, The face of JESUS, the Sun of righteousness that shines in
the Gospel, when the beams of it strikes upon thy soul, they make it
lightsome and bright like the face of Jesus, they turn the soul in the shape
of the face of JESUS, that shines in the Gospel. Would ye have Scripture for
this? look the last verse of the chapter going before, We behold (says he)
as in a mirror, the glory of God with an open face. and are changed into the
same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. And this is
done in such a sort (O would to God we knew the power of the Gospel) that
thou, who had nothing but darkness within thee, art made a shining light,
casting out thy beams, and ouer-shadowing silly dark bodies. He that
brought light out of darkness (says Paul) by His word, He has shined in
mine heart, that I may minister the knowledge of Jesus Christ to others. So is
it most certain, thou in whom the Gospel is so powerful, art made a light
in the world, to illuminate dark souls.

Now to come to the next, the Gospel it self: How expresses he the Gospel?
He calls it not simply and barelie with a mean word, The Gospel, (all
these mean words, and silly simple speeches of such a glory, tells what
feeling men have in their hearts of the effectualnesse of the Gospel) but he
calls it, The light of the Gospel, The Gospel is a light, and it is the
light of lights. The Sun, albeit it be bright, was never comparable to it in
shining, and therefore it casts out such glorious beams in the souls of men
and women. What is the cause that it is a light? The cause is in the subject of
it. The subject of it is glory. What will make a light, if glory will not make
it? The Gospel, is the Gospel of glory, and all that is within it is glory.
What glory ^^ this? The glory of CHRIST the King of king^ his glory must be a
great glory: what kind of person is this Christ? He is ye Image of God. He
never rests mounting up till he come to that divinity. Lo how he rises: he
climbeth from the Gospel to the Mediator, and from ye Mediator to that glorious
Majesty. So all the glory that shines in ye Gospel, is ye glory of God, and
all the light of the Gospel, is that light of God which th'Apo. 1. Tim. 6. 16.
calls yt light which has none access, and never man had access to it, till
this Jesus brought it down, and without this light thou art but darkness, and
shall end in exterior and utter darkness. All the beams of the Sun are but
darkness in respect of it. The Sun is but a creature, this is the light
uncreated of the glorious GOD, the very essence of GOD, count of it as thou will. Now mark one thing of this: This man by his speech leads us to his
heart, what are words, if they want the heart? and if they have no life, what
are words to be respected, suppose thou speak a thousand years of light
and glory, if thou have neither light nor glory in thy soul. Certainly,
there are none that will look to these words, but they may see the man's heart
was replenished with this light and glory whereof he spoke. The face of JESUS
shyned on his soul, and so wonderfully he utters that conception, and
fullness of the heart, in such words as are marvelous. The heart of PAVLE was
full of light and glory. But I see little light in the hearts of men and
women, in respect of that light which was in his heart. And therefore,
Brethren, to speak the truth, because this Gospel, howbeit it has been
sounding in the ear these many years in this Land, yet it has not entered
into the hearts of men and women, it has been a sound in the ear, but not a
light in the soul, because thou have not suffered it to enter into thine
heart, and kept it there: therefore, the Lord is threatening to take it from
thine ear also: and so will be seen on EDINBVRGH one day. The eye is always
upon men, but thou look not to that poysonable heart of thine, that is
procuring ye away-taking of this Gospel out of thine ear, and except ye
descend into your own hearts, and search the emptiness of yt light in them,
it is not possible that it can remain. Can it be possible that this contempt
of the Gospel, that of her own nature is so effectual in the hearts of men,
can be borne with for ever? No, ye Lord will not suffer this contempt to be
unpunished. And therefore, the Lord appearantly has said* I will put away my
Gospel from this ungrateful people, whom it has not illuminated after so long
time. So ye yt have been long looking to instruments, look as long on your
own false hearts that are the cause of all. Yet, Brethren, notwithstanding of
all this contempt of ye Gospel, the Lord save me, and all them that I wish well
to, from this, to be an instrument of the withdrawing of it for yet it was
never seen that ye Lord used good men to be instruments in such a deed. Who is
it that is here sent to blind this world? who but the god of this world, the
Devil!? and therefore I give this watchword, Let no man preasse to be the
occasion of the away-taking of the Gospel.

Now I shall take up the next verse shortly, and so I shall end. In the next
verse the Apostle gives the reason wherefore they to whom the Gospel was
hidden, behooved to be they who were ordained for perdition, and whom the god
of this world has blinded. His reason is taken even from his sincerity in
preaching the Gospel, For (says he) we preach not our selves: Whom preach
I then? but JESUS CHRIST the LORD, and I preached Him to be the Lord in my
Gospel: and what preached I of my self? Our selves your servants for Christ
Jesus sake. For the Bridegromes cause I was a servant to the Bride, for His
cause who is the only Head and LORD of the Church, I was a servant to the
Church. Then of this reason mark this lesson: A man, whom the LORD raileth to
preach the Gospel, not to seek himself, nor his own advancement, nor
worldly riches, nor honor, but only to preach the Gospel in sincerity,
what effect will he have in his preaching? Strange effects will follow him:
if he save thee not, if he win thee not to God, if he minister not comfort
to thee by his Gospel, what will he do? I shall tell thee, He will put a
stamp upon thee, and thrust it into thine heart and conscience, testifying to
thee in the own time (for the conscience wakeneth not in all men at all times)
that thou wast not faithful, but a reprobate ordained to perdition from all
eternity, if thou gettest not repentance in time, and if the Gospel preached
by a sincere man has not fructified in thee, all his preaching is but a seal
to thee of thy damnation, and in the Great Day shall stand up and aggrege thy
judgment.

Mark another thing here: What is this that makes this man so bold? He will
denounce perdition, excecation, and blind-folding by the god of this world, (I
assure you, this is a bold speech to denounce damnation) but what makes him
so bold? Ye see it in a word, the conscience of his own sincerity, that in
his preaching he sought not himself, but the LORD his Master. There is the
lesson. A man whom the LORD will send (and the LORD as certainly will send
men to speak in sincerity his message, as ever he sent any Prophet in the
world, howbeit there be not an extraordinary calling now) A man, I say, whom
the LORD will send, he will denounce damnation to an obstinate and rebellious
people: and he will be bold to take thee, as it were, by the ear suppose
thou be a king, and lead thee to that Tribunal to hear the sentence of
damnation pronounced against thee. The LORD give me this sincerity, and then
I will not care for all the kings and all the men in the world: for the LORD
will give boldness to the man whom he raises in sincerity to cite kings
before that Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST.

Another thing I see in this Text: There is no lord, but the Lord JESUS, who
will tread down all the lords in the earth, and tread upon their necks at
his pleasure. And more I see, There is no Lady, nor Queen, but the Church,
the Spouse of JESUS CHRIST: As for Kings, Queens, Politickes in the earth,
all are but servants only, Kings servants, Queens servants, Pastors and
Ministers servants and nourishers of the Church of JESUS: The Apostles,
servants, ministering food to this glorious body of JESUS, and feeding it with
the sincere milk of the word. And that is it which the Apostle says in the
1. epis* to the Corin. chap. 3. verse. 22. speaking of himself, and others. All
is yours (says he) whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc. Even so,
all is yours, all are but servants to you, ye are Christ's, He is your Lord,
ye have none other lord, but Christ. The^ the Church must have a great
prerogative, jurisdiction, and liberty. She is a Queen, and if ever there was
in any country a jurisdiction and liberty, she has it given her of her
Spouse, the Lord JESUS. Then ye know what should follow: If she have a
liberty and jurisdiction, I will speak that which the Apostle speaks in the
second epist. to the Corin. chap. 13. verse. 10. God has not given me (says
Paul) power to your destruction, but all the power which GOD has given me is
to your edification. The GOD of Heaven gave never to any creature in Heaven
no^ earth, power to do against her, but all to maintain her in her liberty.
Then meddle not with her jurisdiction. Let none earthly power meddle with it,
and beware that no irruption be made within it. There was never Emperor nor
Monarch of this world, that made irruption within it, that ever wanne by it.
Therefore, let every soul beware to meddle with this liberty: for
certainly, that sword that shall be strocken at her, she shallding it back
again like the hammer off the stithie. Read the Ecclesiastical Histories, ye
shall see, that never man got the vpper-hand, that ever meddled with it. And
therefore, the LORD open men's eyes, and let them see this, that they may
reverence this glorious Spouse of JESUS CHRIST, as ever they would see that
glorious Face of CHRIST JESUS Her Head: To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, world without end: so be it.

THE NINTH SERMON.
II. COR. CHAP. X. Now, I Paul, my self, beseech you by the meekness and
gentleness of Christ, who when I am present amongst you, am base, but am bold
toward you, being absent.

And this I require you, that I need not to be bold when I am present with
that same confidence wherewith I think to be bold against some, who ecteeme
us as though we walked according to the flesh.

Nevertheless, though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after the
flesh.

(For the weapons of our warre-fare are not carnal, but mighty through God to
cast down Holds.)

Casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of CHRIST.


THESE Corinthians, unto whom the Apostle writes, being before founded and
grounded in the faith of JESUS CHRIST by this Ministry, yet afterward seduced
and led aside with false apostles, Orators ^ather than Teachers, who preached
the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST with humane affected eloquence, begin to disdain
the Apostle, who ^ounded and grounded them in that Faith of JESUS CHRIST, and
to account of him even as if he had not been sent, or had not been an Apostle
in very deed, but had only given himself out for an Apostle. Therefore, in
this present Text, the Apostle beseeches them to account of him (as he was
indeed) as the Apostle of Jesus Christ, and desires them so to esteem of him:
and so, taking occasion, he falls out in a very high description of his
Apostleship. And first he makes a request unto them, Now, I Paul, my self,
beseech you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ: Surely, if ye will
consider their deseruinges at the hands of the Apostle, they should have been
met more hardly, and sharper language should have been directed unto them: Yet
ye Apostle meets them gently, and directs to them a meek and gentle
request, I Paul, in mine own person, beseech you, and that for the meekness
and gentleness of Jesus Christ, if ever ye had any taste of that mercy and
meekness in Jesus Christ toward you, even for that meekness sake, and for
that mercies sake, obey me, do the thing which I bid you. So the Pastor has
his lesson first here: It is the part and duty of a Pastor, who has to do
with people, First at the entry to begin with meekness and lenity: yea,
amongst all the properties that is required in a faithful Pastor, this is not
the least to be endued with lenity and pity: Lenity, (I say) arising not
only of the consideration of the misery of men, with whom he has to do,
(for all people are miserable by nature, and all our preachinges are to a
company of miserable creatures, who, being miserable, has need of mercy,
and craves pity) but arising also of a sense and feeling of his own
wretchedness and misery. What? Is he not himself a miserable man by nature,
as well as any other person of the flock, man or woman? Then again, the
mercy and lenity of JESUS CHRIST which he has found towordes himself,
should move and raise up his lenity and pity toward his flock.

Therefore, Paul; being of mind to speak to these Corinthians, how be it he
had matter of sharpness and threatening offered unto him by them, yet the
mercy of Christ toward him, who was so miserable himself, until he got that
mercy, changes all sharpness to lenity* and turns his threatenings which
he might have used, in a pitiful request. Next the people likewise has their
lesson here For, as the lenity pity, and meekness of Jesus Christ should
move the Pastor to lenity toward y^ people, even so this same lenity and
meekness of our Lord Jesus should move the people to obey the gentle and
humble request of the Pastor. And he or she that ever has felt in heart, and
tasted the sweetness of the mercy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, will not so soon
hear of this lenity and mercy, for CHRIST'S mercies sake, or for His lenities
sake, but as soon they will be moved to obey the request. And they again, who
continue stubborn and disobedient, notwithstanding of a duetifull and lawful
request, I say (for my part) that stubborn hearted body never knew what
Christ meaned, never felt remission of sins through the blood of Jesus
Christ. They that will not do the thing which they should do for the mercies
sake of Christ, shall never taste of that mercy, nor of Jesus Christ.
Affuredlie, they serve for nothing but to be faggots for the fire of Hell: for
where mercy is not, there must be judgment.

Now in the latter part of the verse, he sets down a description of
himself, I Paul, who when I am present among you am base, but am bold
toward you being absent. This is one thing in effect with that which
follows afterward in the 10. verse of this chap. (for this dis-estimation of
himself, is from that light account and regard that they made of him, and of
the Gospel which he teached) For the Letters (says he) are sore and strong,
but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is of no value. He here
describes himself conform to their dis-estimation of him, for the mis-liking
is recent in his memory, yet his speech is meek to them. This matter would
have angered a good man, but Paul is so far from anger, that he breaks out
in a gentle and humble request. Whereupon I note, That the unthankfulness of
the world should not break our patience, or cause us forget that lenity
wherewith the Ambassador of Jesus Christ should be endued: for lenity is
bound to us, and we are bound to it, yea, although this world be never so
ungrate, yet we are bound to strive by long suffering to overcome in the end.
Secondly, think ye not but Paul should have thought shame to registrate (as it
were) his own shame to ye posterity to come, so that I may say, Paul, thou
wast of none estimation, and every one may see in how small acou^t he was
amongst these people. There is none of us all, if there be any infirmity in
us, but we would have it hidden: but a man having a good conscience, and
discharging a faithful part of duty, is nothing blotted by the speaking of
the world, nor the registrating of their speeches, is nothing to his shame: But
the shame pertains to the people: their words and deeds toward the Pastor
remains in his memory, and in the memory of God, and shall continue until
the day of Judgment; except they repent: yea, even these same words spoken
against Paul, shall meet them in the teeth at the day of Judgment.

Yet I see in these words a sharpness and rebuking mixed with lenity, to let
us see, that when we have to do with wicked men, lenity and meekness should
not be corrupted, but tempered with sharpness, that ungrateful men may be
brought to a sense and feeling of sin and misery. Lenity alone will not
serve the turn, but with sweetness sowrenesse must be mingled, that the word
spoken may be the more effectual and forcible, who when I am present among you
am base, etc. The world, and the men of this world account of nothing but of
that which has a fair show, and that they esteem highly of, although it were
never so little worthy: The ground whereof is this: All men and women by nature
are hypocrites, painted bodies, no soliditie in them, all are visorned folk:
he comes out, she comes out, all masked and disguised: For what is an
hypocrite, but a false show? Nothing surely: And therefore, because there is
no soliditie in themselves, they can account nothing of soliditie: as he is
himself, such is his estimation of others: as she is her self, such is her
estimation of others. O! would to God every man and woman could dis^en^^ into
themselves, and know their own nature.

Amongst all things in the world, this Ministry is the vilest, it is the
basest thing under the Sun to the eye of man. Other callinges will have some
outward glory, a king will have an outward glory, but this Ministry has none
outward glory: and yet there is no calling under the Sun that has so
precious a subject, as the calling of the Ministry: Yea the most solid
thing in the world is under it, eue^ that which makes men and women solid,
and without it no soliditie, but all is a^ chaf^e before the wind. The Apostle
(2. COR. 4. 7) compares JESUS CHRIST, and His graces, which are revealed in
the Gospel, to a treasure, and the Apostles themselves to lame vessels: But
we have (says he) this treasure in earthly vessels, that the excellency
of that power might be of GOD, and not of us. There the most glorious thing in
the world is in the basest vessels, and weakest instruments. What makes the
world to contemn and disdain this treasure of the Gospel, but the weakness
of these vessels, and the baseness of these silly men whom GOD has put into
this service? Indeed I marvel not, howbeit I see the contempt of this
Ministry, (and surely there is nothing more vilder in the ears of men of
SCOTLAND, than to hear the name of a Minister) but I wonder rather, that ever
man or woman should be altered by this Ministry: the one is of nature, the
other is of grace. Wonder never at nature, but wonder to see a man or woman
altered by grace. Alas! this is to be pitied, men lose their part of these
unsearchable riches in JESUS CHRIST, because they stumble at the ba^enesse of
this Ministry: For he that esteems not of this Ministry, never tasted of
the sweetness of JESUS CHRIST: he that esteems not of the lame vessel, has
no part of the riches which are in the lame vessel. In the words following,
But I am bold toward you, whilst I am absent. I see they were compelled to
see and feel some boldness in Paul, though not in his presence, yet in his
absence, though not by his words in speaking, yet by his writing. There is none
so senseless in the world, none so dead, none so hard hearted against the
power of this Ministry, but either by word or writing, either by absence, or
else by presence, they shall be compelled to feel the force of i^: Yea, this
Ministry shall either be the savor of life to life, or else the savor of
death to death unto them.

And this I require you, that I need not to be bold, etc. In this next verse we
have his request expressed in few words, which is as much in effect as if he
would say, Seeing I am the Apostle of Jesus Christ, I beseech you to acknowledge
of me as of an Apostle. The argument is, If ye count not of me, whilst I am
absent, when I come, if there be any power in me, I shall make you know it,
and utter it against you: ye shall find me bold, and not base: ye shall find
sowrnesse, and not meekness: sharpness, and not lenity. Here he tells by a
comparison, what kind of boldness he will use: When I come to you, I shall
use the same boldness toward you, that I use toward the false apostles:
and as concerning ye false apostles, I shall thunder out against them shame, and
confusion, and ignominy, so that they that cou^teth not of me, that I am the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, shall find my power*

We may see here. Paul would be counted by these Corinthians, to be the
Apostle of Jesus Christ: is he therefore seeking his own honor and glory?
No, he is seeking the weal of the people. It is the weal of the people to
count of the servant of GOD, for when they count not of him, they cannot
account nor accept of his doctrine: and when the doctrine is not well accepted
of, then goes the building slowly forward Alas! this evil esteeming of men
in the Ministry, is the cause that so few are edified, and so many to
remain faithless: for where the man is lightlied, the doctrine is contemned:
and where the doctrine is contemned, there can be no faith, no edifying: so
that it is a greater matter to contemn the Ministry, than men think it to
be.

Mark these words, That I need not to be bold* Here we see plainly, that
lenity and meekness is required in a Pastor: The Pastor is ever bound first
to begin with lenity and meekness, severity should only come upon
necessity, when lenity and meekness is contemned, and cannot serve. Read in
ye 1. epist. to the Cor. chap. 4. verse. 21. Take your cho^se, whether I shall
come to you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness: meaning,
that he would come in severity, if lenity would not serve. And 2. Cor. 13.
2. when he sees that they cannot be won with lenity, he changes his voice,
and says, If I come again, I shall not spare you: when I come again, I shall
terrify you with the power of God, because ye throw it out of me. I see
again, he is very sharp against these false Orators, he uses no lenity
toward them. Yet there is a discretion to be had betwixt the dealing with
false teachers, and with the people. There should be lenity used toward the
people: but what should be with a deceiving lowne, that begins to bring the
truth in slander? He must be handled with severity and rigor: no lenity
should be used toward these that crcepe in daily to bring the truth in
slander: Ye know their voices, Who made LVTHER a Minister? Who made CALVIN a
Minister? But they shall find it one day that LVTHER and CALVIN were
Ministers, and that there was a power in the word which LVTHER and CALVIN
teached: For this is true that PAVLE spoke, The LORD consumes them daily with
the word that comes out of the mouths of His Ministers, and shall consume
them daily, until the Day of the LORDS appearance.

In the third verse he falls out in a description of the manner of his
walking, Nevertheless, though we walk in the flesh, etc. Though we live in
the flesh, that is, in the infirmity of this common nature: for, to live in
the flesh here, is to live in the weakness of nature, yet we walk not, or
war not, according to the flesh: that is, our actions and doings in our
Apostleship are not fleshly and weak: Ye see the outward body is weak, but
measure not the inward man after the body and strength thereof: for, suppose
my body be weak, yet mine actions are strong. So he takes to him one thing,
and refuses another.

Now, Brethren, let every man that lives take gladly to him frailty and
weakness: and if men call thee weak, take it to thee: for he that will be
strong in himself, cannot be strong in GOD. In this same Epistle (Chap. 12.
verse 9.) The power of GOD (says he) is made perfect in mine infirmity. Of
all men in the world, a man whose calling is to be a Minister, should take
chiefelie upon him this frailty and weakness: yea, let him accept it more
redilie than it can be casten to him: and as he is frail and weak, so he
must feel his frailty and weakness, and the chiefest part of his preaching
should be of frailty: and that Minister that never felt his own misery,
cannot persuade the people that they are miserable, and bring them to an
acknowledging of it.

And herein appears the wisdom of GOD, who chooses not to this Ministry
those who have the greatest graces of nature, and natural gifts, but He
chooses out the weak ones, and contemptible bodies, that are amongst men, and
He sets them up to be Preachers to mankind, as He speaks in the first
Epistle to the CORINTHIANS, in the first Chapter, and the six and twenty
verse, Ye see, Brethren, your calling, how that not many wise men amongst
you according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but
GOD has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and
GOD has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty. So
the Lord chooses the ignoble and silly creatures, and sets them up above
kings, yea, and the greatest Monarchs of the world, to beat them down.

Mark again, as every man should willingly take to him this frailty and
weakness of nature, so let him refuse the other, that is to say, let him
refuse to walk according to the flesh: To walk according to the flesh, and to
war according to the flesh, is all one, (for the walking of a Christian is a
warrefare.) Hold back these fleshly actions, and namely, these actions of
sin: take to thee the weakness of nature, but cast off sin: For if thine
actions be altogether fleshly, be thou sure thou have no part of the power
of God, nor of the life of JESUS CHRIST: thou have but the life of a man, or of
a woman, and shall die like a man or a woman without the life of GOD. But above
all men in the world, let a Minister eschew these actions of the flesh, look
that his actions be powerful, and that the power of GOD appear in his
walking: so that when in outward appearance he is but a weak body, yet it
may be said of him, yt he is strong in Christ: For as weak as he is to look
to, yet he is a strong warrier, the Spirit is sensible in him, he speaks
not like a man only, there is another grace conuoying his words, than can
accompany the word of man. If thou be a Minister, although thou were never
so strong in body, if thou find not GODS power in thy life and doctrine, I
will not give one penny for thee: look that thou feel the power that Paul
felt, as ye read in the 2. Epist. to the Corin. chap. 4. verse. 16. when he
was dying in the body, then was the inner man quickest in him: and the more
the bodily life was away, the more the life of, GOD was manifest in him. A
Minister that has not the power of GOD within him, how can he preach of
CHRIST'S power, or of His life? how can he be a Minister of life, that has
no tasto of life himself? how can he preach of life, that never felt life? of
necessity, he must be a shameless man, that will speak of Christ, of His
mercy, life, and power, when in the mean time he knows not what the
mercy, life, and power of Christ means: that man was never called of God to
be a Minister, all that he speaks is like the babbling of a Parockquet, the
power of God does the deed: and therefore, God chooses the weak instruments,
that the world may see, that it is only His grace, and not the gifts of the
men that does the turn. He calls it not his walking, but warring and
fighting. The life of a Minister is but a warre-fare: and he who would be a
Minister, should make him for warre-fare, make him for pain and labor,
otherwise, let him never strive for that calling: Yea, there is nothing so
laborious or painful, but the life of a Minister is compared unto it. We
never read in the Scriptures where it is compared to any thing that imports
easiness or idleness. 1. CORIN. 9. 26. The Minister is compared to a Warrier,
then to a runner, running with all his maine speed, striving to come to the
mark, never looking over his shoulder to this or that thing, as many will
do* saying, I have done this turn, or that turn. No, when thou have done all
thou can do, say, thou have done nothing. Then he is compared to a
wrastler, and to an husbandman, that holds the plough from morning till
evening. In all these comparisons of the Scriptures, the figure is not so great
as the thing figurate: when an heavenly thing is compared with a worldly
thing, the worldly thing is nothing in respect of the heavenly thing. And
therefore, there is no man comparable to the Minister in labor, the warrier,
the runner, the plowman, is nothing to him.

The Apostle writing to Timothy, says in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. verse.
5. If thou fight not, thou shall never attain to the crown: and why should
thou lose so fair a crown for a momentes fighting? No man (says he) is
crowned* except he fight faithfully. And 2. Timoth. 4. 8. There is a crown
of righteousness laid up* not only for me, but for all those that love the
bright coming of the LORD JESUS. When Paul was an old man, and leaving this
world, I have ended (says he) my warrefare, and I have foghten a good
fight, and therefore I look for that crown. If he had never been a runner,
he would never have taken this promise to himself, A crown is laid up for
me: And therefore, the LORD give us grace to labor for a while, that we may
rest from our labor in the life to come.

In the next verse he proves that his warring and fighting in this world
was not according to the flesh, taking the argument from the weapons and armor
wherewith he fought, such as the armor is such shall the warring be, if the
armor be weak* the fight shall be weak: if the armor be strong, the fight
shall be strong. Our armor (says the Apostle) is not fleshly, our weapons
are not of flesh nor frail matter, but our weapons are strong through GOD, the
power of GOD is in them, GOD is in the word which we speak, He sets
down the end, To beat down strong holds: This power will beat them down,
nothing will gaine-stand it.

Brethren, ye see by experience, put a rasour into a childs hand, it will
cut: this cutting comes not of the strge^th of the child's hand, but of the
sharpnes of y^ rasour. Take a gun, and put it into a child's hand, he will slay
a man, or shoot through a wooden door: this is not by the strength of the
child, but by the strength of the armor. Even so, GOD by His word in the
mouth of the silliest and weakest body in the world* will slaye* and kill the
strongest man that goes upon earth, if He put His word and it were but in a
blabbering mouth as He did in Moses, that word shall come and pierce in through
flesh and bone, till it come to the mergh, and shall divide asunder the soul
and the Spirit, Hebr. 4. 12. It is not the man that does this, but the weapon,
the word that is in his mouth. The multitude of this world; is beguiled, if
they see a poor man set up, they will measure ye grace of God by the man, and
they think the inward man be as weak as the outward: and so Kings and
Princes are beaten down this way, and slain, Earls fall down slain, men
and women of all ranks fall down slain, as sure as ever ye saw a man slain
in the body.

Ye remember the History of Samuel, 1. Sam. 15. 32. he calls for king Agag,
and as soon as Agag comes forward, and had eschewed the fury of the young
king, thought that he should eschew the sword of the aged man also: but Samuel
calls for the sword, takes it in his hand, and cutteth him in pieces: So
this word, in the mouth of weak bodies, slays Kings and Queens in the
world, when they are laughing and playing they are slain without their
expectation.

Yet in this same verse mark the force of this armor, Ye hear not of the
building, but of the throwing down. It is true, he builds up also, but thou
must first be brought down and humbled, and then be builded up upon a new
ground. What is he that will build a new work upon an old rotten wall? thou
would keep nature and sin, and yet be a new creature: no, thou must first
renounce nature: for the slaughter of the old man must go before the quickening
of the new man.

In the verse following, having spoken of the weapens, he comes to the
warrefare, and here is a stranger battle than ever was foghten, We throw
down (says he) the imaginations, and every high thing, etc. There is a
battle, and a strange battle: Paul is the fighter of this battle* the
warrior of the Lord Jesus, a warrier to Him, to win prisoners to Him, to take
Kings and Princes by the cares, and lead them to Christ. That thing that is
assaulted in this battle, and against which Paul has taken armor, is first
the cogitations. By these cogitations is meaned the whole faculties of the
soul, for the principal function is the reason of man. Now what is she
doing, but sitting in her Castle, building her rampires, and casting her
fowsies about her, and snaring her self in her own net? And let thee be
thou need none other to trappe thee, thou will trappe thy self, take thou
as much pride in thine own engine as thou will, if thou have no more* woe is
thee: It shall fetter thee, and take thee in the grinne, as surely as ever
thou saw a bird caught in the net of a fowler. The next thing that Paul
assaulteth in this battle, is every high thing that is exalted against GOD:
this I take to be the pride of the heart, which as an high mountain, rising
up as it were to the heaven, exalts it self against GOD, and holds out
GOD, and the light of GOD. These then are the things which Paul assaulteth
Now to come to the battle, the first thing that Paul does, he wealdes his
weapons so skilfullie, that first of all he beats down all the imaginations
and reasonings of the mind, which are as rampieres and fowsies wherewith she
circuiteth her self to hold out GOD and His light. Next, he assaulteth the
pride of the heart, which as a mountain exalted it self against GOD, he
beats it down, and makes it equal with the ground. Thirdly, having beaten
down all, he comes and takes the thief by the neck, and leads him by
the hair captive to JESUS CHRIST, not to himself, that he should be king
over her: No. JESUS CHRIST is the King over the soul, as the Apostle in the
second epist* to the Corinth. chap. 11. verse. 2. voweth the Church of GOD not
to himself, but to her Spouse, to the end that she may be safe, and GOD
glorified. The man that seeks his own gain, is but an hyreling. There are
three actions here, whereof the first two are none other thing* but the
destroying of the sin that is in the mind and in the heart. The third is the
saving of man, by leading him captive to Jesus Christ, for the leading of a man
captive to Jesus Christ, is his safety, and the liberty of the soul is this
captivity, and the slavery of the soul is liberty to sin. When ye were
slaves to sin (says the Apostle Paul in the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans, the twenty verse) then ye were free from righteousness. Mark
here a wonderful power of God in this base and silly Ministry, (O! would
to GOD men could know this power) destroying the deceit of reason, and
beating down the pride of the heart of man, mounting up against GOD. Alas, so
great is the power of sin, that it has no match under heaven but this
Ministry. I will tell it over again, There is nothing to throw this power
down but this Ministry. When this Ministry was not in the world amongst
the Gentiles (of the which SCOTLAND was one part, for our Progenitors were
Gentiles without GOD in the world) sin reigned to death: ( Roman. 5. 21)
Multitudes of Gentiles perished: but from the time that Jesus Christ, the
author of grace, came into the world, and brought with Him this Ministry,
first He himself, thereafter His Apostles, amongst whom Paul was as painful
as any man) made it manifest how powerful this Ministry was by demolishing
the kingdom of sin, for then grace began to reign, and the power of GOD
was manifested.

Brethren, I dare affirm the only thing that holds down the power of sin
is this silly base Ministry, take it away, (for men would feign have it away)
and shoot it to the door, (and for ought that I can s^^, I think it shall
go away) sin shall come to an hight. Take away the thing that holds down
the head of sin, and it shall reign. Then, O miserable Scotland! here I
denounce shame and ignominy shall come to thee, shame and confusion to King
and Court, Land and Burgh, if this candlestick be removed. This shall be found
by experience, if ever thing was true. And thou that would ^un to damnation,
have the remoouing of it, that thou may haste^ thine own damnation. Now the
last thing I see is the proper effect of this Ministry of the blessed God (and
would to God the world could see the glory of it*) the proper effect is not
to slay men, but to save them. This world thinks that we are come to slaye
them: No, we are come to slay sin in you, that will slay you, if it be not
slain. Paul (in the 1. epist* to the Cor. chap. 3. verse. 12. and 13.)
compares the Ministry to a burning fire, that burns up hay, stubble, and
trees: even so it burns up thy sin, and the dross of thy nature* and^^l
the vanities of thine heart, but saves thy selse. How is this that the world
cannot abide the mean of their salvation? they cannot get rest neither night
nor day, till they get away the thing that saves them. Now it saves the man,
by taking him, and leading him captive under the King of glory. Ye see they
that are superiors in the battle, when they say to any man. Be taken, if
he will not be taken, they will slay him there: Even so as truly, i^ thou will be stubburne, and wilt not be taken in this field, this word shall slay
thee. Therefore, blessed are they that can suffer the ordinance of GOD, and
stand still until sin be slain, and they themselves be led captives
under Christ, for that captivity under Him is true freedom. To that immortal
and everlasting King, be all honor and glory, for evermore,

Amen.
THE TENTH SERMON.
PHILIPPIANS, CHAP. I. What then? yet CHRIST is preached all manner of ways,
whether it be under a pretense, or sincerely: and I therein joye, and will
joye:

For I know, that this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers, and
by the help of the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST.

As I heartily look for, and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but
that with all confidence, as always, so now CHRIST shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or by death:

For CHRIST is to me both in life and in death advantage.

22. And whether to live in the flesh were profitable for me, and what to
choose I know not:

For I am greatly in doubt on both sides, desiring to be loosed, and to be
with CHRIST, which is best of all.

Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

And this I am sure of, that I shall abide, and with you all continue, for your
furtherance, and joye of your faith:

That ye may more abundantly rejoice in JESUS CHRIST for me, by my coming
to you again.


PAVL lying in bands at ROME, there rises up two sorts of Preachers: The
first sort of them that preached sincerely, that GOD and His glory might be
advanced. The second sort of them that preached not sincerely, not for the
advancement of Christ nor His Gospel, but to add afflictions to Paul bands,
moved with ambition and envy toward him.

In the first verse which we have read in your audience, Paul utters his
mind concerning these two sorts of Preachers, and this is his mind in effect,
Let them (says he) preach as they will preach, let them preach of sincerity
for the glory of Christ, let them preach for the fashion: howeuer they preach,
(preaching the truth of God) CHRIST is preached, even by them who preaches
not sincerely. And therefore, because Christ is preached, I rejoice
notwithstanding of all that injury which I receive by their preaching: I
rejoice and will rejoice, and no man will be able to take my joye from me.
Shortly then, there is Paul's mind concerning these two sorts.

My doctrine shall be general: And the first thing that I mark here is
this, (and any of you may see it) The Lord is glorified, Christ is magnified,
even by a counterfeite doing of men, when they do the thing that is good: yet
not in sincerity, nor of purpose to glorify GOD in their doing. But their
purpose not being to glorify God in their doing, (they not doing sincerely)
howbeit He gets His own glory by their doing, yet they shall get little
thanks. It is not so much the turn it self, the action it self, preaching,
or whatsoever it be, that procures to a man thanks and grace at the hands of
God, as it is the purpose and intention in doing. I had rather do the soberest
thing in the world, and if it were (...) eat my meat, and drink my drink,
of purpose to glorify God in my doing, than to do the greatest and fairest
work that can be seen to the eye of man, without purpose to glorify God in
that doing. Mark it: Whether ye eat, whether ye drink, or whatsoever ye do,
little or much, do all to the glory of God, says Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 31. And
therefore, Brethren, there is nothing that a man should so much look to in his
doings and actions, as to his purpose, and to the intention of his heart.
Look thou as thou will, the Lord looks chiefelie to every man's intention
and purpose. He that preaches, what is to be respected with what measure of
grace he preach, if in preaching his intention be to glorify God and Christ:
whatsoever any man or woman does, let them look above all things, that in
doing their intention be to glorify God, as ever they would look for thanks
at His hands. This is a lesson. I see here another thing. The Gospel is
advanced, JESUS CHRIST is glorified in Paul's hurt, and who is a dearer man to
Christ, than `Paul? The lesson then is this. We see the Lord is glorified,
when those whom He loves best, is damnified in this world, in their hurt and
damage He gets His glory: that thing which is done against them in malice,
the Lord therein is glorified.

Well then, I learn by the example of Paul, If so be that my GOD is
glorified in mine hurt, if He gets advantage by my damnage and skathe: then
understanding that glory redoundeth unto Him by my suffering, and it were by
my death, I am bound to rejoice I rejoice, (says the Apostle) and shall
rejoice: I am bound to rejoice, and thou art bound to rejoice still in
glorifying God to the end. So above all things, the glory of Christ should be
sought. What am I to be respected, and my shame, hurt and death? what art thou
to be respected thy shame, hurt and death? if it redound to ye glory of Him who
made me and thee for His glory?

Now, when he has showed his joye and mind concerning these two sorts of men,
in the next verse he comes to the cause of his joye in that the LORD was
glorified in his hurt and damage. For (says he) I know that this shall
turn to my salvation, etc. That thing that is done to mine hurt, it shall be
so changed and turned about, that, against the expectation of men who would
hurt me, the LORD shall work out my salvation. There is the lesson. If I can
rejoice, and thou can rejoice, that the LORD gets glory by thine or mine
hurt or skathe, we may be assured, that our trouble shall be wonderfully
altered and changed: that which was done to our hurt, shall turn to our
salvation. The Apostle Paul says, (in the 8. chapter of the epistle to the
Romans, verse 28.) To them who loves God, all things comes for the best:
For if the glory of GOD be dear to thee, if thou prefer His glory above
thy salvation, be assured thy life and salvation shall be dear unto Him: yea,
thy salvation shall be dearer unto Him, than His glory can be unto thee: for
thou can not love Him so well as He loves thee. Moses ( Exodus 32. 32.)
utters a wonderful zeal to GODS glory, and says, Ere Thou destroy this
people, raze me out of the book of Life: that is, altogether destroy me.
But what answer gets he? No Moses, I had rather raze them out of my book who
have sinned against me. Paul desires that he may be an Anathema, Romans 9. 3.
and that for the zeal he had to the glory of God. But Mose, shall never be
scraped out of the book of God, because he loves Gods glory: Paul shall
never be accursed, because he loves Gods glory. And if thou will look to
His glory, all that evil which thou can wish to thee for His glory, shall
be turned to thine health and salvation. Then ye see there is nothing that we
can lose by seeking of Gods glory. Our damnage shall be ever turned to our
advantage.

In the next part of the verse, and the verse following, is set down the
manner, and the ordinary manes whereby the hurt and damage that the godly
suffer for the glory of God, is turned over to their good: The Lord only is
able to turn it to their good. Who is able to turn darkness into light?
death into life? ignominy into honor, but He? It passes the cunning of all
the creatures to make this wonderful change: The Lord only is able to make
this change. And certainly, the shame, trouble, and affliction, that the
godly suffer in this life, would all be the beginning of Hell, except that
most skillful crafts-man, the Lord, come in, and made this wonderful
alteration, and turned all these things to their advantage, except He turned
death to life, ignominy to honor, and trouble to joye, the estate of the
godly in their sufferinges were most miserable. Think not that these things
are good in themselves: No, death is not good of it self, it is a punishment
for sin, Romans 6. 23. The Lord only makes the change, and makes death to
be the entry to life: but the Lord does all this by ordinary means and
middle: and yet all the means which He uses, derogateth nothing to His
glory, because they all come of Him, and He has the glory of all. Seeing
then, in making of this wonderful change of darkness into light, of death
into life, of woe into joye etc. there must be ordinary means: woe be to
thee that contemnest the means, for if thou do it, the trouble shall lie
still on thee till thou be troubled in Hell: Sickness shall be sickness
indeed to thee, death shall be death indeed, and the beginning of Hell to
thee.

Then let us take up the means, as they lie here in order. Ye have heard of
one already, to wit, Rejoicing that God is glorified in trouble. If (as I have
said) thou can have that heart and care of His glory, that thou can
rejoice in thy trouble, that thy trouble glorifieth Him, be assured a
wonderful alteration shall be made of thy trouble: Trouble shall be no
trouble, affliction shall be no affliction, death shall be no death: Only
get thou this desire of His glory.

Now follows the next mean: The Apostle says, I am assured, that this
thing shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers. As the care to the
glory of God is a mean to make this alteration; and to turn our troubles to
our salvation: so the care and solicity of the body of the Church, the
intercession and prayer that the godly makes for us, who lie in trouble, is
another mean: for the prayers of the godly for any member of the body of
the Church has a wonderful effect. They will turn misery into joye,
darkness into light, yea death into life. Yet howbeit others have care of
thee, lying in distress, if thou thy self contemnest and despisest their
care, if thou regardest not whether they pray for thee or not, and no body make
intercession at GODS hands for thee, there shall be nothing but trouble to
thee: trouble shall always continue trouble: affliction shall always remain
affliction. And as thou contemnest and despisest the prayers of the Saints
and the godly for thee, so thou shall lie still in misery and drown in
misery at last. It is a folly to a man to think, that his own care only
for himself will serve the turn, contemning and despising the care of all
others for him: I cannot think that such a one has one spunke of godliness
in him, who will contemn the care of others: For it is certain, the
sufficiency of grace is not given to one man, or to one woman only, but to
the whole members of the body. And therefore, there must be a concurrance of
the whole, all must concur for thy good and salvation: for if the hand will
stand up and say to the eye, to the mouth, to the foot, or to the rest of the
members, Care for your selves: foot, care for thy self: womb, care for thy
self, etc. I will care for my self: were not this a foolish hand? would not
this hand perish and wither? yea, it would perish if the mouth fed it not,
if the foot carried it not, if the womb received not sustenance to nourish it:
Even so if thou say to the rest of the members of the Church, Care for your
selves, I will care for my self, thou shall die like a dry member, and be cut
off: no salvation but in the union of that blessed body of CHRIST, which is
the Church. And none yet ever came to Heaven, but by a certain concurrance of
the rest of the members of the Body, by praying by preaching, by admonishing
exhorting, and rebuking If thou refuse this concurrance in teaching,
admonishing, and comforting thee, thou shall never get Heaven. Paul (in the 8.
chap. to the Romans, verse. 28.) says, We know that all things work
together for the best, to them that love GOD. Mark the force of the words. If
there be not a working-together for thy salvation, thou shall not come to
Heaven. There are two of the means whereby trouble and damnage is turned to
salvation. Yet there are more of them, for he says, And by the help of the
Spirit of JESUS CHRIST. There is another mean. As it is a fault to one member
to refuse the help of the rest of the members of the body of the Church, their
prayers and intercession: so it is as great a fault, to lean so upon the care
of any of the members of the body, of the Church, or of the Ministry, in
preaching, praying exhorting, and comforting, that in the mean time thou have
no care of thy self, to get the spirit and life within thee, for Christ's
Spirit is thy life: thou will not pray for thy self, but wilt bid the Church
and Ministry pray for thee, as if that were enough. No, except that Spirit
be within thee, (which is the Spirit of Adoption) to make intercession with
sighs unspeakable at the hands of God: down shall thou go, albeit that the
Church and whole members thereof would please to hold thee up. What if the
hand had no motion, life, nor strength in it self, would the foot and the eye
be able to hold it up? No, if the foot and the eye strive to hold it up,
they should rotte with the hand, and behooved to be cut of: For whereto serves
a rotten member? It will infect the whole body, if it be not cut off. So if
thou be without spirit and life within thy self, how beit all the rest of
the members of the body of the Church would hold their hands about thee to
hold thee up, thou shall fall down and die. So as ye would have others caring
for you, care for your self, and see that ye have the Spirit of God caring
for you. If Moses, Abraham, and all other faithful men would pray for you,
it is nothing. What good did Samuels prayers for Saul? The Lord stopped his
mouth, and forbad him to pray for him. Thus ye have heard of three means
whereby this wonderful change is made: The first is the care of God and His
glory: The second is the intercession of the rest of the members of the body:
the third is the Spirit of Christ interceading for us, and the care which we
have of our selves. We have need of these means. And certainly the day is
approaching, that experience will tell the truth of these things. Paul, a man
ever afflicted, in trouble and under danger, tells of his own experience
what he found. But are there yet any more means? Look the verse that
follows, As I (says he) heartily look for, and hope, etc. The word
imports such an hope, as when a man has his head raised up, his eyes open
and bent, awayting for any thing attentively. We see when a man looks
earnestly for any other, his head will be lifted up, his eyes will be bent,
looking to that place where from he should come: and if he love him well, he
will look attentively, having both heart and eyes bended up, with hope of his
coming. The like word in the 8. chap. to the Romans verse. 19. is ascribed to
the creatures: They awaite with fervent desire, when the son of God shall be
revealed.

I shall make the words more plain: I hope, according to mine attentive
exspectation, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: that is, that I shall never
think shame of my Master Jesus Christ: because, that if I think shame for
any thing which I suffer for His cause, I think shame of Himself. He says,
that in nothing I shall be ashamed: There is the negative: I will be ashamed
of nothing. But what more? With all boldness of spirit I shall magnify Him
in my body, not in my soul only, but in my body also: and that, Whether it
be in my life, or in my death. He casts in the argument of this assurance,
as in all times bygone, ever to this hour, I have magnified Him in my body.
So this bygone experience (would he say) makes me to be assured by hope,
never to be ashamed of Him, but to glorify Him in life and death. Then take up
the lesson. Amongst the rest of the mean s whereby this change is made, of
misery to felicity, of death to life, and all things are made to serve to
our salvation. Hope is one, and it is the fourth in number. Wherein stands
this Hope? That in no affliction which I suffer for Christ's sake I will be
ashamed, and so shame the Lord. (For in suffering if thou bl^shest, and
think shame, thou shamest Him) But by the contrary, in all things that I
shall do or suffer in this body, I shall do with courage, confidence, and
liberty: I shall suffer with courage, confidence, and liberty. And so, in
doing, in suffering in the body* I shall magnify my LORD. So this is the
point: If I glorify Him before men with courage and boldness in mine
afflictions, I may be assured, He shall glorify me before His Father in
Heaven, Mat. 10. 32. They that suffer with Him, shall reign with Him, 2.
Timoth. 2. 12. But by the contrary, if thou with blushing think shame of Him
and of His Gospel, and of the afflictions of the Gospel, if thou shame Him
before the world, He shall shame thee before His Father, Mark. 8. 38. So this
Hope is no small matter, for if thou have an assured Hope during thy whole
life* thou shall magnify Christ, whatsoever falls out in life or death,
assure thy self all shall be turned to the glory of God, and thy salvation.
All the troubles that shall be laid upon thee in this world, shall be so
turned over, that they shall serve to thy good and consolation. But if this
hope be away, if thou lie sluggishly, not having thine head raised up, with
closed eyes, not looking and hoping that thou shall glorify thy Lord, not
caring for His glory, either in thy life, or in thy death, all thy misery
that lights upon thee, shall remain misery, and shall press thee down to
everlasting damnation. Look then how precious this hope is? Learn another
thing here. There stands much in these two, in shame and blushing, in
confidence, liberty, and courage: I say to thee, there stands more in the
conseque^ts of suffering and doing, than stands in the suffering and doing it
self. I suppose thou suffer the death for Christ's sake, if thou be ashamed
in suffering, and have not liberty and courage, thou suffer not so much for
CHRIST, as for thy self: and thy death is nothing else, but a death to thee,
and thy suffering is nothing, but a suffering to thy self. Even so, do what
thou will do to glorify Him, if it be not done with liberty, freedom, and
courage, thou losest thy travel. Seeing then, that so much stands in the
disposition of the heart, let every man look that he prepare himself with
courage and confidence against the day of trial, that with confidence in
suffering he may magnify God: Paul says to Timothy, in his 2. epist. chap.
1. verse. 8. Be not ashamed of Christ, nor of me, that am His captive. Think
shame of none that suffer for Christ, but rather be thou partaker of that
affliction, to suffer with courage and confidence those things with them.

Yet mark another thing here: he says, that he might magnify Christ in his
body: He speaks not of the soul. And so I obseru; that of the very body.
(let be of the soul) even of the very bodily mass which thou bear about
with thee, a great duty is required for the glorifying of God and His Christ.
When thou art living in thine actions, when thou art dying in thy death, it
must be an instrument glorifying God, when thou art going upon thy feet, it
must be an instrument of His glory: when thou art lying in thy bed, yea,
the Lord must be glorified in it, when it is dissolved into ashes in the
grave. I mark this against that vain conceit of men, who will say, What
care I, so I keep a good mind to God, let me prostitute my body to
harlotrie, gluttony, and all vices, yet I will keep my soul to God. No,
either God will have all, or the Devil will have all. Away thou idolater, who
wilt keep thy soul to GOD, and wilt bow thy knee to Baal, the Devil will
get both soul and body. Paul says not, that the Lord has only bought thy
soul with a price, but that He has bought both soul and body, that they
should glorify God, 1. Corin. 6. 20, ^ee are bought with a price, ye are not
your own. Fie, filthy body, that wilt say, May I not do with my body as I
please? Have thou power to reaue it out of the hands of the Lord? The Lord
has the power of thy body, and in that last day thou shall be challenged with
theft and sacrilege. And when he has said, ye are bought with a price, he
subjoyneth, Glorify God not in your spirit only, but also in your bodies:
Either He will have both, or else none: Think thou to send thy soul to
God, and thy body to the Devil? No, either the Lord shall get both, or both
shall go to Hell. Take heed how ye keep these bodies, ye shall render account
of them: Thy body should be the Temple of the holy Spirit, if thou defile the
seat of that holy One, shame shall light upon thee. I mark here: To assure
himself of continuance, that he shall continue in glorifying God in life and
death, he takes an argument from his former experience, Ever hitherto I have
glorified God in my body, and I have a steadfast hope, that I shall continue and
that all the actions of my body shall glorify Him: and when I am dead, He
shall be glorified in my body.

It is good then, to begin well, and to have experience, that thou have served
GOD well in thy calling: for experience brings hope, and hope makes thee no
ways ashamed, Romans 5. 4. 5. And if thou have experience that thou have served
GOD, and He has been with thee, and kept thy body in purity, thou may
be assured to continue to the end: Not that our continuance stands in our
self, (no our continuance stands not in our selves, for the best man that
lives is not able of himself to stand one moment) but out standing is in God,
for if He would take His grace from us, in one moment, we would fall. It is
the love that He bears to us that holds us up: be once assured of that love
of GOD toward thee, and then thou may be assured, that thou shall
glorify God both in life and death.

Now in the next verse he says. For Christ is to me both in life and death
advantage: He gives a reason wherefore he said he would magnify God in
his body, both in life and death: The reason is, because of the advantage he
has of Him, CHRIST JESUS is advantage to him. And when? Not when I live
only, (says he) but in my death also. Is it not good reason that I should
glorify Him both in life and death, in whom I have advantage both in life and
death? All men do for advantage. When a man has done and suffered, he would
have advantage. When we honor the Prince, or any man, all is for advantage.
If gain moves to honor men, to serve them, where was there ever such a
gain and advantage as may be looked for at the hands of CHRIST? If gain
will move thee, where will thou get it, if not in CHRIST? Would thou have
gain and advantage for thy doing in thy lifetime? He will give thee it. Thou
shall not do one deed, but thou shall have thine hire in thine hand. Would
thou have gain in thy death? if thou die for Him, thou shall get as fair an
advantage as ever man got. Indeed, a man will give thee gain for honoring
him in thy lifetime, but when thou art lying in thy deathbedde, can thou get
advantage out of the hand of a man? Suppose a Monarch would give thee a
kingdom, what advantage is it to thee, if thou live not to brook it? But I
tell you plainly, The LORD is greater advantage to us in death, than in life:
and all this advantage which we have of Him in this life, is nothing in
respect of that advantage which we shall get in the life to come. Paul (in the
third chapter of the Epistle to the Philippians) when he has counted al his
advantages, and numbered out all the prerogatives which he had in this world,
That he was a Jew, a Pharisee, his father a Pharisee, of the Tribe of
Ben-jamin, none so zealous of the Law as he, etc. many advantages and great
prerogatives: but after that he once comes to CHRIST, and gets Him, he
says, All is but dung, in respect of that excellent knowledge, of that
advantage of JESUS CHRIST. As I counted much (would he say) of these earthly
advantages before I knew Christ, even so, after that ^ once had gotten a sight
of Him, I counted them nothing but dirt and dung. And therefore, he tells
out the advantages and gains that he found in Christ. That (says he) I may
be found in Him: that is, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness
which is of God through faith. There is the first advantage, Thou art justified
before the Tribunal of GOD. What king can give thee that advantage, to set
thee up as a freeman before the Tribunal of God? And albeit thou had gotten
all the advantages that kings can give thee, if thou gettest not this advantage
to stand before that Tribunal, clothed with Christ, thou shall go to
damnation. Then he adds to another advantage, That I may know Him, and the
virtue of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His afflictions, and be made
conformable unto His death, if by any means I might attain to the
resurrection of the dead. There is the second advantage: thou art made like
unto Him in holiness, and both in suffering and in glory, thou art comformed
unto Him. Well is ye man that can get this advantage, to be glorified. What are
all adua^tages to be counted of that can come to thee in this life, in respect
of this advantage? that when thou art lying (a vilde body) in the grave,
Christ shall take thee up, and set thee in that glory which is prepared for the
sons of GOD. Alas! if men could see the advantages which are in CHRIST: For
all fails for fault of sight: If men got but one blink of CHRIST, they would
not give that sight for all the kingdoms in the earth: We want spiritual
eyes and senses. These spiritual advantages in CHRIST, are seen only with a
spiritual eye: and for fault of that spiritual sight, we see not the
advantages which are in Him. There is nothing which we should more desire,
than these spiritual senses, wherewith we may get a sight and fore-taste of
these things which are in JESUS CHRIST.

Now, in the next verse, taking occasion of the words, that CHRIST was
advantage to him both in life and death, he begins to doubt, whether it
were better for him to live or die And whether (says he) to live in the
flesh were profitable for me, or what to choose, I know not: I think I
would be dead, to see mine advantage which I will get in death: for my gain,
which I get living, is nothing to that advantage which I will get in death: But
I am straited, whether to live in the flesh, or to go out of the body. Then
he brings in the reason, It is better for me to be loosed, and to be with
CHRIST: I will be at Him, (yet he says, I am in doubt, and not resolved.)
Nevertheless, to remain in the flesh, is more needful for you: For albeit
it be better for me to be dead, yet when I look to you, it is worse for you.
After this doubting and reasoning, he concludes, I will live then, and the
LORD will keep me for your weal.

Then, Brethren, I will mark here one or two things, and so I shall end.
Ye see a doubting in PAVL, whether he should live or die, which distracteth
his mind. This doubting is common to many: For sometimes we would live, and
other whiles we would be dead. But look to the cause that distracted PAVLES
mind, and made him to doubt, whether he should desire to live or die. Some
men would die, because there is nothing in this world but misery: Some men
would die for other causes, because of sickness, some because of shame
following some offense, for the life is tedious to a miserable body, the life
which should be comfortable, is tedious in distress.

But how many comes to this point, To desire to be dissolved for the
glory that is with JESUS, and says. If I were away, I would get this
advantage of glory? Who would be away for the glory of Heaven, and
advantage that is laid up there? It is a rare grace to get this desire. No
question (think as ye will) infinite joy, glory, and passing advantage is in
Heaven.

Again, some men would live, wherefore? because they are fresh, green, and
able men: they would pass their time yet: Some men would live* because they
have wife and children, and would care for them, (I condemn not lawful care)
but all this desire is vain. Where will thou get that man, that would live to
help the poor Church of CHRIST with his labor? How many will come on with
this, to live only for the weal of the Church of CHRIST? I desire such a
Pastor who is minded to live for the care yt he has to lead many by the hand
to Heaven, ere he go away, that he may win many souls to CHRIST, that he
may be the welcomer when he comes there himself: He is happy. It is the
sight of that Heavenly glory, that makes men to have this foresaid desire.
How many sees that Heavenly glory? Fie on us, seeing such a glory laid
up in Heaven for us, that yet will not make a mean to get it: we perish for
fault of sense: There is ^o lack of advantage in CHRIST, but the lack is in
me, and in thee, I have no desire of that glory, thou have no desire of that
glory, and so we perish. Therefore, get this sense of glory in time, or
else thy soul shall be drawn out of thy body. Do accordingly. Would
thou have it sweetly loosed? Then get in time a sense of this glory. Would
thou have it pulled out by force? The^ neglect the sense and sight of this
glory.

Observe another thing of the care of Paul. He counted nothing of all these
afflictions, in respect of the care which he had of the Church of God. I wonder
at this care of his, considering now our carelessness: For if ever care was
dead out of the hearts of men, it is now dead. Farewell the care of the Church
of God in Scotland, for fault of ye zeal of Gods glory, and the care of the
Church of God. I see this Land, and the Church of GOD therein, decaying. Learn
another thing of PAVLES resolution. Yet he resolves to live and that for the
weal of the Church of Christ. Mark it. There is none of us, but we should
desire to have the fruition of the glory and joye that is in the face of Jesus:
yet we, who may profit in the Church of God in this life, are bound to desire
to live for a while, that the Church may be helped. The Lord accounts more
highly of this desire, than of a desire that a man has to die, and to be with
Jesus. The Lord accounted more of PAVLES living, to help the Church, than of
his glorifying Him in his death. Think ye that PAVL would have lived so
long, except the Lord had seen him profitable to His Church? And no question,
ye Lord Jesus (knowing the misery of this earth) would have taken up His
Apostles at His ascension with Him, if He had not loved the weal of His
Church. There is no good body, but the Lord would have them with Him: yet He
lets them remain here in pain, that they may help the Church, otherwise
there would not be a good body left living in SCOTLAND, He would take them all
away, and glorify them. But so long as He has a Church in SCOTLAND, He will
let good men continue, but when He takes them away, woe be to them that tarry
behind! It is wonderful to see how the Lord will keep a man by whose travels
He will help His Church. All the world will not get leave to hurt an hair
of his head. HEROD takes PETER, and puts him into prison, laying him
betwixt two soldiers, thinking to execute him ye next morning, Act. 12. But
the Lord by His Angel wakeneth him, and brings him safe out, and yet he
wist not what he was doing. PAVL and PETER were wonderfully delivered, so long
as the Lord had to do with them: but when He had done His turn, and they fell
into the hands of NERO, there is no more dinne of them, they were slain. So
long as the Lord has ado with any man He will shake Heaven and earth ere he
perish. Well, the care of the Church of God is decaying in SCOTLAND. Le^vs
cry, LORD, put the care of this Church, and the care of the members of the
body of Christ, into the hearts of men, that every man may care for the
salvation of another, and that God may be glorified in them through His Son
Christ Jesus our Savior: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
all Praise, Honor, and Glory both now and for evermore,

AMEN.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON
TITUS, CHAP. III. For we our selves were in times past unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasu^es, living in maliciousness
and envy, hateful, and hating one another.

But when the bountifulness and love of GOD our Savior toward man appeared,

Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to His
mercy He saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost,

Which He shed on us abundantly, through JESUS CHRIST our Savior:

That we, being justified by His grace, should be made heirs, according to
the hope of eternal life.


IF we shall consider this Text (well-beloved in JESUS CHRIST) we shall find in
it three things. The first, the miserable estate and condition of man, wherein
he stood before he was called to grace by JESUS CHRIST. The next is his
merciful delivery, from that miserable estate and condition. The last is the
end of his merciful delivery: to wit, That he should serve God all the days
of his life, in all manner of thankfulness for so merciful a delivery. And
seeing our communicating with the body and blood of the LORD approaches, our
preparation cannot stand in three better things than these: First, in a
knowledge of our misery before that we knew God in CHRIST: Next in a knowledge
of our merciful delivery from that miserable estate: And thirdly, in a
duty toward God for our delivery. We shall speak at this time of the first
two.

Now, to return, and to go through the words as the Lord will give us grace:
The occasion of the setting down of this first part, to wit, of our misery
before we knew Christ, is this: Immediately before he has exhorted TITUS to
use all kinds of lenity toward them that were not converted, not to deal
with them in rigor, but to deal with them in meekness. He gives the
reason: Look what they are now, even such were we before we were called,
living in concupiscence, our minds were rebellious against God: therefore let
us deal with them as we would have been dealt with our selves at that time.
I mark here first, That our miserable estate that we stood in, before we were
called to this grace through Jesus Christ should never be forgotten. The
misery of nature wherein we are conceived and borne, and wherein we live for
a time, till we know Christ, should never go out of our remembrance: When
thou have plaide the fool a while in sin, when thou have followed harlotry,
committed murder, oppressed thy neighbor, and when God has called thee out
of that miserable condition, and made thee to know Him in Christ, forget never
thy former misery, forget never that thou have followed filthiness, murdered,
oppressed, etc. Says the Apostle to the Ephesians, who were Gentiles after
their conversion in Christ, Forget your old done deeds? says he so? No: but
he says, Remember that ye were Gentiles.

Brethren, it is true, the estate of grace in Christ has a sweetness with it,
if a man or woman have a sense of it, but look that the sweetness of it* m
is-^elish not so the taste, that in the mean time thou lose all sense of thy
former misery. Keep therefore both the misery and the delivery in thy mind,
that thereby the true sense of GODS mercy may be stirred up in thine heart:
for none have the true sense of the mercy of God in Christ, except he only
that sigheth for the misery which we did lie in before. This is the first.
Another thing I mark here. This same remembrance of our misery, it should make
every one of us that stand in grace, to have a compassion upon sinners: where
ever thou see them, labor to win them, but with pity, and let be thy
bitterness: A man that has no pity, but is full of bitterness against a
sinner, that man has forgotten that he was a sinner before. There is no man
so clean, but there is a remaining corruption in him, albeit he see it not.
They that have the true zeal of God, they will indeed be severe against
sinners: Why not? but they begin always at their selves, and then reprove
others. Hypocrites begin not at themselves, but they hide and cloak their
own sins, and are always severe against others. But the man that begins
at himself, his severity is aye mixed with pity.

But to come to the words, We were such as they are now: we were mad, and out
of our right wit, we were beside our selves. There is the first part of our
misery in nature, for we were all miserable by nature: there is not one
soul, but it is borne miserable by nature. Ye see then, Brethren, our misery
begins not at our body: (there are many who if they have their body well
disposed, are at ease then, but if it be not well disposed, they are heavily
displeased, then they groan and sigh) no, our misery begins not at our body,
it begins within us, at our souls, and not at ye inferior parts of the
soul, but at the mind, which is the most excellent part and light of our
souls, and that should guide all the rest of the powers of ye soul. Now the
sickness of it is madness, it is blind, ignorant, without judgment, and we
are mad fools by nature. There is no man born in ye earth, but he is borne a
fool: thou art borne a mad body, and besides thy self. Thou will think thy
self very wise, and thy wit will compass Heaven and earth, yea, and others
that look to thee will think thee wise, but if thou have no more than nature,
thou art a fool. As he is a fool in very deed, who thinks he speaks
always an oracle, even so art thou, that art not in Christ, and countest thy
self wise: the wiser thou think thy self, thou art the more and the more a
fool. All this is to let men see, that none is wise without God: For when the
light of GOD is not in thee, all that thou do is foolishness and he that
is wise without GOD, shall curse his wisdom one day, and say, that all was
but madness: yea, and all the Monarchs in the world shall curse that
wisdom, which they had without God. This natural sickness goes further
down, it descends to the heart, it tarieth not in the mind: But next we
become maine rebels against God, he that is mad, he is set to rebel, and
he is froward, ever inclining to disobedience against GOD.

Brethren, ye know there are two sorts of fools amongst men: Some fools
are silly simple fools: other fools are malicious fools: by nature we are
all borne fools, but malicious fools, evermore rebelling and displeasing GOD.
If we compare th^se two sorts of fools together, the second is worst. LORD
save us from a rebellious heart: For I tell thee, the mind is not so blinded,
but it has some sight of GOD: but the heart of man, after the fall, is
altogether inclined to rebellion: so that if there be one spunke of light left
in nature, it will travel by all means to put in the finger in the eye of the
mind, and put it out. And therefore, travel to reform thine heart, for if it
be not reformed, it shall evermore carry thee the wrong way. So there are two
parts of the misery of man. Now comes on the third. Thy misery ends
not here. Mark, and travel to find this in experience. (Fie on us, if we
know not our selves, for if we know not our selves, we shall never know God
aright.) The third part stands in actions, for the mad and rebellious
heart must break out in some actions. Can a mad and rebellious body be idle?
He calls ou^ works wavering, going out of the way. Can a mad man keep the
hie way? No, but evermore he goes to one side or other. No more can we by
nature go forward in the right way: for by nature we are mad, froward,
and disobedient. It is true, natural men will do things that are right in
themselves: but no man shall do that which is good in it self rightly, that
has yt rebellion in his heart: for we do nothing rightly, but when our eyes
are upon God. Albeit the action were never so good, if thou seek not GOD in
it, it is not done rightly. Thou may well do it to please the eyes of men,
and thou may get thanks at the hands of men for it, but thou shall get
none at Gods hands: so if thou would be accepted of GOD, and would have
the action of thine hands to please God, first look that thine action be
good, and then look to God in thine action. Then there are three parts of
misery of the natural man: first, madness in the mind: secondly,
maliciousness in the heart: thirdly, his actions are wauerings, all wandering
out of the way.

To go forward. He describes this wavering, and he calls it serving: it
stands in slavery, his whole lifetime is but a service and slavery. The
natural man, if he have no more but nature, he is a slave and a servant,
bought and sold, for Paul says, he* is sold to be subject to sin,
Roman. 7. 15. Suppose he were a Monarch of the whole earth, if he be without
the new man, he is a slave. It is true, he will have many servants under
him, but he is the first and chief slave himself: yea, he is a greater
servant than the very kitchen boy, and the most abject servant in his house.
But to whom is this service done? To whom are we slaves? In plain talk,
he says, to concupiscences. He calls them pleasures, but fi^ on them, how
beit they are sweet things, yet they have a sour end. Harlotrie is sweet
for a time, but, O that bitterness in the end! It is sweet to murder, but,
O that bitterness that it shall bring with it in the end! it shall be bitterer
than the very gall. Paul makes mention here of a^varietie and diversity of
lusts. Thou that seruest thine own lusts, art not subject to one master only,
but to an hundredth: thou art subject to many unclean masters of diverse
qualities.

Brethren, are these our masters? Fie upon them, the service done to them, it
is a vile service. Thou that art a lord, when thou look to thy kitchen boy,
thou will think his service vile, but fie upon thee, thou art a greater slave,
he is an honest servant, but thou art a slave: for thy service is done to thy
filthy pleasures, there is a variety of them, and so thou have many masters,
whom thou seruest. And therefore, ye will see these men who serve their own
lusts, to be the weariest bodies y^ ever lived, even as if they were drawn
through a mire: for the only true and clean service, is the service of that
only one GOD: the only repose of thy soul, is on that one GOD: there is no
rest, but on Him. Away with that creature that drinks in the soul lusts of
this earth, that is no rest to him here, and woe to that rest that shall come
in the end. So there are the masters which we serve, foul concupiscences,
and fleshly lusts. It may be asked, Will a person be subject to such a
great variety of concupiscences? I answer, The seed of every sin in the
world is in every man: so all concupiscences are in thee, because the seed
of them is within thee: No, the best men in the earth has the seed of these
lusts, which budde out into actions: it will lurk for a time in the winter,
but in the spring it will break out, and then thou will know thou have it,
when thou feel the stink of it. So there is the first answer, the seed of
every sin is in the heart of every man, in such sort that it will make thee
loath at it, if thou saw it: but alas! it is hidden from our eyes, that we
cannot see it, and therefore we loathe it not. Again, in some men and women,
that seed of all lusts will break out in actions: A man that follows
harlotrie, will be a drunkard also: an auaritious man, will be ambitious
also, etc. It is a marvel to see how many sins will be reigning in one
miserable slave, and to see how that slave will be hurried from one sin to
another. Fie on thee, will thou never get thy fill of sin? thou shall once
be filled with wrath, and then thou shall loathe at thy sins: For albeit
there were no more but one sin in thee, it is enough to cause thee to go to
Hell.

Now to go forward: He numbers out some of these concupiscences, and the
first is malice, maliciousness in the heart against our neighbor. Then
comes in her two daughters, envy and hatred. When thou art sorry at thy
neighbors weal, and would not see him thrive, then thou will hate him.
There are three particulars, and they are as many pleasures to them that
serves them: he that has malice, thinks himself never well, but when
there is malice in his heart: from thence comes envy, and the envious heart
is never well, but when it speaks evil of his neighbor, for that is meat
and drink to it* he that has hatred, is never well, but when he hates his
neighbor, and that is his meat and drink.

Now I shall draw these concupiscences into certain ranks. There are some
of them against God, some against our neighbor, and some against our selves,
amongst the which is intemperancie. Fie on thee, O Epicurian! thou ^innest
against thy self. Now the Apostle in setting down these concupiscences,
makes a choice of the concupiscences against our neighbor, for if we be
malicious against him, we are malicious against GOD. Whosoever is enemy to
man, he is also enemy to God. Now there is no harmony amongst men that are
only natural: For without GOD in Christ, there is no true love, no true
concord. Put a man and a woman together without God, will there be any
concord there? No, for the duties of the first Table are requisite for the
discharging of the duties of the second Table, and must preceede them. How
can thou love thy wife or thy children, without God? No, there is no true
love, and the end shall prove it to have been but hatred only.

In the end of the verse he sets down two sorts of hatreds, he says
hateful, that is, he that suffers hatred: then he subjoyneth, hating one
another: we are odious to others, and again we hate others. Always mark one
meeting here. Think thou to hate, and not to be hated again? It is but the
just judgment of God, that as thou enuiest and hate, thou also to be hated
and envied. What harmony can be here, when thou hate me, and I thee? No
true concord, but all is lose. There is no conjunction, but that which is in
CHRIST JESUS. When this conjunction is not amongst men, away with all other
conjunctions. This is shortly the miserable estate wherein we stood by nature,
before the participation of mercy in CHRIST.

Now I come to the other estate. An alteration must be made, or else we are
gone: For what can become of a body that dies in madness? Now look how we
are delivered: But (says he) after that the bountifulness and love of GOD
our Savior appeared. There is the way how our merciful delivery comes on.
Ye read not one word here, that man lying in misery, began to find out a
delivery himself. Ye read not that the mad man of himself begins to take
up himself: he says not, Then we took up our selves: No, no, we would have
lied long ere we had taken up our selves. Then the natural man waltering and
wallowing in sin, and drinking in the foul pleasures thereof, he will never
take up himself and let him go on, if he should live ten thousand years,
he will never be the better, but still worse and worse. Can a man that is
dead naturally, think of any life to himself, to rise up, and stand again?
Not such a thing, he cannot so much as once think to rise up.

Now, Brethren, we are all black dead spirituallie, by nature there is not one
spunke of that Heavenly life in us, no more than in a dead body, that is dead
naturally, there is a spunk of natural life: and we are not half dead only,
but are whole dead. Can a natural man once think of a spiritual life? No,
and therefore Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 31. When we were dead in our sins, we
were quickened by CHRIST, meaning that we had no power in our selves to rise
again. If it be so then, when I see a wicked man (that has been serving his
foul lusts all his lifetime) take up himself, I will not say, that that man
took up himself, I will say, there is a dead man risen to life: I will ask
of thee, In the beginning of the creation, thoughtest thou of thy creation?
desiredst thou to think of it? No, no more thoughtest thou of thy
regeneration: thou thoughtest as little of thy second creation, as thou
thoughtest of thy first creation. And therefore it is well said, He created
thee without thee: And as He created thee without thee, so He redeemed thee
without thee. Dare thou say, that thou gave counsel to thy redemption,
and thoughtest of it when GOD redeemed thee? then how comes this work on? We
are prevented, something appears that was hid: there was one thing long
hidden, and now it begins to shine. And what was this bountifulness and
love to mankind? it was hid, and breaks out. And who is it that is
bountiful? is this any man's bountifulnes? No, it is the bountifulness of GOD:
and this quickening love is GODS, and that toward man. And what God is this?
He calls Him GOD our Savior: For God is considered two ways, as a Creator,
and as a Savior. It is the love of Him as a Savior, that is showed to thee in
thy Redemption. And when was this love reueiled? when JESUS CHRIST came into
the world, and took upon Him our nature, then this love brake out toward man:
He loved him from all Eternity, but it brake not out till then. Mark then.
It is the love of GOD that saves, it is GODS bountifulness that saves: our
delivery behooued to proceed of a wonderful bountifulness in God, whereof
the ground is love. If He had not loved thee, He would not have delivered
thee. Then it is not a common love which He bears toward us, but there is a
special love in GOD to mankind: He loves not these Heavens, these Stars,
so well as He does men. No, He communicates not the thousand part of those
things that He communicates to man, either to the Heavens, or to the
Stars. Then it is not the love of GOD the Creator that does this, and is the
ground of this bountifulness, and of our life in Him: but it is a special
kind of love. It is that love that proceeds of GOD the Savior. It is not
the love of a Creator, but of a Father, not to the creature, but to the son.
GOD loves His son better than He does His creature, He loves us as His
sons. If there were no further love of GOD, but as He is a Creator, thou
durst never cry, Abba, Father: and except the Spirit spread abroad into our
hearts that love which He bears unto us, for all the world thou durst not
appear before Him. The time is set down when He has saved us, when His
singular love appeared in the world, He saved us being manifested in the
flesh. Then it follows that we were lost, and gone, when GOD of His love
put to His hand, and saved us, we were out of our right wit, rebels to GOD,
wavering, and vagabunding out of the right way, slaves to our own lusts.
Whom count ye lost, if these be not lost? I will never count of a reprobate
person, who is given over to filthiness, to harlotrie, to murder, to
oppression, to mischief, etc. I will never count of him but as a mad,
desperate, and lost body: when he is walking abroad, and moving in the
world, he is but a dead carcass: and if he come to GOD again in mercy* it
may be said. There is a dead body, turned to life. Have thou followed
harlotrie? repentest thou? thou have been dead in sin, but now thou art
alive. The lost son, when he had spended his childes-part of goods yet he
repented, and came home to his father again: his father says, He that was
dead, is living again, Luke 15. 24. So in a word, we were lost men. Think
thou that thou art not lost, because thou can breathe? And think thou a
man not dead, if he can walk upon the street? Think thou thy self very
well, if thou have these vital motions in thee? O, but suppose thou had all
the natural lives in the world, if thou be given over to thine own
affections and leauest not off thine old sins and iniquities, thou art a
mad and a dead body. Began then that love toward man only to appear when
Christ came into the world? I answer: The love of God the Father appeared and
manifested it self in some measure to the godly, even before Christ came into
the world: God forbid but this love had been appare^t unto Abraham, and the
rest of the godly, before the incarnation of our Savior. But at the coming of
Christ it manifested it self more brightly, than ever it did before: for all
His love of before was in Christ to come: but now, since He came into the
world, the love of God toward mankind has appeared in greater abundance. The
Lord grant us an apprehension and sight of this love, that at the least we
may strive to love Him again, who has loved us so dearly in His Son JESUS
CHRIST.

Now, he shows by what means this our salvation is procured at the hands
of GOD: he tells you by what means we are not saved, Net (says he) by the
works of righteousness which we had done. The means by the which we are not
saved, is our own just works: thou art not saved by thy just works, lean to
them as thou will, I will promise thee* in the name of that Great God, they
shall never save thee. Can a man that is mad and a rebel to GOD, and a slave
to his own lusts, do such works as may procure salvation? But such were we,
says the Apostle: therefore we can deserve nothing by our works. Fie on
thee, Papist, with thy merits! fie on the works of preparation! can a mad
man prepare himself for grace? No such thing. I tell you when GOD put to His
hand to our salvation, He found no matter in us of our salvation, but
damnation. When GOD begins to love, He finds no matter of love in us, but
of hatred. And this commends the greatness of His love toward us, when He
sees nothing in us but matter of damnation, yet He of His free grace and
mercy loves us and saves us, Ro^. 5. 8. This sets out His love highly
toward us, when that we were sinners He sent Christ to die for us: therefore
seek not thy salvation neither before thou be in Christ, nor after thou art in
Him by y^ merit of works, for thou shall never get it yt way, but thou shall
still be the further from it the more thou seek it by that mean. Then if
good works be not the mean, what is the mean? The Apostle ^aith, He has
saved us according to His mercy: These are flat contrary, The mercy of God, and
the merit of man. If thou be saved by y^ mercy of God, the^ no merit, because
thy merit is not able to save thee. The first fountain of our salvation is
love, after love comes on mercy: then pity and compassion in His mercy
presupponeth misery. Mercy is showed to the miserable creature. GOD seeing us
miserable, mad, rebels; following our own crooked affections, begins to
be pitiful, and to have compassion of us. Ye know mercy and pity
follows upon love: For when we love any one, and see him in misery, then
we have pity upon him: if thou hate him, suppose he were in never so great
misery, thou will not pity him. Then GOD, seeing us wrapped in sin and
misery, He has pity upon us, which pity proceeds of love, and with love
and pity concurreth His power. We will lone one, and see him lie in misery,
when it will pass our power to relieve him: but GODS power is always
effectual, to deliver all them who are subject to misery, if once He extend
His love and compassion toward them. Then the cause of our salvation is in
GOD only, and no part in man, who is saved. The first cause is the love of
GOD, which is the fountain: The next cause is mercy, for ere ever this world
was created GOD of His mercy took a purpose to save us. The Apostle says,
Ephesians. 1. 4. He purposed of Himself, He saw no thing in us wherefore He
should take purpose to save us. And when He comes on to the execution of
that eternal purpose of our salvation, there is nothing in us, but all is in
Himself, for He is all-sufficient Himself, and nothing is without Him. The
end wherefore He died, all of Himself, without us, was to the praise of the
glory of His grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. that thereby the whole glory of our
salvation might redounde to Him only, because the cause is only in Him:
Thou that take any part in it, and attributest it unto thy self, thou
spoylest GOD of His glory: Either give Him all the glory of this action, or
take it all to thy self: this glory is too heavy for thee, if thou take it
upon thee, it will press thee to everlasting damnation. Then there is the
mean of our salvation, The mercy of GOD.

Next he lays out the parts of our salvation abroad one by one, that ye
may see what salvation means: he says, By the washing of the new birth,
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. There is the first part. It is a washing
of us, when GOD puts to His hand to save us. Ye know, washing presupponeth
foulness: therefore it must follow, when GOD began to save us, we were
unclean, full of byles and botches, conceived and borne in filthiness, and
then warbling and wallowing in our own sin and filthiness, and ever the
longer we live, we are still the filthier. It is a marvel, that that Holy GOD
should ever sustain to look to thy filthy byles, or to put His holy and pure
hand to thy vile botches, or to send down His clean Spirit to dwell in thine
unclean heart, or that any ways His purity should meddle with thine impurity.
Amongst all the arguments of His love, this is one, When He puts to His
fair ba^d to thee that art so foul. Find thou thy sins pardoned? and thy
self purged and washed? assure thy self, thou art safe, and GOD has loved
thee: For except the love of GOD had been all the greater toward thee, He
would never have purged thee from thy sins. It is a sure token of His love
toward thee, that it is infinite and exceeding* that He has not loathed thee,
and thy filthy byles and botches. I see here two washings, one outward,
another inward: the first in these words* The lauer of regeneration, the
next. Therenewing of the Holy Spirit. The first, is our Baptism: the next,
the inward washing and renewing by the Holy Spirit, represented by this
outward Baptism. As the water vvasheth away* the filth from the body* so
the Holy Spirit purges and vvasheth the heart from sin. I will speak but
thus far shortly of Baptism. The outward washing in Baptism is not to be
looked to lightly: the pouring on of the water, is but a base sign to look
to: yet it is not a bare sign of the washing of the Holy Spirit: but it is
the instrument that God takes in His hand, and whereby He applies ^o us the
inward washing of the Holy Spirit, Col. 2. 12. Romans 6. 4, he ascribes our
regeneration to Baptism. We by Baptism are buried with Christ, risen with
Christ, and if this mean be con^emned, there shall be no regeneration: if a
man lightly this Baptism. I affirm, there shall be no renewing inwardly by
the Holy Spirit: and if he be not renewed. he shall never be saved: for
without regeneration. no salvation. Ye see (2. Kin. 5. 10) what was enjoined
to Naaman the Syrien, when he sought cleansing, the Prophet bad him go to
the Iordane, and vvash him seven times: But he thought with himself, What is
this? Are not there fair Rivers at home at Damascus? Yea, he would not go
till he took better counsel: but so soon as he went, and vvashed himself
seven times, he was cleansed. Even so it is in Baptism: if a man contemn
the outward washing, he shall never be cleansed by the Spirit.

This same is also true of the Sacrament of the Supper: Count not therefore
little of the Sacraments, because God has promised to give Himself with the
Sacrament, if it be rightly received. Now look how long our regeneration is
in working in this life, the force of Baptism continues as long: thou must be
continually renewed ti^l thy last breath: therefore, the force of Baptism must
continue with thee to thy last breath. It is a vanity to think that the
force of Baptism stands in the ministration of the action only: no, it
leaves us never, after we have once received it, till we be placed with
Jesus Christ. Have thine eye still upon Baptism, for it is a mean whereby
the Lord will save thee.

Further, Brethren, he begins here at regeneration: Ye may see then the
necessity of regeneration: Would thou be safe? look that there be a new
birth. look that thou be borne over again, as Christ said to Nicodemus, John
3. 3. Verily, I say unto you, except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of GOD. If thou be not a new creature, thou art not in CHRIST,
but without CHRIST, and without JESUS CHRIST there is no salvation. Ye see men
would beguile themselves, if they should say, when ye ask of them, Whether
they will go to Heaven or not? They will answer, We will go to Heaven: and
yet in the mean time they will hold on the old man, and will never change
their manners: but that vain opinion will deceive them: 2. Corin. 6. 9. Be not
beguiled, for no ^ornicaters, adulterers, murderers, drunkardes, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. If thou hold on the old man, thou shall
never be safe, JESUS CHRIST must beget thee a new again, or else thou shall
never enter within the gates of Heaven.

Now when he has spoken of this inward and outward washing, he insisteth in
this point concerning the Spirit, and declares from whom this Spirit comes,
which He shed on us abundantly through JESUS CHRIST our Savior. We have
Him not our selves, He that washes us is He that powers on the precious lauer
of the Spirit, vvherby we are vvashen. Then the Spirit is from GOD. Is that
Spirit from the Father immediately? No, He powers Him in through JESUS CHRIST
our Savior: so immediately this Spirit comes from JESUS CHRIST, but mediately
from GOD as the Fountain: He comes from the Father to the Son, from the
Son to us. John 15. 26. The cause of this order is this: He is our Savior,
and has bought us with a dear price: the Spirit is bought to us by the
blood of JESUS CHRIST, His blood has bought all which we receive and get by
Him: so He gives His holy Spirit with all His graces, by the hand of JESUS
CHRIST the man. Then if ye would have the Spirit, dress your selves to that
treasure in Heaven, and beseech God that He would vouchsafe to send that Spirit
upon you through JESUS CHRIST, and give you His grace by the hand of the man
CHRIST.

Yet to open up the words more narrowly, Which He powers out, etc. He
speaks of the Spirit, as it were of water: the Spirit here is compared to
water, because of the washing: for as the one vvasheth the filth of the body,
so the other vvasheth the filth of the soul. He is not content to say, He
powers out the Spirit, simply, but he says, abundantly, in a great measure,
as a flood in abundance. This teaches two things to us: first, the liberality
of GOD, He gives not grace niggardly, as men, but whatsoever we get, it
is in abundance: His love is rich, His mercy is rich, the Spirit which He
gives unto us is rich: so He is liberal unto us. Then it follows of this
also, that we are very foul and unclean. A cloth that is very foul, will
require much water and washing: even so we must have abundance of grace,
because we were so foul through sin: but suppose we were never so foul,
except we get a sight of our filthiness, we will never desire to be
vvashen: when David felt himself very filthy in murder and adultery, he
cried, Wash me, O Lord, and make me clean, PSALM. 51. When a body comes to
a remorse of conscience, it is a vvonder to see how he will drink in that
Spirit, and desire to be satiate with that water. A foul body that has
not the sense of his filthiness, will never cry for washing. The murderer
and the harlot will never cry, Lord wash me, except they get a sight of
their own uncleanness. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled, MATTHEW. 5. 6. There may be moved a
question here, How is it said, that the Spirit is powered out so
abundantly, how many feels this riches? Will a man or woman discende into
their selves, they will find great lack and scarcity of this Spirit.

Brethren, I answer: One drop of the Spirit of Jesus Christ is counted
great riches: one drop of grace is great riches: one drop of the water of
life, is greater riches, than all the water in the world: it will weigh
down all the precious things that are upon the face of ye earth. Thou that
have gotten one drop of grace in Jesus Christ, thou art richer than all the
kings in the world. Moreover, if this drop of grace could be dried up in
the hearts of the regenerate, it were less to be counted of: but there is
still drop after drop, and none end of dropping: Continually thou art
refreshed now and then with new drops of grace, so long as thou live. So
this continuance in dropping is a great riches: thou have no cause to
complain, that has this continuance. Well is the soul that gets drop
after drop, for that soul may say it has gotten great riches. Thus much
for the first part of our salvation, called regeneration: when God puts to
His hand to save us, He puts to His hand and vvasheth us inwardly and
outwardly, and gives us His Spirit.

Now follows the next part, That being justified by grace, we may be made
heirs according to the hope of life everlasting. The next part stands in
justification. I will not insist, I shall touch it in a word: It is none
other thing but the imputing of the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST unto us.
This righteousness is not inherent in us, but the satisfaction of JESUS CHRIST
is imputed to us. This Justification in effect is none other thing, but
forgiveness of sins. when God forgiueth thee thy sins* and accounts
Christ's righteousness to be thine, and lays not thy sin to thy charge. Al
is one thing. Justification is not this y^ men dream of, to wit, a
righteousness inhere^t in our selves, but it is another man's justice which by
imputation is made ours. Compare these two together, Justification and
Regeneration, and consider the natural order of them, Justification is first.
A man is justified by the blood of JESUS CHRIST imputed to him, ere ever he be
regenerate by the Spirit. The Spirit that vvasheth him in regeneration comes
through the blood: the blood, first, and then comes in regeneration, and
vvasheth away the mother sin, and the foul stinking corruption that is in
thee, and both thy justification and regeneration comes of free grace,
without merits: for these two are ever opponed, grace and mercy: preasse not
to deal these two: to give GOD one part, and to attribute another part to thy
self: leave thy merits behind thee, and take thee to the mercy of God,
otherwise there is no salvation for thee. Thereafter comes on another part of
salvation, we are made heirs of everlasting Life: but there is something
going betwixt, that is not set down here: For ye see, that when we are
justified and regenerated, we are made sons by adoption: before we be
heirs, we must be children. But I leave this, because the Apostle speaks
not of it here.

Then the last part is: We are made heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven: what
more can be required in salvation? there is the highest degree, Thou art placed
in thine inheritance, there is thy perfection, According to the hope of
eternal Lift, lest we should think, that we are already put in
possession of this inheritance: he meets this, and shows, that albeit we
are in this life made heirs, yet we are not in this life put into a real
possession of this heyrship: but he says, according to hope: we are heirs
by hope, but once hope and all shall go away, and we shall be heirs in
very deed. Yet hope is necessary so long as we live here: so long as the
Father is living, the heirs have a to-looke and a hope of the heyrship: Hope
thou, or else thou shall never see Heaven. Now this hope is not so bare, that
in the mean time we have no fruition of the thing hoped for: yea, even in
this life the fruition of Heaven is begun in effect: and if thou have not the
beginning of it here, hope never for the accomplishment of it hereafter. We
have a beginning in this life, but as for the full possession and fruition of
our inheritance, it is reserved to the life to come: And therefore it is, that
the Godly in this life hope still for the coming of JESUS CHRIST, till they
be set and placed with Him, in that inheritance purchased to us by His blood:
To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, for ever and ever,

AMEN.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
PSALM CXXX. Out of the deep places have I called unto Thee, O LORD.

LORD, hear my voice: let Thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.

If Thou, O LORD, straightly markest iniquities, O LORD, who shall stand?

But mercy is with Thee, that Thou may be feared.


THE inscription of this PSALM (Brethren) declares that it is a PSALM most
excellent: The excellency of it we remit to the matter contained therein: it
has been penned by some holy man, and Prophet of old, but by whom it is not
certain: It is sufficient to us to know that the Spirit of GOD was the dyter
of it. To come to the matter and parts thereof, The Prophet (whosoever he was)
first sets down the estate and disposition of his soul in trouble, to wit,
that he ran to the Lord, and prayed to Him for delivery: and this he does
to the fifth verse. Next, finding in very deed the effects of the prayer he
made, and finding mercy and delivery as he craved, he professes before all
the world, that as he had before awaited upon GOD, so he will await still
upon Him, and He will put his confiden^ce in Him: and this he does to the
seventh verse: lastly, from the seventh verse to the end, he recommendeth this
duty to Israel, that is, to the Church of GOD, to wait upon the LORD, and
with the recommendation, he gives in forceable reasons to move them. To come
to the first part, first he says, that in his greatest danger he cried to
the Lord JEHOVAH. Next, he sets down the prayer. To come to the
proposition, he says, Out of the deep: yet more, Out of the deep places have
I called unto thee, O JEHOVAH. By these deep places he understands great
miseries, great dangers, wherein his body was, great terror and fear in his
conscience, for his sin and offerding of God: for the Scripture (as ye may
see Psalm. 69. 2. 3) compares great afflictions to deep waters, wherein a man
is like to drown: and many a time, when the body is in danger, the soul will
be like to drown in desperation. No doubt, the greatness of the danger made
him to utter to the Lord voices coming from the very deapth of the heart. If
we felt our selves in great danger, we would call from the deapth of our hearts
to God: he uttered not a voice only, but a loud voice, with a cry. This is
the meaning of the words. We so here first, that the children of God, whom God
loves most entirely, are many times subject to great and extreme dangers and
troubles: and if ever thou think to come to Heaven, make thee in thine own
course to suffer one trouble or other. Let no man thersore, judge evil of a
man because he suffers. Next we see the greater the danger be, the heavier
ye distress and the affliction wherewith ye godly is exercised be, the more
vehement, fervent, and earnest will their prayer be they have to God: and how
comes this to pass? Even in this manner, and by these degrees, Oppression and
affliction works in the hearts of the faithful a sense of ye common misery
of nature: When the hand of ye Lord is upon afaithful man, then he begins to
feel his sin and corruption: And except the LORD exercise us in this life,
either one way or other, the best of us all will fall into such a sound sleep,
that we will neither remember what we have been, what we are, nor what we
shall be, neither acknowledge our selves to be sinners: So there is a
necessity of afflictions, for affliction brings us to a feeling of our
misery. Next, when through affliction, the heart is prepared and brought to
some sense of sin, then it is capable of grace, the^ it prays to God. (Look
never to come to Heaven if thou feel not thy finne, yea, and that thou art a
miserable sinner) Then, if once thine heart be prepared with some sense of
sin and misery, then comes in that holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, which in
ye Scripture is called the Spirit of adoption, who finding ye heart dejected
and made lowly (the Spirit will nerer look in to a proud heart) begins
to work, and to touch the heart of the miserable sinner with a sweet sense of
mercy through Jesus, he begins to shed abroad the love of Christ into
the soul: and when once the heart has tasted of the sweetness of mercy, and
as Peter says, has tasted how sweet and gracious the Lord is, and finds
this passing love of God in Jesus Christ, then i^eth a boldness, and begins
with confidence and peartnesse to present itself before God, and to put up
prayers and requests, Roman. 8. 26. When once that Spirit has given
liberty, then we cry with an open mouth (for the heart is wide opened) Abba,
Father, Roman. 8. 15. Because we have gotten a sense of that fatherly love in
Jesus Christ. The prayer of the faithful is most effectual when they are in
greatest danger, and then the voice is lowdest: for it is the Spirit of GOD,
who makes intercession for us with sighs which cannot be expressed, but God
knows the meaning of his Spirit.

Now, Brethren, surely few of us have yet been in this deepnesse and
extreamitie of misery: the Lord has not yet so pressed us with His hand, as
He has done many others: and therefore, ^e^^ there is amongst us, who has
this feeling of sin and misery: and consequently few of us can pray so
earnestly. How many are there amongst you that dare say, that ye feel
sensibly the common misery of nature? Go to your hearts, and look if ye
feel it not sleeping in sin: and so long as thou sleep thus, and know
not thy misery, how will thou be careful to feel the love of Christ? and
how will thou earnestly pray to God? And certainly I take this coldness in
prayer to be a forerunner of a judgment to ouer-take this Land. No, it were
better to be swimming in the waters of affliction, praying earnestly to GOD,
than to be this way lying in prosperity without prayer.

Now I go forward. After he has proponed, that out of the deepnesse he
cried to JEHOVAH, then to let us see his cries, he sets down the form of
prayer that he used in his great miseries: first he says, O Lord, hear my
voice: Next, in the other words, he doubleth over the same petition, Attend
to the voice of my prayers: for he prays not coldly, but he cries
earnestly: certainly, the doubling of the cry would be opened up from the
ground. We should gripe down to the heart, from whence the prayers of the
godly do flow, that when we hear them, or read them, we may get such an
heart and disposition in prayer as they had. The doubling of the prayer, and
the mouth wide opening, comes of the doubling of the graces of the Spirit of
GOD in the heart, and of a double opening of the heart: for except the heart be
opened in prayer, the mouth cannot be opened with pleasure, otherwise if thou
speak any thing, I will not give one penny for it: So the opening of the
mouth comes from the opening of the heart When the Holy Spirit so sweetly
makes manifest the love of God to the creature, then ye tongue is loosed, and
the second cry comes of the second grace, and of ye second opening of the
heart: and so often as thou cryest, so often is there a new grace and motion within
the heart wrought by the Holy Spirit, for it is He only that opens the
mouth piece and piece, to speak to God: for take this for a certainty that
Paul says, There is none that can call Jesus Lord, without that Spirit come
in, 1. Corin. 12. 3. And again he says, We know not what we should pray,
or how we ought to pray, without that Spirit teach us, Romans chap. 8. verse
26. And if He teach not, no man or woman is able once to open the mouth with
confidence and liberty to pray.

And so, Brethren, if ye would speak well, pray well, or do well, look ever
to the disposition of the heart, and night and day pray for that Spirit, who
may transchange thee, transform thee, and take thee out of nature, and plant
thee in grace: for so long as thou remainest in nature, thou can not think
well, thou can not speak well, thou can do nothing well, yea, thou art
worse than a very beast.

But because the words are very weighty, we will yet consider them better:
What means h^^ when he says, Lord, let thine ear be attentive to my
prayer? Thought he that the Lord heard him no^^ and that the Lord played the
part of a deaf man? No* He means not this: look to the estate of the godly,
when ye hand of the Lord is upon them, when ye Lord afflicts us any way, we
think that He neither hears nor sees us, nor remembers upon us: Indeed I
grant, it is not so in effect, for God never alters His affection toward
His own: but the faithful oftentimes judge and apprehend so, and all the
fault of this is in us. Ye see how David oftentimes complains to the Lord,
that He had forsaken him, He had left him, and desires that He should look
upon him: I ask* Is it so indeed, that when the faithful soul cries, Lord
hear see, and remember, that He hears not, He s^eth not He remembers not?
No question but He does* for He that made the eye, sees He not? He that
made the ear, hears He not? He that formed the heart of man, understands
He not? remembers He not? Psalm. 94. Yea, all things are patent to His Majesty,
albeit when He makes it not manifest by some sensible effects and operation,
we think He hears not, He sees not, He remembers not, His favor and
affection is never indeed altered no^ changed from his own children: Then when
they cry for His presence, are they altogether destitute and deprived of his
presence? no, they want it not: for who gave the heart to say, Lord hear me,
Lord see and remember me, if that thou had not some presence of the Lord in
thine heart? thou could never utter these voices to God. The^ I say, If I
have the presence of God when I cry unto Him, why cry I, and pray I, as
though I had not His presence? Are not such prayers in vain? No, for although
we have the presence of God when we pray, yet for all that our prayers to God
are not in vain: for if we had Him of before in any measure by our prayers, He
will manifest Himself more sensibly, piece and piece, more and more: And look
how much more strongly thou cryest, so much the more will the Lord be drawn
to thy soul, and so much the more shall thou find the increase and grouth of
grace in thy soul. It is impossible, that the prayer of a faithful man, if it
were but one word that proceeds from the Spirit of adoption, can pass away
without comfort: for the Lord gives His Spirit to no man in vain, but because
He knows the meaning of His own Spirit, therefore He will grant that thing
for which he makes request, there is nothing more certain: And therefore the
Lord ( Matthew. 5. 6.) pronounces them blessed, who hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for, says he, they shall be filled and satisfied: And so
Christ speaks to that woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 13. 14. If thou soughtest a
drink, I should give thee a drink of the water of life: for the water that I
shall give, shall be in a man (or woman) a Well of water springing up into
eternal life: meaning generally, that whosoever has gotten the first fruits
of the Spirit, and the beginnings of grace, desires and seeks for further
progress and increase, that the LORD should ever furnish them with something
to quench their thirst, and that because they should ever have a fountain
within their belly, to furnishe something to them when they thirsted: so that
when as they should seek refreshment, they might get it in abundance. And
if we felt this thirst and dryness of the soul, we would seek earnestly: for
there was never such a dryness and such an heat in any man naturally* as
there is in us through sin. Consider thine own experience, when thou have
felt sometimes the great burden of sin, and the terrors of the wrath of God
for sin, whenever in this estate thou came to God, and prayedst for
mercy, and said, I am a miserable sinner, LORD, give me mercy; have thou not
felt, that the Lord has answered thee comfortably? and has filled thine heart
with joye, even when in thy prayer thou sighest and sobbest vnspeakeablie? What
means that joye? Even that as soon as thou openest thy mouth with liberty*
to seek that water of life, the Lord conuayeth some portion of it into thine
heart to quench thy thirst.

Now after he has cried twice, he subjoyneth in the next words, If thou, O
Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand. This no question,
follows by way of preoccupation: It might have been objected to him in his
prayer (for many are the temptations of the godly) by his conscience, pleading
for GOD against him: or GOD Himself might have said, Thou prayest to me and
yet thou art a sinner, how should I hear thee? How dare thou stand before
me? It is a wonder that in my fierce wrath I destroy thee not. To this he
answers, first by way of confession. It is true, O LORD, that if thou will
straitelie mark iniquity, that no flesh can stand in thy presence, but they
must be consumed, through the rage of thy displeasure. Then he answers by
way of correction, But mercy is with thee: the meaning is, Thou take none
heed to our iniquities, but of thy free mercy and grace, thou pardonest them
all in thy Son JESUS CHRIST: for none of the Saints, none of the Fathers,
none of the Prophets, ever got mercy, but through that blood of JESUS CHRIST,
who was slain from the beginning of the world: through His blood only was the
wrath of God pacified: except Gods justice be first satisfied, there is no
place left to mercy: therefore says he, my refuge is to thy mercy. Indeed our
estate who live now, is far better than the estate of them who lived before
Christ came into the world: for they saw* the death and satisfaction of Christ,
and remission of sin in his blood but a far of: but we see now all, already
past, and we may say, that now God in Christ is merciful to us, is become our
Father, and has forgiven all our sins. Now out of these words, and by this
example of the Prophet, ye may see what is the estate of Gods children in
prayer: to wit, when in affliction they seek to repair to GOD by prayer, they
will not so soon begin to pray, but as soon their guilty consciences will
begin to knock and challenge them, as unworthy to be heard: the conscience
will stand up, and if it be not cleansed, it will present thy sins before
thee, and set them in order in all their circumstances. Albeit thou forget thy
sins, after thou have gotten thy pleasure, yet thou shall see, that thy
conscience has marked them all: and as a man cannot read when the book is
closed, yet being opened, they may read therein: Even so, albeit when our
consciences are benumbed, we see not the ugliness and guiltiness of sin,
yet when GOD wakeneth them, we will see sin in the own color, and find
the ugliness and guiltiness thereof: Our sins will come in, and stand up as
mountains, and will hide the blessed face and presence of GOD from thee: Sin
goes betwixt us and GOD, and separateth us from GOD. The Saints find in
experience, that it is not an easy thing to find a familiar access to God in
prayer: except our consciences first be purged, we can have none access to
GOD. Therefore, whosoever would draw near to GOD, let him seek to follow
the counsel of the Apostle, in the 10. Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and the two and twenty verse, where he says, Let us draw near with a true
heart, in an assurance of faith sprinkled in our hearts from an evil
conscience. No flesh can have a favorable access to God, except his
conscience be first purged from guiltiness* yea, that which we speak of the
guiltiness of sin, we speak also of sin it self, that except it be
quite taken away out of His sight, that He will not look favorably upon us.
And this is that which the Prophet says here, If thou, O Lord, straightly
markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? For, as guiltiness of sin
stays us to behold God, so sin it self stays God from beholding us
(miserable wretches) with the eyes of His compassion. So long, therefore, as
thy conscience is not purged, when thou go to present thy self before His
Majesty, if thy conscience be wakened, thou will find God marking thy
sins, laying them to thy charge, and wilt find Him as a terrible Judge,
compassed about with burning wrath, ready to destroy thee: and if He mark
thee, thou have no standing: and if thou appear not clothed, with the
righteousness and perfect satisfaction that JESUS through His blood has
purchased for thee, thou dare not presume to approach, for then His fierce
wrath shall be poured out upon thee.

Further we learn hereof, that when ever we would have our prayers
accepted, we should begin with an humble confession of our sins, and
unworthiness, and with an earnest prayer to forgive the same: yea, we must
aggreadge our sins by all circumstances, as the Prophet does here. No, none,
not the holiest Saints, Fathers, nor Prophets, could be able to stand, if he
marked their iniquity, let be himself, who was such an unworthy wretch, who
was laden with so many and great sins. Thou must not extenuate thy sins
before GOD, if thou would find favor with GOD, as many men commonly do,
saying we are all sinners, yea, many men have sinned more, and have done
worse deeds than I have done. That is not the way to find Gods favor. Thou
must be very abject, vile, and contemptible in thine own account, if thou
would have the Lord to account of thee. Then where shall we get a remidie,
to help an evil conscience? for sin takes away all joy and confidence in
prayer.

The next words furnish a fair remidie, But mercy is with Thee: Lord, it is
not Thy justice I look to, but Thy mercy, Thy justice holds me abacke, but
Thy mercy allureth me* I flee from Thy justice and I claim to Thy mercy. So
when a man desires his prayers to be heard, he must first have a sight of
his own misery, guiltiness, and unworthiness, and of the fierceness of the
Lords wrath for the same, and in all humility he must confess the same. Next
he must have a sight of the Lords mercy, and hope, that it is possible that
GOD be reconciled with him: except that these two be joined together, he
comes not duly prepared, the one without the other will not serve, both are
necessary: for without the knowledge, sight, and feeling of our misery, of
sin, and of the wrath of God for the same, we will never be earnest in
prayer: Who will ask, except he find his want? and without an humble
confession, there is no coming before God. Thou must not do as the Pharisie
did: read that parable of the Pharisie and of the Publicane, Luke 18. The
Pharisie was so blinded with self-love, that he could not see the filthiness
and corruption of his own heart: and therefore, not only in the presence of
man, whom he might deceive, would he justify himself, but also in the very
presence of God, who cannot be deceived, and who searches the hearts, he would
boast of his own righteousness, and condemn the poor Publicane But what found
he? It is said, he went home not justified, that all men might fear
thereafter to come before God with a conceit of their worthiness. Thou must
follow ye example of the poor Publicane, who being ashamed of himself, would
not look up to Heaven, but looked down, and smote his breast, and said, O God,
be merciful unto me a sinner. Next, if thou have no more but a sight, sense,
and confession of thy misery, will that be sufficient? No, for albeit thou
saw all thy sins, and foundest the burden thereof, and foundest the Lord
as a judge in a judgment pursuing thee, and heaping daily judgment upon
judgment, and wrath upon wrath, that will never make thee to draw near to
the Lord, but by the contrary will make thee to turn thy back upon the LORD:
for as a male-factor has no pleasure to behold the face of a judge, because
his countenance is terrible, No more can the sinner abide the countenance of
God, His judgementes and His wrath may make us astonished, and stupefied: but
if there be no more, they will never make us to come to God. Then if this be
not sufficient, what more is requisite? Even a sight of the Lords mercy, for
that is most forceable to allure, as the Prophet says here, and as the Church
of God says ( Cant. 1. 2) because of the savor of thy good ointments,
therefore the Virgins love thee: this only is forceable to allure ye sinner*
for all the judgementes of GOD, and curses of the law, will never allure him.
What was the chief thing that moved the Prodigal son to return home to his
father? Was it chiefly the distress, the disgrace, and poverty wherewith he
was burdened, or the famine that almost caused him to sterue? No, but the
chief thing was this, he remembered that he had a loving father: that makes
him to resolve with an humble confession, to go home, Luke 15. Even so is it
with a sinner, it is not terrors and threatninges yt chiefly vvil move him
to come to God, but ye consideration of His manifold and great mercies:
therefore, if the Lord waken thy conscience, present thy sins before thee,
threaten thee, and heap judgeme^ts on thee, then say, Lord, I deserve to be
threatened, and alwais to be plagued, but, Lord, thou know my nature, these
things will not make me to come to Thee, but will put me away from Thee:
therefore, let me see Thy manifold mercies toward sinners, to allure me, and
then I shall come unto Thee.

So we see the remidie against an evil conscience, to wit, an humble
confession of sin and unworthiness, and a fleeing from the justice of God,
to His mercy. The fairest and sweetest thing in the world is to feel the
mercy of GOD. But herein there is great hardness and difficulty. It is not
so easily attained unto, as men commonly think: for His mercy is compassed
about with His justice, and with His wrath against sinners, as with a wall of
fire: and he who will come to grace, he must come through a consuming fire: and
when he preasseth to come near, the fire of Gods wrath will hold him off,
and will strike out and burn up the impenitent sinner, as fire does the
stubble: So it is an harder thing than many think it to be, to win to Gods
mercy. And how shall this be remidied? By what means shall we get through
this wall of fire? Truly he who would mean to pass through fire, had need
to be well armed: the man who preasseth to approach near to that inuialable
Majesty, who can abide no sort of uncleanness, and would draw near to the
Throne of His grace must be well armed against the justice and wrath of GOD,
which debarreth sinners. Surely there is none armor in the world that can
preserve us from that raging and consuming fire of the justice and wrath of
GOD, but only the righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Let a man
use all the means in the world, and he be not found in Christ, he shall have
none access to come through the justice and wrath of God to the Throne of
grace: yea, his soul and his conscience must be sprinkled and purged from
dead works, with that blood which was offered up to GOD to that end by His
eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. without he be dipped in that blood, he will find
GOD a terrible Judge. And after that through faith in the death and blood of
JESUS, thou come to that Throne of grace* thou shall hear the sweetest and
most comfortable voice that ever was, that is, All thy sins are forgiven
thee in that blood. And if a man were condemned to die for some heinous crime*
if the king would say, I absolve thee, I forgive thee, thou shall live: What
joye and comfort would that voice bring to the heart of him who was condemned?
The Apostle says, Hebr. 10. 22. Let us go to the Throne of grace with a true
heart, and purged from an evil conscience through the blood of JESUS* CHRIST,
that is, Think not to come to that Throne of grace, except first thou be
purged with that blood. Therefore, as ever thou would be in Heaven, or see
the face of GOD to thy comfort, seek to have faith in CHRIST JESUS: Look
what necessity is laid upon a sinner: either must he be banished from the
presence and face of GOD for ever, and be casten into the society of the
damned, or else if he would be saved, he must be imped and ingraffed by a
true and lively faith in Jesus Christ: make thee for it with all thy maine, to
get a gripe of Christ, as ever thou would be saved.

Now after he has met this objection, which God or his own conscience in
Gods cause might have casten in, that he was so unworthy to be heard by an
humble confession of unworthiness, and by fleeing from His justice, and
claiming to His great mercies, be sets down the end of this mercy and
free forgiveness of sins, when he says, But mercy is with Thee, that Thou
may be feared: The end whereof the Lord grants mercy and forgiveness
of sins to sinners, is that they may obey, serve, and worship God with
pleasure and alacrity. No man can ever be able to glorify God, and to serve
Him cheerfully, but the man who has assurance that his sins are freely
forgiven him in that eternal love of God, through the blood of Jesus: for none
can glorify God, except first he be glorified of God. Albeit the natural man
got never so many and great benefits, yet because he has none assurance of
the forgiveness of his sins he can never glorify God, nor be thankful to
Him. On the other part, It is impossible and if thou have a sure persuasion
that thy sins are forgiven thee, but thou will be careful in some measure to
meet the Lord God in love, to pleasure Him, and to thank Him: for the first
effect that flows from the remission of sins, is sanctification or
glorification: And it is not possible* but if thou be glorified, thou must
glorify the Lord again. But the question may be here proponed, Wherein
stands our glorifying of God? has He need of our glorification? Can our
service be profitable to Him? Can our welldoing extend to Him? Has He need of
any thing that we can do? I answer: Indeed it is true, our well-doing
cannot extend to Him, as David confesses of himself in the 16. Psalm, and
the 2. verse. All the Kings and Monarchs in the world cannot do any thing
that is profitable and steadable to God: We are not able to add any thing to
the glory of God, for His glory is infinite, and to an infinite thing nothing
can be added: for if any thing could be added, it were not infinite. The
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit perfectly glorified one another from
all eternity. Glorify Me, says Christ, with that glory which I had with
Thee before the foundation of the world was laid. That blessed Trinity was as
perfect in glory before the creation of the world, as it has been ever
since. Our glorifying of God stands only in this, when the Lord illuminateth
our minds, that we may see His glory, in all his properties, that we in our
hearts with pleasure and cheerfulness consent thereunto, allow of it, and
with our mouths proclaim that glory which we see to be in Him. And it lies
not in man nor angel to compare His glory. The good and the evil, the well and
ye woe, the commodity and incommodity of al comes to our own selves: and happy
is that man that glorifieth God, and miserable is he y^ glorifieth Him not: for
our felicity stands not in that y^ we our selves be glorified, but in this,
that we glorify our Lord eternally, for that end were we created, and to y^
end were we redeemed with that precious ransom, eue^ that we should glorify ye
Lord and happy is that creature that has some purpose, thirst, and desire to
glorify God in this life, for he may be assured that one day the Lord shall
glorify him eternally in Heaven. That soul, I say, shall be perfected in the
life to come and without all impediment shall cry with the blessed Angels,
Holy, holy, holy, is ye God of heaven, the Whole World is full of his glory.
There shall it find in his countenance saciety of joy, and at his right hand
pleasures for ever.

Mark here last, and I shall end with it, that the seeling of the mercy of God
in Jesus Christ brings out obedience and cheerful service of God: yea, of al
arguments to move a man to abstein from sin, and to serve the Lord with
pleasure, that is ye most pithie and forcible, The shame of ye world, the fear
of temporal judgment, the horror of conscience, and the fear of the pains of
hell, will not be so steadable: it may be ^ they repress raging lusts, and
furious affections ^^r a time, but they will not mortify sin, and slay
corruption, and will never cause a man with pleasure to serve and obey God: but
if a man has found ^ God has loved him so well, that he has given his only
son to die, that he might live, it is not possible but that man, in some
measure, will set himself with alacrity and chearfulnes to serve God. Therefore,
the Apostle, when he would persuade christians to abstein from sin, and to serve
God, what argument uses he chiefly? read Romans 12. 1. he proponeth the mercy of
God, offering Jesus to die for them, for there he says, I beseech you,
brethren, through the mercies of God, ^ ye offer up your selves a living
sacrifice: therefore, if thou would covet to do ye Lords will cheerfully, pray
the Lord, that he would not so much threate^ thee, and propone terrors to thee,
as that he would make thee sensible of His mercies in Jesus Christ. The vain
Papist speaks little or nothing almost to the people of this mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, but propones to the people the pains of hell, and fire of
purgatory, to stay them from sin, and to make them serve God* and do good
works: but if there be no more, it will never make them to bring forth such
obedience, as either is acceptable to God, or yet profitable to themselves. The
Lord therefore, make us to be sensible of his unspeakable love in Jesus, that
we may set our selves with pleasure to serve and glorify him here, that so we
may be assured that he shall glorify us in the kingdom of Heaven, which Jesus
has purchased to us by his precious blood. To this Jesus, with the Father, and
the H. Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for ever,

Amen.
THE XIII. SERMON.
PSALM CXXX. LORD: my soul has waited, and I have trusted in His word.

LORD more than the morning watch watches for the morning.

LORD: for with the LORD is mercy, and with Him is great redemption.




WELBELOVED in the LORD JESUS, The last day we divided this Psalm into these
three parts. First, the proposition, whosoever he was that writ this Psalm,
he makes mention and rehearsal of that prayer that he made to his God in
the time of his great danger, and this he does to the fifth verse: Then
finding in experience a comfortable answer, and how good a thing it was to
pray to God, and to wait on Him, he professes* that as before, he had awaited
on Him, so still in time coming he would awaite on Him, and this he does
to the seventh verse. In the third and last part, he turns him to Israel, to
the Church, and exhorts them to await on God, as he had done, promising them
mercy and redemption from all their iniquities, if they would awaite on Him.
The last day we ended the first part: so we have now to follow out the other
two parts which remain.

Then as for the second, The prophet finding in experience the fruit of his
prayer, he professes that he will yet still wait on the Lord: I have waited
on the Lord: my soul has waited, and I have trusted in His word: As though he
would say, I depend yet still on His word, for the presence of the Lord that
we have in this life, is in His word, and in His Holy Spirit, that
accompanies it: So all the dependence we have on GOD, is in His word and
promise. Take that away, and then we have no sight, no presence, no faith
here, till we see Him face to face.

Yet the words are better to be marked, he says, I have waited on the Lord:
Then he says* My soul has waited on the Lord: as if he would say, I have
not awaited on the Lord only with my bodily eyes, but with mine heart and
secret inward affections: I have depended on Him from my very heart. For,
Brethren, mark it well, It is the heart of a man or woman, that draws GOD
down from Heaven, and sucketh in His presence* Marvelous is the power that a
faithful heart has when it sends up sighs and sobbes to Heaven for grace,
to pull down Gods presence and grace: if there be no more but the eye, it will
not do the turn, but where the Spirit of the Lord dwells in the heart, it
makes it to ^igh with sobbes that cannot be expressed. It is not possible, but
GOD, who gives His Spirit to no man in vain, and who knows the meaning of
His own Spirit, will grant that for which the Spirit makes intercession.
Paul (in the 8. chap. to the Rom.) setting down the waiting on of the godly,
how they wait on the Lord, he sets down both the forceable operation of
Gods Spirit in our hearts, as also the fruit of his operation, We sigh in our
selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies: there the
waiting on of the godly, is conjoined with sighs and sobbes. Then after, he
lets us see what follows upon that* What to seek we know not: but when
the Spirit of the Lord interceadeth for us with sighs and sobbes unspeakable
then the Lord, who searches the heart, and knows the meaning of His own
Spirit, grants that thing, for the which the Spirit makes intercession: for
what else means that unspeakable joye, which many a time the Saints of God
find before they have ended their prayers, but that their prayers are
favorably accepted? What means that unspeakable joy, when he says,
Believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious? That joye witnesses,
that the Lord gives his presence: for there is a sure ground, There is no true
joy, but in the presence of God: and so the joy testifies to thee, that thou
sighest not so soon, but the Lord gives his presence to thee. Now, when he
has said, My soul has waited, then he subjoyneth, I will wait still upon
His word: I will hold up mine ear to Heaven, as it were, and hear what He will
speak unto me. There is no consolation nor joy in this world, but in the
hearing of His voice: The friends of the bridegroom, says S. John, when they
stand and hear the bridegroom speak, they rejoice exceedingly: So it is the
joye of a Christian to hear the Lord Jesus speak. The meaning is this, I have
waited on so long, and have found in experience how good a thing it is, and
therefore that experience shall move me to wait on still, I am forced through
the experience of mercy* to wait on still without wearying. This prophet,
whosoever he was was in a great danger, and therefore in the beginning he
said, Out of the deep places have I cried unto thee, O JEHOVAH: so he was
under great affliction, his affliction y^ he suffered wrought in him so y^ he
waits patiently ye Lords deliverance: a waiting with patience, in end he
finds experience and proof of the mercy of God, for he was delivered: finding
experience of the Lords love through that delivery, he conceits an hope that
Gods favor shall never leave him, and professes that he will wait yet still, and
wait on continually, because of that experience of mercy. In the 5. chap. to
the Romans, ye have the notable effects that affliction works, linked
together: and if there were no more but the effects y^ we find to have been
in this man, they testify, that it is true that the Apostle speaks here:
Oppression (says he) works patience, that is when affliction is sanctified
to him that is afflicted, through time it brings forth patience. Then after
that a man has waited patiently on the deliverance of the Lord, then says he,
patience works experience, that is, a body that abides patiently under the
cross, in the end he finds an experience and proof of the Lords love, one
way or other, either by delivery, or by furnishing strength to bear it out, or
by some spiritual grace. Then he says, experience works hope, that is,
when any one has found in experience the mercy of the Lord, he conceaueth
an hope, that the Lord shall ever deliver him, and never forsake him: and he
hops yt he shall get greater favor, than ever he got before: for if the Lord
give the faithful a temporal delivery, they hope He shall give them
eternal delivery: And this is sure, thou can never hope for great enough
things of the Lord, thine hope is far inferior to the things that shall be
granted: for certainly, they that hope in the Lord, shall find greater things
than ever they hoped for: thou art not able to apprehend in thine hope the
greatness of them: the kingdom, the joye, and the glory, is greater than
thou can look for: when thou shall come there, thou shall find that all
things are greater than thine hope.

Now when he has proponed that he will hope in the Lord, he begins in
the next verse to amplify that proposition, and declares the earnestness of
it by a comparison taken from the watchmen, who watch all the night over
without any relief, and says, My soul waits on the Lord more than the
morning-watch watches for the morning. It is a worthy thing, to consider how
that after the heart is once prevented with a tasting of the sweetness of Gods
favor, how that heart will hing and depend upon Him, and seek and wait for
grace at Him more and more. Alas! from whence comes this, that men and women
are so careless to seek the Lord, and to wait on Him? Alas! they have not
tasted of that gracious sweetness that is in God through Jesus Christ, for if
they had once tasted of it, there would be a perpetual thirsting and desiring
for that presence: the heart would never have rest nor ease till it got that
presence. The Apostle Peter, when he desires them to seek that sincere milk
of the word, whereby they might grow, he subjoyneth, If once ye have tasted
how sweet and gracious the Lord is: meaning, that they that never have tasted
of the sweetness of the Lords presence and His graces, have not a desire of
grace. We see here what is the estate of the faithful in this world, by
this comparison with the watch. The estate of every one of us. is this waking
and watching from evening to morning. The watch, ye know, watches in the
night, and there especially where greatest danger may fall out, and the watch
that has no relief in his watching, but must watch from the evening to the
morning, he must be very weary, and being very weary, he will be very
desirous of the morning and the sun rising: when it comes, he is relieved
of his painful watching and goes to take his rest. To apply this to us: This
world which we live in, till the coming again of the Lord Jesus, is but a
darkesome night, in respect of that glorious day that shall appear when He
comes again. Indeed, the world since the first coming of Christ, is called
a day in the Scripture: but that is in respect of them that were before Christ,
but in respect of that passing light that Jesus Christ shall the^ bring with
Him: this is but passing darkness, and we shall think so, when that day shall
come. Now next, the watch in this world was never more straitelie bound to
watch in the night, than every Christian man is bound to watch till he come
again: and this was the direction that Christ gave His disciples. Wait, for ye
know not what hour thee good man of the house shall come: and in watching,
we find a great heaviness: What faithful man is in this world, that is not
wearied with watching? The world that sleeps in this life, is not wearied,
but the faithful that watches is weary of this life, and feign would they
have that morning coming, when the sun of righteousness, the Lord Jesus,
shall rise up, that they may be relieved: And when yt morning shall come, thou
that have watched in this world, at the least has striuen to watch, and
looked for that glorious coming of the Lord Jesus, thou shall get rest, so
sweet a rest as never man found in this world: but thou that have slept here,
and have not vvatched for Him, sleep on: when He comes thou shall get no
rest, thy sleeping shall end in a terrible wakening. There is no rest to them
that has not a desire to watch in this world: but they yt have a desire to
watch, and to hold up their heads, they shall get rest, yea, endless rest,
and quietness.

Now, having spoken of the first and second parts, I shall go shortly forward
to the third part of the Psalm, wherein the Prophet turns himself to
Israel, that is, the Church of God, and he exhorts Israel, the Church of
God, to watch, and wait on the Lord: Let Israel wait on the Lord: finding in
experience what he had gotten for his waiting on, to wit, mercy and
deliverance, he cannot be holden from glorifying Him, and cannot get Him
glorified enough: Therefore, he turns him to the whole Church, and exhorts
them to wait on, that they may find such experience as he found, and that
they may glorify the Lord also. So the end he looks to, is to glorify the
Lord, that He may be glorified in many belieuers, and waiters on him. The
end of the mercy of God tends to His own glory. There are many properties in
God, he is infinite in wisdom, in power, in truth, infinite in glory and
Majesty. Now the Lord is glorified in all his properties, in his wisdom,
power and justice. But above all things, the LORD seeks that the world
should glorify Him in that deep riches of mercy and gentleness that is in
Him, that we should praise Him everlastingly in His mercy. And as this is
His will, and as the mercy of GOD serves to His glory, So the soul of a man
that has once tasted of the mercy of the Lord Jesus, is carried away with such
a zeal to His glory, that it will cause am in forget himself, and with Moses
and Paul wish to be a curse and anathema, to have God glorified. This man ye
see, when he has tasted or His mercy, he turns him to the whole Church, and
wills them to trust in Him, that they might find His mercy, that so God may
be glorified. So it is he only, who has tasted of the mercy of God, who
when he looks through the miserable world, can have pity on any man. He that
never tasted of that mercy of God had never true pitic upon any man Then y^
thing which he craves is this, that many should taste of His mercy, that God
may be glorified by many. His heart is moved with pity, and so all his
endeavor is to see if once he can get them win to God: for when he looks
abroad upon miserable sinners, he is full of rueth and compassion. But mark
again, the zeal which he has to the glory of GOD, is the first cause that
moved him to seek that all the world should taste of mercy and glorify God.
So first he bears a love to Gods glory, and then he has pity toward men:
the one is the cause, the other the effect: the one preceedeth, the other
follows: the one is the root, and the other the branch. All the love we carry
to man, should be for the love we have to GOD. And where these two go
together, a zeal to the glory of God, (alas! where is zeal to Gods glory now
adays? which is a true token, that His glory is departing away) and then a
pity of the misery of man, a desire of the salvation of man: then that man
will forget himself, that he may seek the salvation of the world, that so
in it God may be glorified. And the man that has this disposition in his
heart, is fit to be a Minister and Preacher of grace to the world, otherwise,
if he want this disposition, it is but a cold preaching that he will make.

Now in the next words, when he has proponed the exhortation, and desired
them to wait on the Lord, to move them the more, he points out to the
Church the nature of God, what God is: for we must know what God is, ere
ever we put our trust and confidence in Him: for why? says he, with the Lord
is mercy and gentleness: as if he would say, The Lord is full of mercy. His
mercies are incomprehensible, yea, infinite, and neither man nor Angel can
sound out the deepnesse thereof: He is all mercy: and as S. John says in his
first Epist. chap. 4. verse. 8. The Lord is love. Therefore, await on Him: for
why? there is no want nor scant of mercy in Him. This is well to be marked,
when he exhorts Israel to wait upon the Lord, he says not, because He is
omnipotent, and infinite in justice, only wise, etc. But he gives this
reason, because mercy is with Him, therefore wait upon Him. This would be well
considered, What is the cause of this? Now I will ask another question, What
thing in God need we most into this world? There are many things which
we have much need of: What is it that we have most need of? Another
question: What is the estate that every one of us is borne in, in this world?
Are we not borne sinners? conceived and borne in sin and iniquity? And so
are we not all miserable? For there is nothing for sinners, but misery,
death, and damnation: and so all sinners are miserable. So, what thing is it
that a sinner wants most? what is it that sin and misery craves, but
mercy? And if thou be miserable, the thing in this world that thou should
crave first, is mercy, that God would be merciful to thee: So mercy and
forgiveness of sin is the first thing whereto thou ought to have
recourse. And if thou will tell a miserable body that feels himself to be
miserable and the child of wrath, that God is omnipotent if thou point Him out
in His wisdom, in His justice, he shall be so far from receiving any
comfort, and consolation, of any of these things, that by the contrary he
shall be so terrified, that he dare not presume to seek God, to look to Him,
to come to Him, etc: but he will run away from God: But tell him that God is
merciful, and full of grace in Jesus Christ, that is the sweetest speech that
ever he heard. But, alas! few of us feels that burden of sin: Who is he
that groneth under sin? Who fears the terrors of that wrath? If thou find
them, then tell thee of the mercies of Jesus Christ, it would be the sweetest
tale that ever thou heardest. And when a man is once sensible of the infinite
mercies of GOD in Jesus, then tell him of all the infinite properties of God,
tell him of His power, wisdom, and providence, they will all serve to his
comfort: for why? he will think that all things that are in God appertain to
him, and serve to his weal, he will find that all things will serve to his
salvation. Otherwise, without this assurance of mercy, he will never think
them comfortable. So there is a sure ground, The faith of a man or woman, first
of all, is ever relative to the mercy of God: and that is the first object of
faith. Indeed, having gotten a gripe of mercy, then it extends to all the
rest: but before that, there is nothing in God that it can rest upon. Ye see
by experience, when the law is preached, there is little allurance of the
heart: but when the Euangell and Christ Jesus is preached, the heart is drawn
on and allured. What is the cause of this? The doctrine of the law is a
doctrine of extreme justice, and His justice does nothing but terrify the
soul: but the doctrine of the Euangell is a doctrine of the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, which draws to it the hearts of men. Albeit thou hear the law
preached an hundredth years, and hear no more, thou shall be so far from being
the better, that thou shall still be the worse. So this testifies, that the
object of our faith is the surpassing mercy of God. Then, if thou would
search ye nature of God (and search Him a thousand years, thou shall never
come to the ground of His deepnesse) search out especially His love and mercy:
a man may fail and vanish away in curiosity, searching ye deepenesse of God:
but in searching out His mercy, thou shall never err, it shall be with a joy
and consolation of the heart. Paul prays for the Ephesians (chap. 3 verse.
18.) that they might attain to that infinite deepnesse and breadth, length and
height in God, for God is infinitely deep in all things: but wherefore is it
that he prays? Even that they, searching in God, should search that infinite
profoundity of the love of God. Surely, if we would know that profoundity of
God, and search in to His nature* the^ let us search always in to that love
and mercy of God in JESUS Christ. And this searching has ever a grouth and
increase in faith, till we get a sight of Him everlastingly.

To go forward. He is not content to say, with Him is gentleness, but he
subjoynes, with Him is great redemption: the words grow in highness, and these
words comprehe^d and set out a greater mercy in God than the former: now ye
mercy of God in Jesus Christ is not all told in a word: alas, for want of
feeling we speak slenderly and lightly of it: no, in very deed, all the words,
and the greatest words in the world, of the most holy, most wise, and most
eloquent men, is not able to set out and point out that infinite greatness and
deepnes of it: and he and she that once have tasted of mercy, scarcely can they
find words to express the thousand part of it: when they have gotten a little
taste and apprehension of it, they are not able to get words to express that
apprehension of the heart. Paul commonly calls it the riches of mercy, God,
who is rich in mercy, according to His infinite and great love, etc. Ephesians. 2.
4. Paul, David, and the rest of them cannot get words to express that
apprehension of mercy that they have in their hearts. No, there is no creature
that is capable of that infinite mercy: for the work that ye Spirit of Jesus
Christ does work in the heart, whether it be a sense of dolor, or a sense of
joy, the tongue of no creature can tell or express, Paul calls it sighs
inexpressible: and Peter calls it joy unspeakable: So ye heart cannot
express the greatness of the work of the Spirit. Men will think them
hyperbolicall words, but that is a token that they have not tasted that joy and
mercy in their own hearts.

Now in the last words he comes near hand, and makes a particular promise of
His mercy to His Church, He will redeem Israel, His Church, from all her
iniquity, as he would say, I have told you, He is merciful and full of
redemption, but I come nearer hand: Thou shall find in experience, that He is
merciful, and full of redemption: So it is not enough to the Preachers of ye
word, to preach Gods mercy and redemption generally to the world: no, they must
come nearer hand, and in promising* they must make to the hearts of the people
a particular application, and say not only, God is merciful, but* He will be
merciful unto you, and He is full of redemption, and He shall redeem you: and
so say I, I have not been speaking of mercy and redemption that appertains
not to us, but the Lord shall be merciful, and redeem you, if ye believe in
Jesus Christ: for there is no grace but in Him. If this particular application
be not made, the conscience of sin is so great, that the sinner dare not put
forth his hand to receive mercy. Now to whom pertains mercy and redemption?
He says, He shall redeem Israel, that is, the Church militant. The Church is
milita^t in this world, but redemption pertains to it in the end. But where
from shall the Lord redeem ye Church? Not from persecution and tribulation in
this world, but from all her sins. So this presupponeth first, That the
Church is full of sin so long as it is in this world. This is but a vain
dream to imagine that there shall be a Church, or any member of the same, in
this world, without spot: away with that vanity. So next, the redemption of
the Church stands nor so much in freeing it from persecution or tribulation,
although she shall be redeemed from all these things also, as from redeeming
her from sin: the chiese redemption shall be from sin: for why? the greatest
enemy of the Church is her own sins* and it is her own sins that is the cause
of all her persecution and it is sin that the Lord mortifieth and slays by
persecution and tribulation: for if there were no sin, there would not be such
a thing as a persecuter or a tyrant against her: and the greatest burden that
ye godly feel, is always their own sins, and they were never under so great
perfecution* no cross, no trouble comparable to the burden of sin. Paul
says, Romans 7. 24, Miserable man! who shall deliver me? Where from? Not from
persecution, albeit he was subject to as great persecution as any man, but
from this body of sin, because he could not get that obedience to God, that
he would have had. And wherefore died Christ? Was it to redeem us from
persecution, or crosses in this world? No, the Lord died that He might redeem
us from sin with His precious blood. And Paul (to ye Corin) makes mention of
that triumph that the Church shall have when the Lord Jesus shall come, O death
where is thy sting? Then she shall glory that she is redeemed from sin, and
from offending of GOD. And that shall be our chief felicity in that life to
come, that our hearts and thoughts shall be free of all sin, we shall offend
God no more, but al shall be full of obedience to Jesus Christ, and then shall
we be fully sanctified and glorified when we get that blessed presence of the
Lord Jesus, which we long for: To whom be praise and glory, for ever,

Amen.
THE XIIII. SERMON.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XV. Tyrus and Sidon.

Canaanite, came out of the same coasts, and cried* saying unto him, Have
inercie on me, O Lord, the son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with
a devil.














IN this TEXT which we have read (well beloved in the Lord Jesus) we have a
wonder, that the Lord wrought on a woman, a Canaanite a Gentile, of a cursed
generation, the generation of Canaan. The wonder is, the healing of a woman's
daughter that was possessed, and sore and miserably vexed with a devil. The
woman having the occasion to meet with the Lord through His coming to these
parts where she abode, she slippeth not the occasion, but seeks mercy and
grace: she finds at the first great hardness and difficulty, to get mercy:
but at the last, she overcomes all by her faith, and gets mercy.

Now to go through this History so shortly and plainly as the LORD shall give
the grace. This woman is called a Canaanite, that is descended of that old and
rotten stock of Canaan* that was destinate for wrath and destruction. ( Genes.
9. 25. Look to her estate, she is come of a cursed raze, she is lying in
sin and security: first in sin, next in a deadly sleep and security of
sin. This is the estate of every one of us: we lie in sin, conceived in
sin, and borne in sin: we feel not the sin, and that deadly sleep of
security is worse than the sin we lie in: there is none of us better by
nature than this woman was. Then when she is thus lying in sin and security,
the Lord from the Heaven sends her awakening, and a sharp wakening: for the
judgments of God are like many messengers from Heaven to waken us. In the
example of the woman we see that the Lords children must be wakened: and
oftentimes our first wakening is very sharp, doleful, and fearful, as it
is with one that is wakened in the rage of a fever. Yet there is grace here:
Well is ye man that is wakened, though the wakening were never so sore and
sharp: for the multitude of the world dye in security, and never waken, till
the fire of Hell waken them. Well is thee, and thou be wakened, albeit it
should be with never so heavy a judgment, yea, though thy daughter, or thy
self, should be possessed with a devil.

Now, when this poor woman is thus wakened, and is wrestling under the heavy
hand of God, the Lord casts an eye toward her, (for no doubt, howbeit she
was one of the raze of cursed Canaan, yet she was chosen to eternal life) and
of very purpose He casts Himself into these parts where she was: what ever
other erand He had, there is no question, but He had a particular respect to
her, ^ she might have the occasion to come to Him, and this was a great grace.
When we are wakened out of security, then the Mediciner has his time, and this
is a greater grace. It is a great grace to be wakened, but it is a greater
grace to find a Mediciner to cure thy disease: for, as multitudes die in
security, so also multitudes die in pain, torment, and desperation, after
they are wakened. Well, she hearing tell that He was come to these parts, and
that He was such a man, a wonderful man, as the prophet Esaias calls Him, who
cured all sort of diseases, who restored sight to the blind, limbs to the
lame, cleansed the leprous, and raised up the dead, she is moved to seek grace
and mercy at Him. Had not the Lord prevented her, and come down thither and
sought her, to draw her to Him, there had never been such a thing, that she had
sought for Him. All thy misery, albeit it were never so great, will never
draw thee to Him, except He seek thee first, and draw thine heart unto Him.

Well, now to come forward, when she seeks Him, she finds Him, and
gets His bodily presence.

CHRIST and His Disciples were vvalking together after His accustomed manner:
at the first meeting, says the TEXT, The woman cries, He is apparantlie
going before, and the woman follows after, and cries: Misery constrains
her to cry: And if the LORD lay His hands upon thee, He will compel thee
to howl and cry. O, that power and might that is in the LORD over His
creature!

But I doubt not, considering the words and communication that the LORD has
with this poor, miserable, and sinful woman, but it was that Spirit of
adoption that opened her mouth so vvide to cry upon Him so, O thou son of
David have mercy on me: What cries she? Mark her words: She cries, have
mercy upon me. How many of Jerusalem cried after this manner? An Heathen, ^
Cananite, cries this way: misery compels her to cry. But what makes her to
cry Mercy? We will rail and blaspheme God when we are in misery: but what
caused her to cry Mercy? No question, the conscience of her demerites caused
her to cry Mercy: she felt her self to be worthy of all that misery
wherewith she was burdened. The voice of a miserable sinner, that feels
misery, is, O Lord have mercy upon me: but lo how she styles Him, O Lord,
The Son of David: these were the common styles indeed of the Lord, in this
life, He was called of the multitud, LORD, and the son of David. But
certainly, I am of this mind, that this woman took these styles otherwise than
ye common multitude: The very eye of her soul was opened, to see Jesus Christ
to be the Lord, and to be the Son of God manifested in the flesh of the seed
of David, howbeit I will not attribute unto her a distinct and clear knowledge
of both His natures in one person, and of His offices.

Then, Brethren, ye see two grounds of her petition. The first is a Lordship,
and Power, and Dominion in Him, of whom she sought mercy. The next is, a Pity,
a Mercy in Him of whom she sought mercy. She sought mercy at a merciful
face, grace at a gracious face. Look that thy prayer be well grounded on the
LORD. When thou openest thy mouth to seek mercy at that LORD, look that thou
acknewledge that there is a power in that Lord to give thee every thing that
thou stand in need of: and chiefly, look that thou acknowledge, that there
is an infinite passing mercy in that Lord, surmounting all thy sins, and then
shall thou pray from the heart, with confidence and liberty: otherwise thou
may well seek mercy from the teeth outward, but never with thine heart.
Then she lets Him see a good cause wherefore she sought mercy: Lord, I have
need of a Physician, for I am sick. What sickness is sorer to a poor body,
than this, to be rent both in soul and body with a devil? Lord, my poor
daughter is tormented with a devil: As in thy prayer thou must have a sight of
the infinite power of thy God, of the mercy of thy God, so scorn Him not with a
senseless heart: No, if thou gettest not a sense and feeling of thy misery, of
thy trouble, and vexation in thine heart, call not upon the Name of the Lord.
It is true indeed, the Lord sees and knows thy misery, as well as thy self,
albeit thou speak not a word unto Him of thy misery: yet for all that, the
Lord takes pleasure to hear thy misery out of thine own mouth: He will not
only have thee to feel and groan in thine heart for it, but he will have thee
to utter it unto Him with thy tongue also, if opportunity serve: He will have
thee to make it known unto Him, as if He knew it not He will have thee to
bring up thy misery from the ground of thine heart, and as thou feel it in
the sadness of thine heart, so to utter it in thy voice: for the Lord
delights to hear miserable bodies speaking of their misery.

Now to go forward. When she has made her petition, see the meeting: the
text says, At the first He answered her not a word, but goes forward with
the Disciples, and lets her follow on crying, O Lord, have mercy upon me:
not once nor twice, but the cry goes never out of her head. This is
wonderful: He that prevented her with grace, and gave her grace to seek
him, will not make her one word answer, but goes his way, and will not
speak unto her: Yea, thou vvilt find, that he, who prevented thee with grace,
and sought thee, ere ever thou soughtest him, and gave thee grace to cry and
pray, Have mercy, O God, yet he will seem to mis-knowe thee, and make thee
none answer. Thou vvilt cry in sickness, Mercy, but vvilt thou always find
mercy? No, no, thou vvilt cry in other troubles, Mercy, and his Spirit no
question will interceade for thee, and yet for a time he will make thee none
answer. What means this? why does he so? Now when he has given thee grace
to cry for mercy, a thirst and an hunger for grace, (Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst) when he has given thee this first grace, he will let
thee cry a great while to try thy constancy. We never get a spiritual
grace in this life, but with the grace we get always a trial: and when he
gives us grace to cry: he will try if we will cry on. And to speak
the truth, Brethren, All our life here, is but a trial of the graces of GOD,
which he has given us. We get not our heaven here, but a faith to look
a far of unto it, an hunger, a thirst, a desire of it, and with our thirst a
trial of our Faith, a trial of our Hope, of our desire, to see if we will
stand in it. And then says Peter, in the life to come, the trial of thy
faith, and hope, and patience, being ended, What shall follow, Praise, and
honor, and glory, when JESUS shall appear, 1. Pet. 1. 7. Thou shall be
filled with saciety and fullness of joye, thine hunger and thirst shall be
satisfied as soon as ever thou see thy Redeemer.

Now to proceed. The Disciples that followed ye Lord, they are troubled with
the cry of ye woman, and say to the Lord. Either give her one answer or other,
and let her go her way. Surely I think this suit of the disciples was not so
much for any desire they had that he should help her, as to be quite of her
crying, because they were deafned with her. So then the Papists need not
upon this, to ground their intercession of the Saints in heaven, for us that
remain here on earth: for this ground is as vveake as their doctrine of
intercession is: and she directs not her speech to the Apostles here, to
PETER, JAMES, or JOHN, that they should intercead for her, but to the Lord
himself, she speaks to none of the^, but she passes and speaks to ye Lord
immediately: So should we leave all the Saincter, and with confidence go to
the Lord Himself. The Disciples are deafned and troubled with her crying: the
Lord Himself lets her cry on: and this is a token that He is not wearied
with her crying Well then, thou find a comfort here, when thou cryest night
and day, He never wearieth with thee: He says not, thou troublest me, al thy
cries sighs, and sobbes, are pleasant to Him. Men will be weary sometimes
with thy crying, as we read, that unjust Judge was importuned by the just
suit of the poor woman, and dispatcheth her away, and says, thou troublest
and irkest me night and day, Luke 18. 1. But the true righteous Judge is never
wearied with thee, when He lets thee cry out, He will not answer with a
grudge, as the Judge did, but cheerfully. The Lord that loves a cheerful
giver, He Himself gives chearefully. What means that joye that the
faithful find in their hearts, accompanying the benefit that comes from
Him, but that the Lord gives His benefits chearefully? for if the LORD gave
thee them not cheerfully, but in anger and wrath, and threw them to thee as to
a reprobate, thou would never have joye in the receiving of them. There is
not such a thing, as a reprobate can have joy in the giver, or ever have his
mouth open with true thanksgiving to the Lord to say once, I thank thee: Why?
Because the Lord gives him not His benefits in love, but in anger. So this is
a sure token when thou find joye in thine heart, and a contentation in thy
prayer, and a purpose to be thankful, that the Lord gives thee chearefully,
and hears thee joyfully. And if thou can get but a joyful look of thy
God, thou may be assured that it proceeds of mercy. When He looks so
unto thee, He does not as earthly kings, or any earthly creature use to do,
for they can keep a fair countenance, and yet have little good will in their
hearts. Well, the woman cries, and the disciples cry: The Lord must answer
once, but He makes an answer little to her contentment, I am not sent,
says He, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel: What have I to do
with that poor woman? she is not one of My sheep, she is of a cursed
generation of the Canaanites, ordained to destruction and wrath: In a word, He
debarreth her from grace, He cloaseth the gates of Heaven upon her teeth: for
when He says, He is not sent to her He shuts her out of Heaven. We ought
to mark this well, for we are Canaanites, that is to say. Gentiles: It is true
indeed, the Lord coming down from the Heaven, and manifesting Himself in the
flesh. He had His commission first and principally to the Jews, and not to the
Gentiles, not to Scotland, nor ENGLAND, nor Germany, nor France, chiefly and
principally: as Christ said to Jerusalem. Oh! that thou could see the day
of thy visitation! Luke 19. 41. He was sent with commission to the Gentiles,
but in case of the contumacie and rebellion of the Jews, as if the Lord had
said unto him, Go thy way unto mine own people, whom I have chosen from
among all the Nations of the earth, and see if thou can win them, go no
further. And if the Jews had not been rebellious and disobedient, we had
never gotten mercy and grace* Look Roman. 11. 11. The fall of the Jews, was
the raising up of the Gentiles, and the diminution of the Jews, was the
riches of the Gentiles. How got ye grace? says he, By their contumacie and
rebellion. So Christ, sending out his Disciples to preach, bids them go, not
unto the Gentiles, or unto the Samaritanes their next neighbors, but unto the
l^st sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 10. 5. And Paul in a preaching
before both the Jews and Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. The word of GOD, says he,
behooued first to be preached unto you, the promise belonging unto you. But
because ye will not receive the word, and have made your selves unworthy of
life everlasting* Therefore, I will turn and preach to the Gentiles: And so
he bade the Jews goodnight, and turned him to the Gentiles. And the TEXT
says, that then the Gentiles rejoiced exceedingly.

So we were strangers from heaven, and aliantes from the common wealth of
Israel.

And we learn in the example of this woman that our entry to grace, and to
heaven, was very hard and difficill: And as our entry to grace was hard* so
if we fall from grace, our re-entrie to grace shall be far harder: And if
thou fall once from grace, hardly shall thou get grace again. A Gentile that
falls once from grace, and treads under his feet the blood of Jesus, shall
never be renewed with grace again. And I say to thee, O Scotland, if thou
fallest from grace, look never for grace again. Look to the cities amongst
the Gentiles that fell from grace, look Corinth, look Philippi* look ye
Galathians, etc. got they ever grace again? No: so if Scotland fall from grace,
it will be a wonder if ever it get grace again. The wrath of God shall be
powered forth upon every one, from the greatest to the smallest: for if He
received not the Jews (His own people) into grace, after that they were once
fallen from it, shall He take thee up again, a Gentile, a vile dog, in respect
of them? And yet our men in this country care not to cast themselves, and
their whole land, into Hell, and into everlasting abjection from grace, without
all hope of recovery. So this is an hard answer* she finds no grace at
all. They that follow Jesus Christ, and seek for grace, will find in their
way a sore trial: men think that Heaven is but a common benefit, and that it
is easy to a man to come thither: but albeit thou be a king, an Emperor, or
Monarch, thou will find an hard entry therein. Will thy kingdom or thy
lordship bring thee to heaven? No, if thou sleep on in careless security, thou
shall never so heaven. So if there were no more but this example of this
Gentilish woman, it teaches us, that it is hard to win to heaven, and that the
gates of Heaven at the first shall be shut upon our teeth. What is the cause of
this? Thou art further from Christ, and from grace, from Heaven, and from the
joye of Heaven, a thousand times more than the natural earth is from the
natural Heaven. Thou art a Canaanite, come of a cursed generation. What ado
has a Canaanite with Heaven? so unworthy a thing, with so worthy a thing? The
Lord, before He opened the gates of Heaven unto her* He would let her
understand, that she had nothing to do with Heaven. And I say unto thee, that
the Lord, ere ever He give thee grace, He will have thee knowing by
tentations and tryalles, that thou art a Canaanite, descended of a cursed and
reprobate generation, and unworthy that ever thou should see Heaven, or
have a do with Heaven: And if He bring thee not to this sight and this fear,
I give thee thy dome, thou shall never see Heaven.

Now mark, He has cloased the doors of Heaven upon her: And certainly,
this answer might have caused her to have gone away with shame and confusion.
But for all this tentation, she continues still, she cries still, and hops
for mercy: hold upon mercy, hope still, believe on still and that hope shall
never make thee ashamed. She has cried for mercy, the gates of Heaven are
shut against her: What does she? Goes she her way? No, no, she tarieth
still, and knocks. And if thou knew what Heaven were, and what Hell were,
thou would be loath to leave Heaven. Oh! the torments that remain for
them that fall into Hell! So she knocks, and falls down upon her face,
and adoreth, and says, O Son of David, have mercy on me. This adoring was
not only for the casting the devil out of her daughter: No, no, she sought
everlasting life at the hands of the Lord, and that healing of her daughter
was an earnest-pennie of that Life. This was the mind of the woman no question.
It is said in the Scripture, Seek, and ye shall find: ask, and ye shall
receive: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Mat. 7. 7. If the seeking
fail thee, yet tarry still and knock. And if it had not been the Lords will
that a sinner (when he finds heaven gates closed upon him) should tarry still
and knock, would he have bidde^ him knock? It were a presumptuous thing for a
beggar to knock at one of our doors: but seeing ye Lord has expressly
commanded thee to knock, then knock on boldly. And if thou go away with the
first answer, or the first nay-saying thou wast never truly hungry nor
thirsty: And it is a token that thou countest little of the grace of GOD. If
thou knew how precious a thing the grace of God and Jesus Christ were, and
what Heaven were, and what Hell were, thou would never cease knocking day
nor night all the days of thy life: for if thou go away proudly, and tariest
not upon Gods answer, but speak presumptuously, and say, If He will not give
me grace, let Him hold it to Himself, as blasphemous men will say: then He
will shoot thee into Hell: for if thou were a king of all the world, thou
shall never get thine head in at Heaven gates, except thou knock. Lord, if the
world knew how hard a thing it is to get entry there! men think that they will
come easily and sleeping to Heaven, albeit they take their pleasure and
pastime: but they deceive themselves, there must be much striving and fighting
ere they get Heaven: Before that Heaven could be opened, it behooved Jesus
Christ to shed His precious blood.

Now, Brethren ye may say to me, Alas, who can knock? who is able to come
there? No, thou have no power once to lift up thine hand to knock at that
gate, except that the Lord put out His hand, and hold thee up, even in the
mean time when He is holding thee back, so wonderful is the Lords working
with His own, He will be holding them abacke with the one hand, and He will be
pulling them in to Him as fast with the other hand, when He will be dissuading*
He will persuade, when He forbids to approach unto Him, he inwardly
allureth m^n to come unto Him. Now, will ye hear the Lords answer? If the
first answer was hard, this is* as hard and rough: for with an angry
countenance no doubt He answers, It is not lawful, says He* to take the
childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs. It is even as much as if He had
taken her by the shoulders, and thrust her out: first He says, Thou art but
a dog, a Gentile, and this that thou seek is a precious thing, the bread
of life, this appertains only to the children of GOD: Shall I take that and
give it unto a dog? As if He had said, Go thy way, dog, thou shall not
get such a precious benefit as thou requirest.

Then we see here, because she was a Gentile, therefore He calls her a dog.
Suppose thou be a King (I pray thee be not too proud in thine own conceit)
and yet a Gentile, Ergo, by nature, a dog. He will cast a Kingdom, an
Empire, a Monarchy to a man, as one will cast a bone into the mouth of a
dog, but all is nothing in respect of one drop of grace, and the hope of
the kingdom of Heaven.

Albeit thou be a beggar, and yet gettest but one drop of grace through
JESUS CHRIST, any hope of the Kingdom of Heaven, any beginning of
regeneration, then thou have gotten a greater grace, a more precious thing,
than Caesar, that got all the world. There is no comparison betwixt the
meanest spiritual and heavenly gift, and betwixt the greatest temporal and
earthly thing.

Now I note again the hardness to win to the Kingdom of Heaven. Would ye
not think it a marvelous thing to turn a dog into the Son of God? It is
as great a wonder to see a Gentile to be called to Heaven as to make dogs and
stones the Sons of God Now know, that before thou gettest access to Heaven,
although thou were a king, thou must be humbled in thine own conceit, thou
must know thine own estate and condition, thou must think thy self as vile
and contemptible as a very dog by nature, as this woman was brought to say:
otherwise, thou shall never get heaven.

Then, Brethren, if the entry to the Kingdom of heaven be so hard, if thou
like a dog return to thy vomit, or as a sow to the puddle, (as Peter
says, 2. Pet. 2. 22.) after thou art was^en with the blood of that immaculate
Lamb, then it is a wonder if ever thou get grace to re-enter again. Now hear
the poor woman's answer: she grants all, It is very true, thou say, I am
but a dog, a vile and an unworthy wretch, and that bread of heaven is a
precious thing, I am not worthy that it should be casten unto me: Yet
(says she) the whelps do eat of the crummes which fall from their
masters table: If thou will not show me this grace, to eat bread with the
children, yet let me eat the paringes and crummes under the table. Ere ever
the Lord bestow grace and eternal life upon thee, he will have thee to
account thy self unworthy of any grace: yea, he will have thee to account
as vilely of thy self as of a dog, albeit thou had never so many great
prerogatives otherwise in the world: ere thou get that life, thy conscience
will accuse thee to be unworthy of such a life, and such a joye as the LORD
ordained for his own. She scipped before, now she thrumbleth and thrusts
in at the gates of heaven, and goes like a violent woman: not indeed
preassing like a sturdie beggar, to be in whether the Lord would or not: but by
humility, and acknowledging of her own unworthiness, in all submission,
coming as it were, creeping like a silly whelpe under the table: that is the
violence that is done to the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 11. 12. She takes up
heaven by violence, in all submission and humility. And if thou be once but a
whelpe under the table of GOD, in the house of GOD, to gather up the crummes of
that plentiful table, thou art called to a greater honor, than if thou were
made King of all the world. I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of
GOD, than to be king of all the world.

Now, Brethren, when she is thronging in, he is loath to put her out again:
No, he says, O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou desire,
thy faith has won the victory. From whence had this poor woman all this
perseverance, and this continuance, and this constancy, but from him? and yet
he stands wondering at his own graces. The LORD, (behold his doing) when
he has given thee grace and perseverance, when thou come to heaven, he
will wonder at thee: and there is the end of all thy perseverance, a fair
crown of glory. And what more does he? That same moment, that force that
was in the word, that proceeded out of the mouth of JESUS, extended it self
to the woman's daughter, and heals her, and casts the devil out of her. Now
she sought only to creep in as a whelp under the table to eat the crummes, and
now the LORD sets her up at the table to sit with Him in glory, as CHRIST
Himself says, I say to thee, says He, many shall come out of the East,
and out of the West, into mine house, into the Kingdom of Heaven, and sit
down at the Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob, Matthew. 8. 11. And from
whence are we come? Even out of the furthermost point of the West. And, O
SCOTLAND! Believe in JESUS, seek earnestly grace at Him, and wait
patiently, when He tries thee, and thou shall find that thou shall be set
down with ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and IAAKOB, in glory. We are the Sons of GOD
indeed, but it appears not yet what we shall be: but one day it shall
appear, when we shall be crowned with the crown of glory. The Lord work
this faith and earnest desire of grace in us for Jesus Christ's sake: To whom
be all glory, honor, and praise, for ever, and ever,

Amen.
THE XV. SERMON.
LVKE, CHAP. VII. And behold, a woman in the city, who was a sinner, when
she knew that Jesus sat at table in the Pharisees house, she brought a box
of ointment:

And she stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet
with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his
feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

Now when the Pharisie who bade him, saw it, he spoke within himself,
saying, If this man were a Prophet, he would surely have known who, and what
manner of woman this is who touches him: for she is a sinner.

And Jesus answered, and said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee. And he said, Master, say on.

There was a certain lender who had two detters: the one ought five hundredth
pence, and the other fifty:

When they had nothing to pay, he for gave them both: Which of them, therefore,
tell me, will love him most?

Simon answered, and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he
said unto him, Thou have truly judged.

44. Then he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this woman?
I entered into thine house, and thou gave me no water to my feet: but she
has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.

Thou gave me no kiss: but she, since the time I came in, has not ceased
to kiss my feet.

Mine head with oil thou did not anoint: but she has anointed my feet with
ointment.

Wherefore, I say unto thee, many sins are forgiven her: for she loved much.
To whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little.

And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

And they that sat at table with him, began to say within themselves, Who is
this that even for gives sins?

And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee: go in peace.


THIS Text (well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) contains a notable History, of the
conversion of a penitent sinner, a sinful woman, whom the LORD first called
inwardly by His Spirit, and to whom after outwardly by His own voice He gives
assurance of the remission of her sins: And we have first set down the
occasion that the Lord offers to this sinful woman to metee with Him, that
she may receive mercy and forgiveness of her sins: Of very purpose He
casts Himself in her way, and into these parts where the woman was, and
yields to dine in the house of a Pharisie, where she might have the occasion
and opportunity to meet with Him: This occasion being offered unto her, being
partly touched with a feeling of her own misery, partly being prevented with
the Spirit of Jesus alluring her, she lets it not slip, but she comes
to the house, where the Lord was, and she comes not empty handed, but she
brings with her a box of precious sweet smelling ointment, and coming to
the house where the LORD was sitting at table, look what she does, she
enters not in peartly and boldly, neither comes she before His face, being
ashamed of her own sins: she was ashamed that these eyes, these all-seeing
eyes of the LORD, which pierce into the soul of man, should see her: So she
stands (says the Text) behind His back, and then she falls down at
His feet.

The sight of thy sin, as it will work shame of face, when the relicts of
nature begins to challenge it, when it strives to enter into the soul, so
that scarcely thou dare look a man in the face, let be the Lord, who is the
revenger of it: Even so, when it once pleases the Lord to waken the
conscience, it will work in thee a wonderful humility: so that thou will
stoop, and cast thy self down under the feet of thy GOD. The stiffenesse
that ye see in men, who bow not their bodies and knees unto the Lord,
proceeds of the want of that sight of sin and corruption within them. If
these men, who fling their heads in the air, (and make their boasts of their
evil deeds) saw their sins, they would be ashamed of themselves, and humble
themselves in ye dust. When she is fallen down, she weepeth. The sight of sin
will make thee to weep and mourn. Thou laughest now, and plaiest ye wanton,
because there is a veil casten over thine eye, that blinds thee so that thou
can not see sin the own color yea, it covers thy self from thee: but if
once thou saw sin and thy self well, it would make thee to weep and lament
bitterly. Well, she leaves not of yet, but being drawn and allured with a
sense of His preventing mercy, y^ came from Him, she draws near^ unto Him. If
she had not felt that love that came from Him, she durst never have come near
Him. As a male-factor has no pleasure to behold the countenance of the Judge,
but his eye and countenance is terrible to Him: Even so, the Lord is fearful
and terrible to them that feel not that love that proceeds from Him.

It is the sense of the love that allureth sinners to come to God, As David
says, Psalm. 130. 3. If thou straightly markest iniquity, no flesh can stand:
but mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. The tears that the
displeasure for sin expresses out of her, she will not lose them, but she
takes them, and ^asheth his feet with them, and the^ takes the hair of her
head, and dries them therewith. Had thou once a sense of that sweet mercy
in Jesus Christ, were that love once spread abroad into thine heart by His H.
Spirit, as the Apostle speaks, O, how thou would love Him, and be careful
to serve and pleasure Him! This want of love toward ye Lord Jesus argues
plainly, that thou have not felt that love of His toward thee: For if once
thou had felt how well He loves thee, who shed His precious blood for thee:
then it is a fair matter to thee to sheede tears for Him, that shed His
blood for thee: And if thou once felt that love, now all the tears, and all
the moisture in thy body, yea, thy very soul thou would be glad to pour
it out for Him, and consecrate thy life unto His service: but living against
Him, in doing all kind of villainy in despite of Him, thou testifiest
plainly, that thou have never found the virtue of His blood.

Look what Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. 14. The love of God constrains me: that
is, binds up my soul, and all the powers and faculties thereof, and
occupyeth my whole senses, that I am ravished from all things in the world,
to get mine heart and affections fixed upon Him: Why? says he, Because He
loved me so well, that He has died for me: and therefore, I will consecrate
my life to him, who has purchased everlasting life for me. And therefore,
whosoever has not a purpose to pour out his life for Jesus Christ, and has
not a free heart toward Him in some measure, he cannot have any sure argument
that Christ has died for him. And if thou have not that assurance, woe is
thee, that ever thou tookest life! it had been better thou had been made a
stock or a stone, if thou find not that Christ died for thee.

But what further did this silly woman? She cease not here, but is
continually kissing the feet of the Lord. Ye who before delited in kissing*
leave your harlots, and from this woman learn to kiss the LORD, or else thou,
and thy vile mouth, shall burn in Hell. Kiss the feet of the LORD, who has
shed His blood for thee: for so often as thou kissest the feet of the Lord,
thou shall find that thou suckest grace out of Him. And this woman, who was
before a vile harlot, now only she takes pleasure to kiss the Lord. And what
did this woman more? It is said, when she had bestowed her body upon Him* she
takes that box of costly ointment, that she had prepared for Him* and
anointed his feet therewith. Bestow thy self first upon the Lord, and
bestow thy body upon Him and His service, and say to Him* Now Lord I give
thee, and I bestow upon thee, mine heart, my soul, my body and all the members
thereof, keep thouthem in holiness, that they may be consecrate to thee. Then
when thou have bestowed first thine heart and thy self upon Him, it will be
none hard matter to bestow thy goods, when His glory requires. And certainly,
when men are so nigard in the ^^ds cause, that they will not bestow a penny
upon Him when his glory requires, or upon His ^oore members, it is a sure
argument, that they ^euer bestowed their heart upon Him. Many vain men and
women will say, And if Christ were in the world, for the love I carry unto
Him, I would follow Him, serve Him, imploye my body, and all that I have in
His service, and to His glory: but if thou will not bestow thy goods upon the
needy, upon His servants, and upon these who carry His image, if Christ
Himself were in the world, thou would bestow nothing upon Him: for if
once thou were sensible of that liberality that Jesus offers unto His own,
thou would love Him so well, that thou would show thy self liberal to
these who carry His image: thou would give all that thou have for His cause,
who is only able to make thee rich.

Now to go forward in the History. Whilst she is thus exercised in
weeping, in washing the Lords feet with her tears, in drying them with her
hair, in anointing them with precious ointment, what does the Lord? what is
His behavior? All this time the LORD speaks never a word unto her: all this
time while she finds so great grace and mercy in Him, He turns not once
His face unto her. If thou gettest once the Lords back near unto thee, if
thou gettest leave to kiss His feet, howbeit thou gettest not His face at the
first, nor His countenance at the entry, yet out of Him thou shall suck grace
and mercy unspeakable. It is a marvelous thing to see how a sinner will get
grace. When the Lord will seem to turn His back upon thee, yet follow thou
on and leave Him not, till He turn His face toward thee: and I assure thee
thou shall get His face at the last. Therefore, never depart from Him, but
stick by His back and His feet, and certainly in the end thou shall get
that sight of that joyful countenance that shall complete thy joy.

Now to come to the Pharisees part, who called Him to dinner, for we have
heard the part of the woman. The Pharisie, named Simon, sits still, and
sees all that is done and speaks not one word, but thinks, and he
thinks the thing which is not good: his mouth is closed, but he blasphemeth
in his heart, If this man were a Prophet, says he, ^ee would know* who, and
what manner of woman this were who touches him* for she is a sinner: he
thought incontinent, that the filthiness of the woman would pollute the Lord:
would he suffer this vile harlot to touch him, if he were a Prophet, or an
holy man? Ye see now, Brethren, how disdainfully he thinks of her, and
how he contemns her in his heart. A Pharisie that is an hypocrite, that will
counterfeite outwardly a kind of holiness: see how he will disdain a poor
sinner, that is an open sinner in the sight of the world: An hypocrite is a
foul sinner, and he will do such things in secret, that it is a shame to
speak of, because his sin is cloaked from the sight of the world, and from
his own eyes: when he beholds another sinner, again, that sins openly
in the sight of the world, how disdainfully will he count and speak of the
open sinner? and will spitte at him: the seuerest censurer that ever was, is an
hypocrite: and then he will stand up, admiring of himself, and his colored
righteousness, and say, I thank God, I am not like other men: And what is
the cause of this? The Lord says, The hypocrite is nothing but a whited
tomb, a painted grave, that within is full of dead men's bones, stink and
filthiness, Matthew. 23. 27. And yet that cloak of hypocrisy being spread over
the heart, the hypocrite sees not that filthiness that is in his own heart:
and that hypocrite that thinks to beguile all the world, chiefly he
beguileth himself. And if thou saw that seed of all mischei^e that is
within thy self, certainly thou would disdain thy self, and thou
would be inclined to judge charitably of a poor sinner: thou would not
be so sore and rigorous a censurer of others as thou art: And if thou saw
what kind of stuff were within thy self* (howbeit it break not out) thou
would say, Now I see as great corruption in my self as in any body: (and it
is the Lord that lets it not break out) the Lord purge and renew me, and
the Lord purge and renew yonder sinner from the sin that breaks out so
openly in outward action. Now as the Pharisie knows not himself, so he
knows not what the Lord is, he knows Him not to be the Mediator, come into
the world to save poor sinners: and therefore he concludes so
blasphemously, The Lord is not a Prophet.

Mark, Brethren: Who ever sees not that misery that is within themselves, of
necessity they never saw that mercy that is in Jesus Christ: These two go
together of necessity, Whosoever sees not himself, is ignorant of Christ,
and would not buy the mercy of Christ for one penny, he cares not for Christ's
kindness, he counts grace and mercy all but vanity. Now of these two
follows another thing, Not seeing himself first: next, not seeing that mercy
in Christ, not knowing that He was that Savior of the world: of these two
follows this wicked conceit in him, seeing the sinner deal with Him to get
grace and mercy, and the Lord dealing so mercifully with her, he scorneth, and
contemptuously disdaineth in his heart this dealing yt the poor sinner has
with y^ Lord. The men who see not their own misery, no^ ye Lords mercy, they
will scorn and disdain a poor sinner, either outwardly, calling them sighing
brethren, and sobbing sisters: or at least in their heart inwardly. And I am
assured there are hypocrites enough this day, who have no sense of misery, that
scorn in their hearts a poor sinner yt seeks mercy of ye Lord, and hold in
dirision our fasting, our humiliation, and all our preaching which they hear.
And therefore, as thou would not be culpable of such scorning, and would
not be inuolued in yt judgment that tarieth that scornful number, seek I
beseech thee, to get these two sighs, and say, Lord, I am but a miserable body,
and am unworthy to look up to ye Heaven: and then get a sense of the mercy of
the Lord: and then thou shall be ^o far from scorning grace in thine heart,
that thou shall be feign to creep in with all humility to get a part and
portion of the grace that is spoken of.

The Pharisie yet has not been one of the worst of them, he was not an open
blasphemer, but an hypocrite, I doubt not, but ye Lord has had mercy on him:
but what, how, and when his conversion has been, the Lord knows.

Now I go forward to ye part of the Lord: first toward the Pharisie, and then
toward the poor woman. The Pharisie conceived not this so quietly and
secretly within his own heart, but the Lord, the searcher of the heart, that
made ye heart, draws it to light, and says, Simon, I have somewhat to say
unto thee, I know what thou think well enough, no man needs to tell me
thine heart* and therefore I will speak something unto thee: Simon answers,
Lord, say on. Brethren, strive to present holy thoughts before GOD: think it
not enough to keep thine hand holy, thy tongue from blasphemy, but keep an
holy heart unto the LORD: begin not to play the counterfeit, to speak holily,
and to have a fair show outwardly, and then to keep a foul heart: and if an
evil thought escape thee (as who will not have a thousand evil thoughts?) if
a blasphemy against GOD escape thee, (as who blasphemeth not God in their
heart as well as the Pharisie?) be sorrowful for it, away with it, let it not
tarry, but say as Paul says, Romans 7. 17. It is not I, that does it, but the
corruption of my nature which remains within me. Renounce that foul birth,
and take it never unto thee: and this is that battle which we should have
night and day, to get that vile canker and corruption which utters it self
so violently against that inviolable Majesty, repressed and put away.

Now when He has thus spoken, He begins to let Simon see, that that same
very woman, of whom he counted so dis^^ainfully, was not so vile a woman as he
thought: as though He would say, Simon, thou think there is not so vile a
sinner in the world, as she is: but I s^y unto thee, she is not so sinful, I
have cleansed her I have given her remission of all her sins: (Who dare call
a sinner foul, that the Lord has called clean?) dare thou call a penitent
sinner foul, who has washen my feere with tears, and repents unfeignedly?
Then subsuming He says, This woman repents unfeignedly, and testifies her
repentance in loving me so exceedingly: Therefore He concludes, All her sins
are forgiven her: Therefore Simon, disdain her not, no more than I do.

But to consider more narrowly, first the ground of the proposition: then the
assumption: last, that joyful conclusion. The ground of his reason is this, To
whom a great debt is forgiven, that person will love exceedingly. To make us
to understand this the better, He brings in a familiar example, a parable,
There was a certain lender, who had two debtors: the one ought five hundredth
pence, and the other fifty: And when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them
both: Which of them, therefore, tell me, will love him most? He, says Simon,
to whom he forgave most. Well, says the Lord, then I take this proposition
out of thy mouth, He to whom much is forgiven, he loves exceedingly, he
loves much: And certainly, if thou have no sense of debt, if thou think in
thine own conceit, that thou owe nothing, I say to thee, Thou love not
God, thou have no love toward Him. A wanton sinner, that feales not the
burden of sin, he has no more love to God, nor to Christ, than a dog
has: fie on thee dog! fie on thee, that have not a sense of sin: for thou
have no love to God. Next again, suppose thou have a sense of sin, and
feel some burden thereof, yet if thou but think that thou have a penny
in thy purse to pay GOD for thy debt, thou will never love thy God. And I say
to thee. I could never think in mine heart, that a Papist, a vain lowne, who
will boast of his merits, who glories in his own works, and thinks he
can pay God for his redemption: I say, I could never be persuaded that such a
one could love the Lord. Next, except with the sense of thy debt, thou find
also a free remission of all thy debt, alas, thou can have no love to GOD:
feel thy sin, and thy poverty, as much as thou will, if thou find not a
free remission and pardon of all thy debt, thou will never love Him, but He is
a terror unto thee so often as thou think of Him, and thou would flee out
of the world to escape His hands. Then thirdly, thou that feel thy debt,
and then feel thine own poverty, that thou have not one penny to give
Him: (suppose thou be a King, all thy Kingdom will not ransom thy soul: n^,
sell Heaven and the earth and all, they will not ransom the soul of one
creature, they will not fill up one penny of the sum to ransom the soul of
one sinner) and the^ with the sense of the poverty, seeleth a free remission,
and hears the Lord say, I forgive thee all, I will have none of thy silver:
but I forgive thee all in the precious blood of my dear Son the Lord Jesus:
(there is the ransom and I adjudge thee to damnation that seek any other
ransom) then thou will love the Lord exceedingly. These three things being
felt, first with groans and sobbes feeling the debt and burden: Next, thy
poverty, and vnhabilitie to pay: and last, a free remission and disburthening,
that sinner would bestow all his goods, and land, and life, and all that he
has for the love that he bears to the LORD JESUS: thine heart will be
sweetly loosed with a love to ye Lord. Who is able to express that love and
that unspeakable joye, that will be in the heart of a sinner, that feels
the remission of his sins.

Brethren, There is yet more than this in the comparison: He to whom little
is forgiven, he will love little: and he to whom much is forgiven, will love
much. He or she that will come in, and confess their sins, but will in the
mean time extenuate it, and say, it is but a little sin, it is but a
venial sin, and many one has done twice as much: that body, I say, that
will extenuate sin, although it were but an evil thought against that
inviolable Majesty, I know not whether such an one has gotten remission of
their sins or not: and supposing they have gotten remission of it, yet it
will be but a little love that they will have unto the Lord.

But he or she that will come in, and aggreadge their sin, though it were
but a thought against that Majesty, for thou art never able to aggreadge it
enough, and if thou find a remission of thy sin, then no man can think how
heartily that body will love the LORD: for if once thou gettest grace to
repent, and to love GOD, thou may be assured, that thy sins, though they
were never so great, never so weighty, and many in number, shall never hinder
thee of grace and mercy. And then again I say to thee, the greatest sinner,
yt counts most of their sins, once feeling ye remission of their sins, ever
the greater lover. Paul, an oppressor, a persecuter, blasphemer, a wrongful
man, once feeling the love of the Lord, forgiving him, O! how exceedingly loved
he the Lord! A penitent sinner shall far surpass them in love that have not
sinned halse so much: the world shall admire at him for his love, he shall be a
miracle to all them that behold him.

Now I proceed forward. The Pharisie can judge well enough of this general,
that he that has most forgiven him, loves most, and that love is the effect
of remission of sins: (Well art thou that love the Lord, for be assured
that the Lord loves thee, and has forgiven thee thy sins:) But when it
comes to the assumption, that that poor woman, that sinful woman, loved the
Lord, there he erreth. Behold, Brethren, the light of nature, and the
blindness of nature: by nature we will know the general well enough: suppose
thou had no more but that light of nature, thou will confess that a
murderer should die the death: But if thou come to the particular, O! but thou
art a murderer, thou have a bloody heart, a bloody hand, and thou art all
bloody: Will any man suffer that? No, no, and therefore he will hold off this
conclusion, Therefore thou should die the death, and be taken to the place
of execution, and there lose thine head. And would to God that our bloody men
(whether they be Noblemen, lords, Earls, Barons, or others) had been headed
long since: for it is a marvel that plague solloweth not after plague
continually, till this land be purged of this blood that cries continually in
the streets. So the Pharisie could not believe the particular, that ever the
poor sinner could get mercy, he was so hard a censurer of the poor woman.
But I count it nothing worth, to judge uprightly in general, except also thou
judge uprightly in particular. The Judges of the Land they will judge uprightly
in general: but come to the particular, to kinsfolks, friends, and
alliances, this man, or that man with his bud, O, there there the judgment is
perverted. Well is the Judge that judges uprightly in particular: for a Turk
may judge uprightly in general: and woe is thee that judge not uprightly in
particular.

Now to come to the other part of the reason, The Lord turns Him to the poor
woman, and the more the Pharisie finds fault with the Lord, the more the Lord
turns Him toward her, and says, I say to thee, Simon, that this woman
loves me more a thousand times, than ever thou did. If thou withholdest
grace from a sinner, then in despite of thy teeth, the Lord will heap grace
upon him. The assumption is this, This woman loneth me exceedingly: then the
conclusion will follow in the own room. Therefore this woman certainly has
all her sins forgiven her. Then He declares the assumption by way of
comparison with the Pharisie, Thou calledst me to dinner, says he, but this
woman loved me better than thou do. I entered into thine house, and thou
gave me no water to my feat, after the fashion of the country: but she has
washed my feet with tears: look if this be a token of love: then again, Thou
gave me no kiss, after ye fashion of the country, but she, since the time I
came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. Then, Mine head with oil thou
did not anoint: but she has anointed my feet with ointment: therefore,
she loves me better than thou.

Now the Pharisie could not discern of the penitent sinner: but the Lord
lets him see, that He can discern betwixt an hypocrite and a true penitent
sinner, there He has paid him in his own hand. And the Lord lets us see,
that He takes heed, and shall take heed to the end of the world, to the
least thing that thou do for His cause to any of His. Who wuld have thought
that the Lord would have taken heed to this? The Lord will take heed who
gives Him water to wash His feet, which is but a sober office. The LORD will
take heed who will stoop down and give Him a kiss, and wash His feet*
with tears. The LORD will take heed who will bestow common oil to anoint
Him with, or who will bestow precious ointment on Him: and in the Great day,
when all secrets shall be revealed, (look if He took heed what we were
doing in the world) Matthew. Chapter 25. verse 34, He will say, Thou gave
Me nothing when I was here in the world, thou visitedst Me not: and he
will point out, place, time, and all the circumstances unto thee.

Then, Brethren, if the LORD takes so good heed what we do, well is the
soul that gives but a piece of bread to an hungry body for CHRIST'S sake,
or a coat to a naked body for His sake. And therefore, ever have Him before
thine eyes, and say, LORD, I give this to Thee, that Thou may not say to me
when Thou come to judge the world, Thou gave Me nothing.

Now, I hear there is a great poverty and famine in this Land, and woe unto
them that are the instruments of hunger: Let us be so far from this, to be
the causes thereof, that on the contrary, we may pintch our selves, that we
may spare upon the needy: for I see the LORD will try our liberality:
Therefore, let us spare upon the poor in this Land, that we may hear of the
LORD in that Great day, Come ye blessed of My Father, for ye gave Me meat,
and ye gave Me drink in this world. And further, we see here, the trial
of an hypocrite. How shall thou know an hypocrite? The LORD lays down the
rule: Ye shall know them by their fruits, Matthew. 7. 16. Ye shall know by
their doings: an hypocrit has many fair words: and I doubt not but this
Pharisie, when he invited the Lord to dinner, had many fair words, but there
shall be little doing, at the least he shall never do any thing heartily.
Where is this Pharisees humility? He offers not to wash the Lords feet,
who was ever traueiling and journeying, nor to kiss the Lord when He entered
into his house, after the fashion of the country, nor showed none
heartsomenesse toward the Lord. An hypocrite can never do any thing heartily,
neither to God nor man. Then would thou know a true Christian man or woman?
Ye hear never a word out of her mouth, all this time that she is washing the
Lords feet with tears, kissing them, anointing them with ointment: So a true
Christian has few words, but many deeds. One good deed, is worth ten words.
And when thou speak, look that thy words be hearty, and savor of love.
Look that thou bless not with thy mouth, and curse with thine heart: and
whatsoever thou do, do it heartily, and though thou were but presenting a
cup full of cold water to a poor body, do it heartily, and then the Lord
shall count well of it, though it were never so little. Look what sentence the
Lord gives out concerning ye poor woman that presented two mites, He says,
she gave more, than they all did, Luke 21. 3. Whatsoever thou do, do it
for the love of the LORD, still waiting for that day wherein the LORD shall
reward thee. It is true indeed, that he who has any discretion, will
discern the heart by the very deed of the hand: And he or she, that has
any heartsomnesse inwardly, it will be manifest and uttered in the very deed
of the hand outwardly. But stand thou not upon the sight of any man in the
world: But say, Lord, thou see the heart, thou see with what heartinesse I
do this: And whatsoever thou do, strive ever to do it with heartsomnesse,
for Jesus Christ's sake: so in doing thou shall have joye. No man can do any
thing heartily or joyfullie, but they who have their eyes upon the Lord.

Ye have heard the proposition, and the assumption also: now He comes to the
conclusion: and He concludes as it were in the teeth of the Pharisie,
Therefore her sins are forgiven her. Not that this love is the cause of the
remission of her sins, but as a sure argument and testimony of her faith.
Her love toward Christ preceeded not, nor went before the assurance of the
remission of her sins: but it followed as a true token. So it is an argument
not from the cause, but from the effect, that testifies assuredly, that the
cause is, and has proceeded: that is, that she has faith in Jesus Christ.

Howbeit the Papists abuse this place, gathering here, that the love which
this woman carried to Jesus, was the cause of the remission of her sins: But I
leave them to their own vanity.

Now, Brethren, after the example of this Pharisie, I shall never judge evil,
nor be a sharp censurer of a penitent sinner: for the poor sinner that
believes once in Jesus Christ, and repents, and takes purpose of
amendment, (for faith and repentance go ever together) a sinner that
believes in Jesus Christ, will repent, and hate and detest sin to the death,
wherewith he has offended God: for when he has once tasted of mercy, then
will he say, Alas, that I have offended so loving and so merciful a Father:
for after that he has once gotten a sense of the infinite mercy of GOD, all
his displeasure will be, that ever he has offended so loving and so
merciful a Father: I say, such a sinner may be assured of forgiveness.

Now mark the Lords answer to the Pharisie: He says not, howbeit she be a
sinner, yet she is penitent, and loves me: but He says, she is no
sinner, all her sins are taken away: for except all her sins had been
taken away and purged by Him, it is most true yt the Pharisie thought, to wit,
the LORD would not have suffered her to have touched Him, He would not have
received the kisses of her mouth, nor the tears of her eyes: No, the LORD
JESUS that Holy One, (if thou be not made as white as the snow, and all thy
sins be not purged) He will not suffer thee once to touch Him, nor to
kiss His feet.

It is a vvonderfull thing to see such a sudden change in an instant, that so
vile and so unclean a body, should be so pure and so clean. Howbeit the
body were as red as the blood, and as the Scarlet, as the Prophet Esaias
says, in the first Chapter of his Prophecy, and the 18. verse, yet
suddenly He will make it as white as the snow, and the wool. Indeed it
is true, thou will never be purged from the remainentes of sin, so long as
thou art in this life: but yet notwithstanding, if thou put on that
righteousness of Jesus Christ by faith, God shall count thee as clean as a
glorious Angel in His sight.

Now when He has ended the speech to the Pharisie, at the last He speaks
to the woman, not thinking it enough to speak in her hearing unto the
Pharisie: but to the greater joye and consolation of the poor woman, He
speaks to herself. Thou will run in and out, hither and thither, to get
a word of the king: and why not? if so thy necessity require: but strive to
get a word out of the mouth of JESUS. Kings many times will give thee
flattering words, but the LORD when He speaks unto thee, He will speak
in truth, and with vvonderfull love, when He says to thee, Thy sins are
forgiven thee, thy sins are forgiven thee indeed: for the word of the Lord
has an operation with it, for if He once call thee an Holy One, thou will be
so indeed. The word of the Lord works in thee the thing that He speaks
most powerfullie: for He calls these things that are not, and by calling
He makes them to be. So the Lord fills her heart with joy, her heart no
question began to find joy when she was speaking to ye pharisie. Now He
fills up her joye, for the fullness of joye is not gotten in an instant, all
joye is in the face of Jesus Christ. Think ye not, but this woman, when she
heard this word, conceived an unspeakable joye in her heart? And I say unto
every one of you, who as penitent sinners will bewail your sins, and mourn
for offending of GOD, and will purpose to wash the feet of JESUS with tears,
and wipe His feet with your hair, as the Lord has given me commission to
speak, Repentest thou sinner of thy sins? Think thou to amend thy life?
Detestest thou thy sins? Beleeuest thou assuredly? Love thou the Lord? I
say to thee* Thy sins are forgiven thee in the blood of that same Jesus whom
thou love so well.

Now a word, and so I shall end. When He has spoken thus comfortably to
the woman, the Pharisic begins again to interrupt and to impede Him if it
had been possible, to hinder the woman of her salvation. The rest about the
table scorneth Him, What is he this, (quod they) that takes upon him to
forgive sins? He takes too much upon him, more than he is able to perform: So
as the Pharisie concluded before, that He was no Prophet, now they conclude
that He was no Mediator.

Well, Brethren, the work of our salvation has many impedimentes. Will thou
seek salvation? seek grace and mercy: then think not to come sleeping to
grace, for I say to thee, ere thou want a stop to hinder thee from grace,
from remission of sins, thine own heart, by the suggestion of the devil,
shall stand up in thy teeth, and blaspheme, (as the Pharisie did first, and as
the rest at the table did thereafter) and all to hinder the work of thy
salvation. But see the end. Stays the Lord for all this? Re^raiteth He His
sentence again, and says, thy sins are not forgiven thee? No, no, the
Lords conclusion is past: if He say it once to thine heart, and if He give
once that persuasion in thine heart, so that thou may say, Lord, be
blessed, my sins are forgiven me: happy art thou, they shall be forgiven thee:
the Lord shall double it within thee: so He speaks to the woman as He would
say, Let them speak what they will, thou art in Heaven, thy sins are forgiven
thee, go in peace. There is no peace but the peace of the Lord, coming from
the remission of sins. Cry peace as thou will, but if thou go not in the
peace of the Lord, thou g^est not in peace* but in war: the Lord is at war
with thee: and albeit thou gettest the Kings peace, and all the worlds peace,
yet if thou gettest not the LORDS peace, thou have no peace at all: so well is
him that has His peace for they only may go in joy, that may say, Now Lord, I
am at peace with Thee, thou have forgiven me my sins: And if thou can say
this truly, thou shall have such a joy in thy soul, as all the Kings in the
world cannot give thee, nor all outward comforts and pleasures afford thee.

Now the LORD give us this peace, and a blincke of that joye in the heart,
through the remission of our sins: for then one day we shall see the
accomplishment of it to our everlasting joye and salvation in JESUS CHRIST: To
whom, with the FATHER, and the Holy SPIRIT, be all Honor, Praise, Glory,
Power, and Dominion, both now and evermore, world without end, So be it.

THE XVI. SERMON.
JOHN, CHAP. III.


IN this conference that NICODEMVS has with CHRIST, (well-beloved in the Lord
JESUS) First Nicodemus coming to Him by night, and confesses Him plainly,
that He was a Teacher that came from God, because there was none that could
work those wonders that He wrought, except the Lord were with him: Then the
Lord Jesus begins to play the part of a Teacher to Nicodemus, who was a
Doctor in Isaael: And the first ground that He begins to instruct him into,
is the ground of Regeneration: For Christ came to make a new world again, and
to renew man, who was dead in sins and trespasses: Therefore He begins to
instruct Nicodemus in this doctrine of Regeneration: and He binds him to
learn it with such a necessity, that except he and whole mankind be
regenerate, there is none of them that shall see the kingdom of God: and this
He does with a great asseueration, saying, Verily, verily. Nicodemus hearing
and fearing that heavy denunciation of banishment from the kingdom of GOD,
but not understanding this regeneration, begins to reason, that it was a
thing impossible that he could be borne again, because he was an old man:
and it is not possible that an old man can enter into his mothers womb
again. Christ answers, and answering* insisteth in that proposition of
regeneration, urging him again with a necessity of the same regeneration:
Only He adds to that that He spoke before the manner and way of this
begetting: to wit, of water, and the Spirit. It is not a fleshly generation,
but a Spiritual generation, whereby a man is begotten again, by ye renewing
of the Holy Spirit in him, of the which, water is the seal to seal up our
faith in that assurance of that regeneration or new birth.

Now in this Text which I have read, Christ insisteth in the same doctrine:
and like as in the verse preceding He has proponed the manner of this new
birth not to be natural, but spiritual: so in this verse He shows Nicodemus
what a kind of birth it is, That (says He) that is begotten of the Spirit, is
Spirit, that is, the Spirit of the Lord JESUS working, begets not a fleshly
or corrupt creature, but a Spiritual and Heavenly creature. This He s^tteth
not down simply, but He sets it down by way of comparison, with the
fleshly generation, to the end that Nicodemus and all men, seeing the
corruption of the flesh, they should esteem the more highly of that Spiritual
generation. And He says, that the thing begotten of the flesh, is flesh:
that is, as the flesh, a corrupt mass of flesh and blood cannot beget but
corrupt flesh: Even so, the Spirit of the Lord Jesus cannot beg^tte but that
that is Spiritual and Heavenly: and thus yees^e the meaning of this place.

But because this place offers occasion to speak somewhat of Regeneration,
whereof the world had never greater need than at this present: (for I think
the world is going back again to that old corruption, from the which they
were delivered) Therefore, to the end that all things may be the more clear,
I shall speak to you first of the flesh, and generation thereof: Next, of the
Spirit and Regeneration: And the LORD make us careful to find the Spiri^e to
be effectual in every one of us to regeneration.

Then being to speak of the flesh, it shall be expedient to deduce it from
the fountain. There are two sorts of sin in this world: The one sort is
called Original, that sin that man and woman is borne with in this world,
which they draw out of their mothers womb with their birth: The other sort
is called Actual sin, that stands in a doing and vvorking and which
flows and proceeds from that original sin, as from the fountain. I may
not insist upon these things particularly, but I shall give you a short view
of them.

Original sin stands in two parts: The first is that horrible defection
and apostasy which whole mankind in the world, from Adam to the end of the
world, have made in the loins of Adam: for ye must understand, it was not
Adam alone, that sinned, and fell from GOD, but it was thou, and all others
that ever were gotten of man, and borne of woman whole mankind made that
defection: for as it is said, in the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, and the
ninth verse, that when Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedeck, that Leui, who
long after was not begotten nor borne, was tithed in the loins of Abraham
his fore-father: (he paid his tithe as well as Abraham did) Even so, we
being every one of us in the loins of Adam when he sinned, we made all
defection from the LORD, and sinned in him. Upon this defection there followed
a guiltiness, wherethorow there is none of us, but we are obliged to die
everlastingly: And if there were no more sin in all this world, but that
first Apostasy only, there is matter enough of thine everlasting damnation:
thou need not to heap sin upon sin: there is thine obligation to thine
everlasting death, and to damnation. This is the first part of original sin.
The second part of original sin is the effect that follows upon the first,
a foul and horrible corruption, that entered in the whole nature of man: so
that from the top to the toe of man, there is not so much whole as one intch:
Man is a vile leprous creature, there is not a whole intch neither in body nor
soul, but all is infected: for, Brethren, that first defection past not away
so: but it brought with it a fearful ruin and wrack to mankind: and it
leaves behind it a foul stink and terrible darkness, and that came of the
just judgment of GOD, punishing sin by sin. And this corruption of nature
brings with it the own guiltiness and obligation to eternal death: so that
sundry ways we are guilty of death.

The Apostle Paul ( Ephesians. 2. 3.) sets down this guiltiness, when he
sa^eth, We were all children of w^ath. This second part of it, Is it that
Christ calls here flesh, in another place it is called the old man: for by
flesh we understand not this fleshly and bodily lump which we carry about
with us: nor yet as the Papists call it, a concupiscence in this lump, and
nothing in the soul: No, no, but this flesh is a corruption both in soul and
body, and in all the powers and faculties thereof: So that there is never an
intch free from that pest. The Lord who made man ( Genes. 8. 21.) expresses
the work and the force of the flesh after the fall, where it is said, that
after He looked, and saw this corruption, He said, that the whole in
aginations of the cogitations of the heart of man, are wicked and evil
continually: which words import, that man from his youth, yea, even from his
mothers womb, could do nothing but imagine, think, and forge, evil,
wickedness, and all sorts of mischief. And when He saw this, He uttered a
sad and an heavy voice* It forthinketh me, that ever I made man, Genes. 6.
6. And it was no small thing, no question, that made the Creator to repent that
He made man. What is man now, but a filthy creature, and a pest to infect
Heaven and earth, if it were possible?

But that ye may the better understand the incomparable greatness of this
evil, which is in man, I shall let you see how it has spread it self through
the whole power of the soul of man: for as for the body, I speak nothing of
it: it is true indeed, it never leaves that body, till it resolve it in
earth again, which otherwise was made to be immortal, and in the mean time,
till death come, it makes the body to be subject to many great and fearful
sicknesses and diseases. Where from come these biles, the fevers, the palsy,
the pest, the leprosy, and other diseases, but from this corruption? But I
speak nothing of it. I will let you see, how it has spread it self in the
soul of man: Brethren, there is never a power nor faculty in the soul, but
all is infected. This pest it has not only infected the inferior appetite, as
the blind Philosophers thought, and as the Papists do this day affirm. But
where begins it? What is the most excellent power of the soul? It is the
understanding, the mind, and this is it that we call reason: This corruption,
it has so entered into the soul of man, that when as that understanding
should be as a light going before, to direct all our actions, motions, and
thoughts the right way according to Gods word and ordinance: It does nothing
but fight and repine against the wisdom of the God of Heaven. It is an hard
matter yt God has created this understanding, and yet it fights against Him.
Paul says ( Romans 8 7.) that the wisdom of the flesh, is enemy against God:
that is, the very understanding of man, which is the most excellent thing in
man, is enemy to God, let be the inferior appetites: And therefore, Ephesians. 4.
23. he desires not only that the inferior appetites should be renewed, but
that regeneration should begin at that which is most excellent in the soul:
even that they may be renewed in the Spirit of their mind. Then ye see this
understanding of man is altogether corrupt, and that light of the mind is
turned unto terrible darkness and that this wisdom fights directly against
God: for this reason of man fights not only against the wisdom of GOD set
down and declared in the law, but chiefly against that which is more against
His wisdom manifested in the Euangell He esteems it naturally to be but
mere foolishness, that ever a man should get salvation by a crucified man,
1. Cor. 1. 18.

And to go fordward. This pest cease not here, nor rests not in the mind
only, but it enters into the roots of the heart, into the will and
affections of man: it has entered so into his will, that when as this will of
ours, this power of our soul, that we call the will, should have chosen that
which is good, and refused that which is evil, according to the reason going
before, and informing what is to be chosen and pursewed, and what is to be
refused and eschewed: it fights not only directly against that most holy
wisdom and will of God: but even against that sponke of knowledge, light, and
reason that is left in man: for when man fell in Adam, the Lord took not all
kind of light from man, but He left in His great mercy in man some sponke of
light and knowledge of the Majesty of GOD the Creator, whereby he might in
some measure know his Creator: And He left in man also some knowledge and
judgeme^t of politic things, concerning our conversation and dealing with our
neighbors, what is just, and what is unjust, what is reasonable, and what is
unreasonable: he left in him also some judgeme^t and discretion of natural
things, whereas He might have set up man as brutish as a dog or an ass.
Notwithstanding of this, the raging corruption of the malicious will, repineth
against this sponke, and strives to blotte it out, that it should never utter
it self to reformation, and to glorify God, and to discharge a duty to man,
in such sort, that it were a just judgment of God, that they should be made as
brute as beasts, as it went with the Gentiles, Romans 1. 24. whom He gave over
unto reprobate minds, so that they had not care of natural honesty or shame:
but they wrought all sort of uncleanness, because they detained the truth of
God in vnrightiousnesse, and suffered it not to reform them. And natural men
has found this repining of this corrupt will contrary the reason and light of
the mind, and they have said, Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor: that
is, I see and allow better things, but I follow the worst. And to be short,
this wit of man repineth as fast against the Lords will, as the will of the
devil does: for by nature we will that same thing that the devil wills:
and there was never any thing so abominable that the devil has pleasure in,
but we have pleasure of the same: Ye, says our Savior, are of the devil
your father, and the lusts of your father will ye fulfill, Ioh. 8. 44.
Behold how great matter and occasion the Papists have to boast of free will
to any good: they are but vain blind bodies. The will of man goes wholly
with the will of the devil. There is no such a thing. There is not so much as
one jot of the will of man free: yet the corruption rests not here, but it
goes forward, and polluteth and defiles all the affections that are in man,
as anger, love, hope, fear, etc. none of them are free, they fight all against
God, they have no conformity, but a great repugnance with that will of God.

I go forward, and I will not omit the natural powers and faculties of the
soul. And I affirm, that there are no powers of the soul that are natural,
as the faculty and appetite of eating of digesting, of expelling, but all are
infected with this post. So that (Brethren) there is never a power of the soul
that is free of this corruption. Would ye understand what becomes of this
corruption, and what it does? Being in the soul of man, it makes that there
is never a thought that a man thinks, but it is a sin. And if thou have no
more than nature, the least motion of thine heart is a sin in ye sight of God:
never a word that thou speak, but it is a sin: never a deed yt thou do,
but it is a sin: never a way thou will go, but it is a sin: and consequently,
it makes thee always subject to the heavy wrath of GOD: If thou stirrest but
thine hand or thy foot, thou sinnest, and the wrath of God will pursue and
follow thee, till at last thou be casten into hell, if thou be not renewed.
Besides this, so long as we remain in nature, this corruption and pest is so
forceable in every one of us, that there is not one sin in the world so
great and abominable, but with pleasure and delight every one of us would
perform it, if the Lord of His mercy did not by His Spirit renew us, at least
by His power restrain us, when occasion is presented. The root and seed of
all mischief under the sun is compacted in every man and woman. Marvel not
when thou see some running to adultery, some to murder, some to sorcery and
witchcraft: for that seed which is forceable in them, would be as forceable
in thee to all mischief, if the Lord restrained thee not: Naturally thou art
as bent and inclined to these things as they are, if the Lord by His powerful
providence did not restrain thee. When the Apostle Paul considers the
strength and the force of that corruption that was in his heart, he says, I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there is no good. And in another place
the Prophet says, Except the LORD had left a seed in us, we had been made
like SODOM and GOMORRHA, Esaias Chap. 1. verse 9.

Brethren, this same seed and root of bitterness is in every infant: ye
think they be Angels, and men commonly call them innocents: No, no, they are
but wolves birds, and there is a world of mischief within them, which
will burst out, when years, strength and occasion concurreth, except the Lord
restrain the same.

Further, I advertise you of the deceitful lurking of this pest, for it is not
only to be feared when it bursteth forth, and is fruitful in evil deeds,
but also when it lurketh: ye see if there be a pest in the flesh of man,
before it be broken out, many a time they will think they have not a pest: So
it is with this pest: it will lurk within the flesh and sinews of the heart
so quietly, that a man will think he is the wholest body in the world: but
touch him, present any object or small occasion, yea, apply but the holy Law of
God to that heart, incontinent his ^oule affections and lusts shall utter
themselves, and burst out: Even as ye see sometimes, that fire will be so
hidden and covered under the ashes, that it will not appear, and men will
think that there is no fire there: but as soon as there is any meet and apt
matter, as wood, powder, or brimstone applied, then it will manifest it self,
and burst forth in a flame. Even so, albeit when men feel not their foul
lusts and affections, they seem to themselves to be holy: yet speak to them
of the Law of GOD, forbidding and discharging such and such things to be
done, then they shall find the passions of sin, which appeared before to
be dead within them, to begin to live, yea, to rage in the soul, and to
bring forth fruits unto death, as Paul says, in his epistle to the Romans,
the seventh Chapter, and fifth verse. And then when these passions break out,
happy is he that has some part of the Spirit of Regeneration, to repress
them, and strive against them in some measure: For, naturally, there is
nothing in us to gaine-stand them, but wholly with all our force, and with
griedinesse we will accomplish them, yea, the devil sits betwixt the
shoulders, yea, in the very heart of man, and carries him here and there to
accomplish all sort of mischief in all kind of filthiness, and shall never
let him stay, till he bring him to destruction. There is no power in man to
resist: And therefore, sin is said to reign, and to have a kingdom within
us: And except the Spirit of Christ come, and in mercy either hold down, or
else mortify and slaye that foul corruption, it shall slay us at the last.

Ye see then, how deceitful it is, and how easily men are deceived, whilst
this corruption lurketh within and utters not it self.

But, Brethren, more dangerous is the deceit thereof when it bursteth out: We
think that man to be in a miserable estate, who is raging in this bodily
pest, and yet is so blinded and senseless, that he is not aware of the
sickness, till he die in the same: if he were sensible of the disease, he
were in a better estate and condition. And so is the estate and condition of
man naturally, when this corruption begins to utter it self: for ye see
some raging in murder with pleasure, and washing their hands in innocent
blood with griedinesse, etc. And some committing adultery without any remorse
yea, boasting and vaunting of it amongst their companions: Others, abusing the
benefits of God, through intemperance in drunkenness, without any grief of
conscience: And others, deliting to oppress, and spoil with violence such as
they may overcome: and in the mean time they have no grief, prick, nor
trouble in their conscience for such doing: Are not such men miserably
deceived, who when they are going to judgment and wrath, rejoice, yea, when
they are posting to destruction, take their pastime, when they are running to
condemnation, laugh, and who, when they are most miserable, think themselves
most happy? And this is the estate of many, and chiefly of the great men in
this country: they rejoice and boast of their sins, and they think
themselves in a good and happy estate, because they find no remorse nor
grief in their consciences.

I shall use an homely similitude, to declare this matter: A man will have a
worm in his finger, or tooth, it will keep it self quiet, and cease from
gnawing for a season and he will think he is whole enough: but take a little
vinegar, or some such like pearcing and sharp water, then she will begin to
gnawe, and then the silly man will complain, that he was beguiled, when he
thought he was well enough: Even so it is with the conscience of man, for it
lies in the soul of man lurking, as a worm lies in the flesh, and sometimes
it gnaweth, and sometimes it lies still, and lets the murderer, the
adulterer, the oppressor, go forward in murder, adultery, oppression, and
other most abominable sins, without any accusation, grief* remorse, or
fear of the law of GOD, and threatening of the curses thereof. I shall tell you
more than that: Sometimes the conscience of a miserable male-factor will be so
senseless, that it will no ways be moved by the Preaching: A murderer will
be sitting before the Minister: A vile filthy adulterer will be sitting
there, devising how to accomplish their abominable lusts, in the mean time
that the Minister will be threatening judgment against their wickedness: they
will not be moved with the threatninges, but will disdain and scorn them in
their hearts, and will say, This fellow does nothing but prate and raise what
he pleases: and after Preaching will go out merrily to his dinner and there
curse and swear, and blaspheme Gods Name and thereafter go to his bed, as a
beast, or a senseless sow. But I admonish thee, O miserable wretch! in despite
of thy teeth, thy conscience shall not sleep always: the conscience of all
flesh shall be wakened one day, either to their weal, or to their woe: And
that Law which so securely men contemn many a time, shall be so powerful to
waken the consciences, and to torment: hem, that by no means nor policy shall
they be able to pacify them again: Their drinking, their halking, their
hunting, their carding, their dycing, and other pastimes, will not then bring
comfort or true peace to the soul: Then that man who thought himself most
happy, when he was enjoying the pleasures of sin, shall think himself the
most miserable wretch that ever the earth bore.

Brethren, the law that was given, and threatening thereof, is wondrous
terrible, and for as little as many men account of it, yet either one time or
other it shall be effectual to stir up and to waken the consciences of men*
I except no man: And if the conscience sleep still on in this life, till death
ouer-take men, as it does in many, yet it shall be so wakened after this life
in Hell, that it shall never get leave to sleep again, it shall so g^^w upon
the soul, that it shall never get rest: And in that Great day, when that
righteous Judge shall appear, the law shall be most forceable to raise in
the soul, dolor, grief, and anguish for ever, which is impossible for any
flesh to overcome, expel, and put away: yea, it is as impossible as it is to
overcome the majesty of God His own self: for as the Gospel is the power of
GOD to salvation, to every one that believes: So the law is the power of God,
to raise up dolor, terror, and anguish in the souls of impenitent sinners,
and at last to bring it into condemnation. Therefore, happy is that man, who in
the time of grace, when the Gospel is crying upon every weary and laden soul,
to come to Jesus, and promising to ease and disburthen all that comes unto
Him, finds this conscience wakened in mercy: for now Jesus Christ, by His
servants, is going through the world, offering to cure all sorts of diseases,
yea, even these that are most incurable: And miserable is that man, who
sleeps on till death ouer-take him, for then the time of grace is past,
repentance then will be to late, it will not avail, remission of sins then
cannot be obtained: the voice of the Law shall ever ^ounde, Cursed art thou
miserable wretch for ever: the comfortable voice of the Gospel crying, Come
all ye weary and laden, shall never be heard any more: Suffer, therefore,
your selves to be launced and wounded in time, that ye may be compelled to
come to Jesus: and the Lord waken the consciences of these bloody murderers,
adulterers, and oppressors in time, that they may see where away they are
going, and at last may return to God.

Now hitherto we have handled this natural corruption, and this noble flesh,
which men glory so much into. Now let us speak something of the natural
birth, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. And what can corruption
breed, but corruption? What can a leprous man bring out, but a leprous child?
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? No, not one, Job, Chapter 14.
verse 4 For why, Brethren? In this natural generation, as the parent
naturally communicates nature, and his own substance: so look what venom,
vileness, and detestablenesse is in his nature, he gives and communicates
it all to his children.

Men glory commonly much of these things which they get through their
parents, they will say, I have gotten great heritages, much honor, and great
riches by my father: But I say, that no man ever got so surely these things
through their parents, as they get through them and their birth a poison and
pest with their flesh, whereby they are made the children of wrath, and shall
get Hell for their inheritance.

Brethren, happy is the man that can consider this natural uncleanness, and
is touched in conscience with the pollution which he gives to his children,
and strives to have it purged: for in so doing, he both acquireth a good
conscience to himself, and gives his children a better heritage, than if he
left him all the heyreships of the world.

When thou have begotten thy child, and gathered goods and riches together,
and acquired great possessions unto him, then if thou take no care of the
purging of that corruption which he has contracted from thy loins, that same
pest shall be laid to thy charge in that great day.

Therefore, now having spoken something of the flesh, and the generation
thereof, let us now speak shortly of the Spirit, and His generation. What
is meaned by the Spirit? This Spirit is the Spirit of the LORD JESUS: this
Spirit is y^ Spirit of Regeneration, who renews men and women* and of old
and sinful creatures, makes them new and holy again: For, as soon as a
sinful man begins to lay hold on the Lord Jesus, by a true and lively
faith, so soon finds he power and grace conuoy^d by His Spirit into his
soul to renew it.

Then, to speak of Christ, because this Spirit is His Spirit: As Jesus Christ
is our elder Brother, so is He also our Father, He is called the Father of
Eternity, Esai. 9. 6. He is called the second Adam, Romans 5. 14. He is our
spiritual Father, who begets us by His Holy Spirit. Now compare the
natural parent with this spiritual parent: Our natural parent is not only
culpable and guilty of that first defection* but also of innumerable sins and
transgressions following thereupon: Our spiritual parent, Christ, is culpable
of no sin at all, but is full of all kind of obedience: for He was obedient
to the Father to the death, even to the death of the Cross. Our natural
parent is altogether naturally corrupt, yea, a lump of sin: but Christ, our
spiritual parent, is not only clean in nature from all spot of sin, and
perfectly holy, as H^e is man, but also He is Holiness it self, because He
is the Son of God from all Eternity: and what can be cleaner than
Cleanness it self?

Now to come to their generation: The natural parent begets by the force of
nature: there is a force in nature to beget: our spiritual parent, Jesus, is
far more able to beget by the power of His Spirit who is the author of
nature: The natural parent by the force of nature will beget flesh, a corrupt
mass, a sinful creature, yea, the image of the devil: this will he give to
his child: but our Heavenly parent, the Lord Jesus, by His Spirit, begets
the Spirit, that is, a spiritual man, an holy and clean man, who has no
delight nor pleasure in sin: for Saint John says, in his 1. Epistle, Chap.
3. verse 9. He that is borne of God sins not: that is, sins not as the
worldlinges do, with pleasure and delight: sin reigns not in him: why
sins he not? because (says he) the seed of God remains in him: that
is, His Spirit, by whom as a lively seed we are begotten and made new
creatures. And what says he more? He says, such a man cannot sin: that is,
he cannot sin: that is, he cannot sin as the natural and unregenerate man
sins: he cannot follow the course of this world, and wallow in the puddle
of sin as they do. And why can he not sin so? because (says he) he is
borne of God. It is a marvelous force that the Spirit of GOD has, He makes
a man that he cannot sin, all the world will not make him to sin. The
natural man can do nothing but sin, all his actions are sins: but he
that is borne of God cannot sin

Now this generation of the Spirit is called Regeneration: which word, albeit
it be commonly in many men's mouths, yet few understand what it means:
therefore, we shall set down the nature and definition thereof, and touch
some particular circumstances, which may serve for the better understanding
thereof. Then, what is Regeneration? It is an alteration and changing of the
whole nature of man, accomplished and performed by the powerful operation of
the Holy Spirit. When I call Regeneration a changing of nature. I mean not
that there should be any change of the substance and essence it self, either
of the soul or of y^ body, as if that by Regeneration the old substance were
quite abolished, and a new substance brought forth: but I mean that there is
a change and alteration of the qualities which are in the substance.

I will let you see this in the powers and faculties of the soul, as in the
mind and reason, in the will, and in the affections. In the mind and reason,
there must be a change of the wisdom of the flesh into the wisdom of
GOD: nothing is a greater enemy to GOD and His glory, to thy self and thy
salvation, than the wisdom of the flesh: And therefore, if thou would be
saved, this wisdom must be mortified, and thou must become a fool, that thou
may be wise, as ye may read in the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, the 3. Chapter, and the 18. verse. In stead of this wisdom must
be powered into the mind the wisdom of GOD. In the will and affections
there must be a change of the frowardness and wicked inclination, into
holiness and a good inclination: Whereas before there was nothing in them but
frowardness, (LORD that man is a froward creature, when GOD commands him to
go one way, he will go the plain contrary) that must be mortified and
slain: and in stead of it there must be wrought in the heart a propension and
willingness in some measure, to pursue and to do that which the LORD
commands, and has pleasure into.

Now howbeit I call Regeneration a change only of the qualities, yet it is
not so light a matter, and so easily performed, as men would think: for it is
a greater work to renew man, than to create him. In the beginning GOD created
all things with His word, but before man could be renewed, the Son of God
behooued to become the son of man* and suffer shame and ignominy, and die an
accursed death, even the death of the Cross. It is an easy thing for thee to
say. I must be changed ere ever I see Heaven: But, Brethren, it is not so
soon done: it is the most difficill thing under the Sun, to get the heart
of a creature changed: And they who have found this work sensibly to have
been begun in them, have found how hard it is by their own experience:
for I tell thee, that before thou be renewed, thou must deny thine own
self: CHRIST says, Thou must renounce thy self, and take up thy cross
daily, and follow Him, LVKE, Chapter 9. verse 23. If the LORD had only
bidden us renounce our friends, our father, our mother, our riches, our
lands, and such other things as are without us, we would have thought it a
matter hard enough, and scarcely would we have been induced to give obedience,
as ye see in the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19. 16. But when the Lord
commands us to renounce our selves, even that thing that is most excellent,
that which is most wise, this reason it self, the wisdom of the flesh, that
furnishes so many reasons to dissuade me^ either to profess or follow
Christ: what can be more hard? But suppone reason were convinced, and the
mouth thereof closed, that it could get no shift to answer, yet think
thou so to be quite of thy self? No, the will and the affections will stand
obstinately against the judgment of the mind, and follow out, and pursue that
which the mind discearneth to be evil.

So thou may easily see, that there is nothing more hard than to get this
Regeneration: yea, thou may see that it is a thing altogether impossible,
except that Almighty Spirit of God be present, and work it effectually in the
soul, all the kings of the earth, with all their weapons and engines of war,
cannot be able to do it. No, all the Angels in Heaven are not able to
accomplish this work: The weapons of our warre-fare, says Paul, are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2.
Cor. 10. 4. 5. There is no power in Heaven or earth, but only the Spirit of
God, that is able to renew one creature. And this power is granted to this our
Ministry, the preaching of the Euangell. Let great men, let worldly men
esteem of it as they please, God has ordained this Ministry, to minister
this wonderful power whereby the souls of men shall be regenerate.

Further, thou must understand, that this Regeneration is not perfected in an
instant, but in process of time: it must continue all the days of thy life:
so long as thou live, albeit thou live a thousand years, this old man will
not be perfectly and altogether mortified and slain, till the hour of death:
Thou must all the days of thy lifetime be groaning under the burden of
sin, subject to crosses and troubles, (away with lightheaded sinners, who
say, they would always have their hearts up: sadness becomes a sinner
well) and thou must strive to find the new man to be renewed degree by
degree, piece and piece, even till at last death be swallowed up of life, and
mortality of immortality. And if thou would have this work to go forward
in thee, then set evermore Jesus thy Lord and thine head before the eyes of thy
soul: look upon Him with the eyes of faith: for it is only His presence and
the sight of His glory, that works this marvelous change: for there is a
great odds between the sight of His glory, and the sight of the glory of
worldly Princes, for the sight of their glory will not change thee, nor make
thee glorious, but vanishes away in a moment: But the sight of the glory of
JESUS shall change thee, and make thee glorious, whenever thou beholdest Him,
either by faith in this world, or else face to face in the Kingdom of Glory:
For when thou beholdest Him with the eyes of faith here, thou shall be
changed, according to the measure of thy faith: and because thy faith is
imperfect, thy change here must be imperfect: but when thou shall see Him
face to face, and behold Him as He is, then shall thou be like unto Him in
glory: thy change shall be perfect: His presence shall be effectual to
change thy vile body, and to fashion it like unto His own glorious body:
when thou beholdest His glory, thou shall be changed into the same glory.

Therefore, ye see what need we have to find this Regeneration begun in
us here, and to find a continual progress therein all the days of our
life, that so we may be assured, that the LORD shall crown His work in us
with glory in JESUS.

And now to end: then surely ye see, that corruption, mischief, and
venom, every man, without exception, communicate unto their children, by
natural generation: Therefore, Brethren, this is mine exhortation to all, both
to great and small, (I except none, from the King, to the Beggar) Strive, as
ye are instruments of generation, so to be instruments of regeneration,
that your children may be taken out of nature, and planted in grace, and so
be made members of the mystical body of JESUS CHRIST: Strive to bring them
up in the knowledge of CHRIST, that so ye may be free of that heavy
judgment which remains for all such as neglect this duty toward their
children, and that ye may see GODS blessing upon your children here, and
may have hope of that eternal life and glory hereafter, which the LORD has
promised to His own in CHRIST JESUS: To whom, with the FATHER, and the Holy
SPIRIT, three persons and one GOD, be all Honor, Glory, Praise, Power, and
Dominion, both now and evermore, So be it.

THE XVII. SERMON.
I. TIMOTH. CHAP. I.






IN this Text (beloved Brethren in Jesus Christ) there is set down to us a
notable example of thankfulness to God, in the person of the Apostle Paul, for
that great and incomparable mercy which the Lord bestowed upon him: not only
in forgiving him his gross and manifold sins, but also for setting of him in
His service, and for the committing to him the message of reconciliation, and
making him an Apostle to preach repentance and remission of sins to others.
As the mercies which he found were wondrous great, so is he wondrous careful
always to testify his thankfulness to GOD: And to the end the more
chearefully he may praise and thank God, he considers and sets down by
degrees, and in order, his unworthiness, and the evil deeds that he did,
notwithstanding, whereof the Lord extended His mercy most abundantly toward
him.

To come to the words: He says, Therefore, I thank him, who has made me
strong, that is, Christ Jesus our Lord: These words depend upon the verse
immediately going before: he said before, that the glorious Euangell of Jesus
Christ was concredite to him, for the which cause he bursteth forth in
thanksgiving, and he says, Therefore I will be thankful to Him, who has
concredited it unto me.

Then ye see, his thankfulness arises on two considerations: First, upon the
consideration of the excellency of the Euangel of Jesus Christ. The Gospel is
glorious in it self, and it is come down from the blessed God: next, upon the
consideration of his own unworthiness: look how worthy the Gospel was, as
unworthy was he: then considering that so worthy a thing was given unto him,
and that he himself was so unworthy, he knows not what thanks to give, he
cannot devise what manner of way to testify his thankfulness. If once we
could see what God were, how blessed that inviolable Majesty were, and what
the Euangell is, how glorious how lively, and how powerful in operation, and
then what our selves are, how unworthy we are, now, Lord, what would we
account of Jesus Christ! this heart that now is bound up, would then be loosed
to thankfulness: But we see not what GOD is, and if we have not found glory
and the power of the Gospel. Look what great commendation this Apostle gives
to the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. 6. where he compares the Law with the Gospel,
and calls the Gospel the Ministry of the Spirit, the Ministry of
righteousness, y^ Ministry of life. Then again, we see not what our selves
are, how vile, how filthy and unclean we are: we see not that mystery of
sin that is in us, and therefore we account so little of the Gospel, and are
so little moved when the Lord threatens the away-taking of it: And to the end
men may know how they ought to esteem of this Ministry and of this Gospel
committed unto them, which now the world so much contemns and disdaineth, we
shall speak a little of the dignity and excellency thereof. To have the
Gospel of Jesus Christ committed to a man's charge is no small thing: No, there
is no flesh worthy of such dignity and honor: no, not the Angels in Heaven,
let be silly mortal creatures. Is the creature worthy to dispose the
treasures of salvation? Is a man worthy to reconsile God and the world? Is any
man worthy to be an instrument to bring remission of sins, peace of
conscience, and joye in the Holy Ghost to the soul of man? Is any worthy to
bear witness to the soul of man, that life everlasting appertains unto
him, and is laid up for him in the Heavens? And this moved the Apostle to cry
out, when he considered this, Who can be found meet for these things? 2. Cor.
2. 16. And so, if we knew all that is contained in the Gospel, we would
say, that the Angels themselves are not worthy to bear such a message, to
dispense the secret and hidden things of GOD, to confirm forgiveness of
sins, to put poor sinners out of doubt, that the LORD loves them* and
takes them for His children: and last, that He will crown them with
salvation, and everlasting life. And the consideration of this should move them
whom the Lord has set in His service, to follow the example of The Apostle
Paul, and day and night to be thankful to God, who chooses such frail and
poor creatures to such an high, excellent, and glorious office, as to offer
salvation to them who before were condemned and cast-awayes. Next this,
consideration should move men faithfully and carefully to execute that
charge which is committed unto them, as also to pray y^ Lord earnestly, that
He would bless them with graces and strength according to the weightinesse of
the calling, that they may be ^ound faithful in that Great day: for man of
himself cannot do so much as to think a good thought, (2. Cor. Chap. 3.
verse. 5.) let be to have such graces by nature as to furnish such an high and
glorious a calling. And as the Pastors have their duty to learn here, so
the people also may and should make their use of it, that is, when they come to
hear the word of God, to the end that the Gospel and the promises of mercy
may profit and edify them, they should be resolved in themselves, that it is
God that sends men unto them, and makes them meet who were unmeet. And in
this place the Apostles mind is not only to humble Preachers to acknowledge
the grace bestowed upon them, but also to resolve all men that he that
preaches is sent from God: otherwise the preaching of the Gospel will never
profit them.

And last, this serves to reprove the vain thoughts and ungodly speeches of
the common multitude: for they think this Ministry to be but a base and
contemptible calling, and say, Who should be placed into it? who but such
fools and unworthy bodies as cannot be meet for another calling? who but
kinlesse bodies? But if a Gentleman, an Esquires son, a lords brother, etc.
take on this calling, he is disgraced and abased therewith. But. O unworthy
wretch! No Emperor, no Monarch, nor no flesh whatsoever is worthy of so great
a calling: no, the Angels in Heaven honor not so much the commission, as the
commission honors them: If thou continuest in counting basely of it to the
end, thou shall find it at the last to be the most glorious thing that ever
was, but it shall be to thy confusion and destruction.

Now I go forward: He comes to a reason of his thankfulness: Who has
strengthened me, says he, that is, of a weak body, full of imperfection,
blottes, and sins, which might have hindered me from that calling. He made
me strong and able. So the Apostle compares his estate by nature, with that
estate which he found of grace: and when he was in nature, he says he was
weak, and under the word of weakness he comprehends his blasphemy,
persecution, and oppression, which he sets down hereafter: And hereby
we may see, that men will never know the grace of God well, nor account
worthily of it, until they consider what men are, when GOD leaves them to
their own estate: And when men get a sight, either of themselves, or of
others, they will see that there is no goodness, nothing worthy of praise,
but much mischief and misery both in themselves, and in others. And when men
once sees and knows this, then it will be an easy thing to them to judge
of the grace of GOD, which supplieth and remedieth all wantes and vices. When
Paul looked to himself, he saw no goodness, and that that had appearance
of goodness, was nothing but euanishing smoke: and therefore confesses, that
whatsoever was in him by nature, was corrected: and so he gives the praise of
all to God.

Again, I see that none will account of JESUS CHRIST, and His Gospel, but
they who find a power and strength in the Gospel. There is a power in the
Gospel, which all the faithful find: for by the Gospel he that was weak to
any good deed, is made strong: by the Gospel he that was dead, is quickened,
and begins to live. This constrained the Apostle Paul to give such glorious
and powerful styles to the Gospel: he calls it the power of God to life
and salvation, Rom 2. 16. he calls it lively and mighty in operation, Heb.
14. 12. The children of God find it powerful, to overthrow and cast down the
imaginations of man and every strong hold which is raised up against Jesus.
And whosoever finds this of necessity they must be thankful. Alas! that
there should be such a power and strength in the Gospel, and that we should
find so little of it! for if we found it, it could not be possible but we
would testify and practice by mouth and hand, by word and action, our
thankfulness otherwise than we do.

Now we come to the next argument, which moved the Apostle to be thankful:
he says, that our Lord Jesus Christ counted him faithful, and set him in His
service: he means not here that the Lord fore-sawe that there would be some
worthiness, goodness, and faithfulness into him, and therefore He employed
him, as vain and ignorant men do affirm: for are not all corrupt? are not
all children of wrath. and subject to Satan? what goodness then can God see
in any of us, except He put it into us? and what can move Him to make a
choice of one more than another, but only His good pleasure and free-liking?
But this he says, to meet and stop the mouths of wicked and malicious men,
who went about to disgrace his person and office, and to make his preaching
fruitless. The world is now full of such persons: as if he had said* Let men
reproach me, disdain me, set themselves against me, yet this is sufficient
for me, that Jesus Christ, who has all authority, and who is supreme Judge,
who only can absolve and condemn, and from whose sentence none can appeal,
is on my side, and has declared, by putting me into His service. and by
calling me immediately with His own mouth, that He would use my Ministry,
and declared, that where I was unfaithful before, He accounted me faithful,
He accounted more of me than I was worthy of. So by this the Apostle imports
a double grace which he got from Christ: first, that whereas he was
ynfaithfull, the Lord gave him says, and so accounted him faithful: Next,
that he had manifested, by calling him to be an Apostle, that He had a liking
that he should be in His service.

Then here ye see, that as before, he thanked GOD for the power and strength
that he found, so here he thanketh GOD, for that exceeding mercy, uttered
in forgiving him his sins, and in calling him to be an Apostle.

Hence we perceive, Brethren, that no man will ever account of JESUS CHRIST,
except he first find that CHRIST has accounted of him: yea, except he find
that Christ has accounted of him that which he is not: whereas he is
unfaithful, he must find that Jesus counts him faithful: whereas he is
unjust, he must find that Christ counted him just. Ye see by common
experience, that when one man loves another exceedingly, he will account more
of him than he is to be counted of indeed, for love ouer-seeth and hides
many infirmities and offenses. Was there ever such a love as Christ Jesus
carried unto us, unworthy wretches? For when we were vile and wretched
sinners, ever offending the Majesty of God, and procuring His wrath, the Lord
Jesus in the multitude of His mercies, and infinite deepenesse of His love,
covered our sins, and hid our iniquities that they should not bees^ene by
God. So when the Lord Jesus has once extended the mantle of His mercy and
compassion upon His chosen children, then albeit they were replenished with
never so many vile and gross sins, yet the Lord will not lay them to their
charge, but in Jesus He will count them just, righteous, and innocent: so He
will account more of them than they are worthy of: For, except that every one
of us be persuaded of this, that we are greater men in the account of Jesus
Christ, than we are in our selves, we shall perish in our sins for ever.

The Pope, and that crew of his shamelesse-ones, scorn this doctrine of the
imputation of the righteousness of JESUS: they will have men to be justified
by their inherent righteousness in Gods presence: But I denounce, in the Name
of the Great GOD, that if they go on so, if they lean to their own
righteousness, and if they find not the righteousness of Jesus to be imputed
unto them, they shall never taste of mercy.

But how knows the Apostle that the Lord accounts so much of him? The last
words of the verse declares, He put me into His service, therefore I know
that He has accounted more of me than I am. Would thou know that the
Lord has accounted more of thee than thou art, has the Lord Jesus put thee
into his service, then He accounted of thee. Indeed I grant, that there are
many who are called to offices, both in Church and Policy, who cannot, nor may
not say, that therefore the Lord has counted them faithful: for there are
many who are not sent of God, but who runs unsent, and are thrust out by
their own corrupt affections, as by ambition, by vain glory, by desire of
preferment, by covetousness. Often times ye see, that many who have the place
and name of Pastors, set themselves to trouble the estate of the Church, and to
give offense unto the weak ones, to speak nothing of their negligence in that
calling. And such like in the seat of Justice, ye will see men without regard
of God, conscience, nature, and common honesty, to give out wicked judgment,
and maintain manifest heinous crimes, and to stand directly in contrary
terms with the Majesty of God, contra-manding where He has commanded.
Therefore, such persons cannot allege that the Lord has counted them
faithful. And men cannot say, that they are set into these offices by Gods
hand: but as it were by Satan: Therefore, to the end that thou may know
whether ye Lord counts thee faithful or not, Look and see that thou have
these signs and testimonies, which may bear witness that the Lord has
called thee. It is true, men now adays cannot have such a persuasion as Paul
had, for he was called immediately by the mouth of Jesus Christ from Heaven, and
therefore he might speak confidently: but it is as true, there are none whom
the Lord calls, but they have some signs thereof. Look therefore, if thou
have an earnest desire to glorify the Lord in the riches of His mercy, to
propagate the kingdom of Jesus, to draw me^ from darkness to light from
misery to felicity, from death to life, from Hell to Heaven. Look if thou
have grace in some measure for such a calling: look if the Lord accompanies
thy Ministry, with euidencie and demonstration of the Spirit, and by thy
preaching has acquired subjectes to His kingdom. Look if thou do the work
of the Lord cheerfully. If thou have these tokens, thou may be assured in
thy conscience, and other men also may be persuaded, that thou runnest not
unsent. But if thou have not these tokens, then boast not of this, that thou
art in a calling. And to speak more generally to all them who are called
Christians, Would thou know in what estate and calling soever thou art into,
whether private or public, whether the Lord account more of thee than thou art
worthy, whether He accounts thee faithful or not, Look to the marks,
signs and tokens of a true Christian: if thou find them in thee, as namely,
whether thou have a pleasure in body and soul, through infirmity, to serve
the Lord, to be exercised in the means of grace, in preaching, prayers,
reading, conference, etc. Look if thou have a pleasure to approve thy self in
all things to thy LORD and Master. Look if thou have a care, to further
others in the course of Christianity, and way of repentance: then, if thou
have these tokens, thou may rejoice.

Then he goes forward: and he cannot sufficiently set out that mercy which he
found, he knows not how nor in what terms to utter and proclaim it: If we
could find that mercy of Jesus, we would see that the heart would never
satisfy it self with thinking of it, or the mouth with speaking of it. And to
the intent that he may magnify the greatness and the riches of the mercy
of the LORD, he confesses and sets down, although to his own shame, his
former sinful life and behavior, in sundry degrees, Whereas before, says
he, I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an appressor. Look if he
thought much of himself, he was one of the cruellest persecuters that ever
was in the Church, he was in a rage against Christ.

Behold Brethren, Paul is not ashamed to paint out himself in his own
colors, and particularly to confess his former evil deeds, and to
registrate them to his own shame to the worlds end. Yea, ye shall see in
sundry places, where he speaks of himself, that he can never satisfy
himself in aggregating his own wickedness. The sinner who has found mercy,
will not regard to discover his sins to his own shame, and to tell all the
world of them, that he may glorify Him who has given him mercy: he will not
stand upon his reputation, but he will preserre Gods glory unto his own
account, he will glorify the LORD with his own shame. When David found
mercy for his vile adultery, and abominable murder, he not only
confesses his sins to his own shame, but also ascends, to confess the
natural corruption which he had from the loins of his parents. The man that
has fallen into a notorious and vile sin and offense, and yet for shame will
not confess it, that God may be glorified, that soul has never felt the
mercy of God. And if thou had felt that mercy of God thine heart would be
loosed, and thy mouth also, to glorify God by an humble confession.

Moreover, ye may perceive out of these words, how and what way the Apostle
found the strength and power of the Gospel: he found a power in it, but not
at the first instant: but ere ever he felt the power of the Lord, he finds
himself to be weak: and ere he feel the mercy of God, he finds himself
to be a miserable man: Thou shall never feel the power of God, except first
thou feel thine own weakness: and thou shall never feel His mercy, except
first thou feel thy misery. And therefore, the Lord Jesus many a time
sundry ways crosses His own in this life, to the end that they may know
and feel their weakness and misery, and so go out of themselves, to find
strength and mercy in Jesus Christ. Sometimes He will exercise His own with
shame and reproach in the world: sometimes with heavy diseases, and painful
sicknesses: sometimes with want of the outward comfortes of this life:
sometimes with trouble and terror in the conscience, and all to this end,
that they may know what they are without the Lord, how weak, how frail,
how abject and naughty they are: that so finding themselves as nothing, they
may be compelled to renounce themselves, and to seek to be found in Jesus.
Yea, after the Lord has drawn them to Him by crosses, the Lord uses all the
days of their lifetime, to expone them to crosses that every day, finding
more their wantes, infirmities, and lack of comfort in themselves, they may the
more daily seek and strive to be found in Jesus, who can supply all their
wantes, and furnishe every thing that they stand in need of. It is true
indeed, many a time the Lord will not exercise His own with crosses, but
spare them and let them have liberty, and give them in abundance the outward
comfortes of this life, before they be effectually called. Look to Paul
before he knew Christ he boasted much of his worldly prerogatives, of his
kindred: he was a gentleman, he was in great account, by the law a Pharisie,
Philip. 3. 4. 5. he knew not what the cross meaned. The like ye will find in
many others of the Saints of God: but as soon as He calls them effectually,
He lays the cross upon them: that seeing their weakness, and distrusting
themselves, they may learn to renounce themselves, and desire to find the
power and life of JESUS in them, which they will find effectual in the cross
in a wonderful manner: Look 2. Cor. 11. The LORD lays manifold crosses
upon Paul, and when with tears he prays, that the Lord would take them
away, he gets this answer, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power
is made perfect through thy weakness: Meaning, that He will be glorified,
and make Paul to find strength in Him, when as he is weak in himself. And
never one is strong in CHRIST, but when he feels himself weak. Therefore
he subjoyneth, that he would rejoice and take pleasure in his infirmities,
that the power of CHRIST might dwell in him: He says (2. Cor. 12. 8. 9. 10.
And 2. Cor. 4. 10.) Every where we brare about in our body the dying of the
LORD JESUS, that the life of JESUS might also be made manifest in our bodies,
etc. When the body by crosses was dying, then he found the life of CHRIST:
and no soul shall find that life without it be dying. Therefore, if ever
thou would find the power and life of Christ in thee, be careful to feel
thine own weakness and misery.

Yet mark the words: He says, notwithstanding of my sins, the Lord had
mercy upon me: And if ye look to the speech, it imports a wondering, that
ever he should have found mercy, who was such a great sinner. It is the
greatest vvonder that ever was, that one sin is forgiven to a sinner, suppose
it were but an evil thought: And if thou saw that great, inviolable and
infinite Majesty, and the greatness of thy sins, thou would wonder that
ever thou gettest one sin forgiven thee, let be blasphemy and persecution
forgiven thee: And wonder thou as thou will: all the Angels of Heaven wonder
that sinners should get mercy, and that God loved the unworthy world so, that
He would give His only Son to die that they should live for ever: and they
wondered when Adam, and the Fathers of old got mercy: but when Christ came
into the world to die for the sins of the world, they wondered far more at
that mercy, and with cheerful voice praised GOD for the same, saying,
Glory be to GOD in the high heavens, and peace on earth, and toward men
good will, Luke 2. 14. Look also what the Apostle says to this purpose, to
the Ephesians. Chap. 3. verse 10. It is their pleasure to pierce in to that
mystery, and to look to that mercy, but miserable man, to whom it belongs,
commonly wondreth not at it. But albeit the profane man, when he is sleeping
in sin, and going on in an evil course thinking it but an easy thing to
get mercy: and albeit he wonder not much when he sees another miserable
sinner to get mercy, but account it a matter of sober importance, yet if it
please the Lord once to waken his conscience, and make his sins to appear in
their own color, how great, how vile, and how detestable they are, and what
it is to offend that infinite and inviolable Majesty, that Omnipotent
JEHOVAH, who created all things, and to find the terrors and torments of
that inevitable wrath and everlasting pain. And if the Spirit of God leave him
there to his own self, and help him not forward, he would conclude, that
there were no mercy for him: and he would marvel that ever a sinner should
get mercy: for he would see the justice of God, as a wall of fire, standing
before God, holding off the sinner, that he preasse not to come near to God.
So such persons would dite their own dittie, and give out their own doom
against themselves. And except it please the Lord to send His Holy Spirit,
who searches all things, yea, the deepnesse of God, out of His own bosom,
to a miserable sinner, thus exercised, to conuoy him through His justice,
through that wall of fire, and to let him see and feel the mercy of God in
the Lord Jesus, he would never, nor durst never claim to His mercy. Only
they who gets that Holy Spirit, who comes out of that deepenesse, to
conuoye the creature to that unsearchable deepnesse, (for albeit the deepnesse
of that mercy be infinite, yet the Spirit of GOD searches out that
deepnesse) will acclaime and apprehende mercy: and then such persons will
marvel, that ever themselves, or any other, should have found such infinite
mercy. And the Saints of God, in the kingdom of Heaven, shall ever be
exercised in marueiling at the mercies of God upon them.

It is true, that many vain wanton men, when they are going on in sin,
being drunken and bewitched with the pleasures of sin, and mad in their
damnable course, will promise mercy to themselves, and will apply mercy to
sin, to make sin more and more sweet, as if it were not sweet enough
before: But away with thee, for mercy appertains not unto thee, but wrath
and judgment, so long as thou remainest in that estate. Thou art not in that
estate, that thou may claim to His mercy: for only the man who has a
sad, a contrite, and a broken soul, may acclaime to mercy, and such a man
in greatest sadness for sin shall have unspeakable joye.

Now after he has wondered at the mercy of GOD, in the end of the verse,
he sets down a cause not so much wherefore GOD gave him mercy, as that
GOD was so ready to give him mercy: He says, that he was an ignorant: and
that he proves, because he wanted faith: His ignorance deserved no mercy,
but rather made him culpable and guilty: For the Lord will not allow such an
excuse in that Great day: but ignorance makes the sin the less. The sin
that proceeds from ignorance, is not so great as the sin that proceeds
from knowledge: for the servant who knows not the masters will, and does
it not, shall be striped with few stripes: but the servant who knows the
masters will, and does it not, shall be striped with many stripes, Luke
12. 47. 48.

But for the better clearing of this point, we must understand, that Paul
means not, that every sin which is committed willingly and vvittinglie,
men knowing well enough that they are sinning, shall not be forgiven: for in
what case should we all be into then? Do we not all many a time sin
vvittinglie and willingly? Do not our consciences challenge us in the very
act? Will we not do vvrong to our neighbor, in his person or in his goods,
or in his name and account? yes, no question: and we cannot justify our
selves in our doings: If therefore, they who offend God, even with open eyes,
were condemned, without hope of mercy, alas! in what case would we be into?
He means not then of all sins in general, he means not of the sins
committed against the second Table against our neighbors: but by joining
ignorance and mis-beliefe together, he shows that he means of the
resisting of the truth of God, which is a far greater sin than theft,
hooredome, or backe-biting: for they who resist the truth, do as much as in
them lies, to pluck God out of His seat, and to put out the remembrance of His
glorious Majesty, that He reign no more: and they say in effect, Let me
alone with God, and I shall handle him well enough, I shall bring him to naught,
he shall not reign, I shall fight against him. Therefore, Paul speaking of
such an accursed sin, says not without cause, I did it of ignorance: as if
he had said, It is true, to blaspheme Gods name and to tread Gods word under
feet, and to persecute the Saints of God, is a sin that surmounteth and
surpasses all sins, and I am culpable of this sin: But what? I did it not
wittinglie, for I thought I served GOD when I was an enemy to the Gospel,
because I ^anted faith. Indeed Paul was a learned man, and brought up in all
good literature, as we read in the 3. Chap. to the Philipp. As for the
knowledge of the law, and the tradition of the Pharisees, he surpassed the
rest ( Galat. 1. 14.) Yet for all this, he says, he was ignorant, because
he wanted the knowledge of Christ. Suppose thou know all the world, and
yet if thou know not Jesus Christ, thou know nothing. And though thou
knew all the laws in the world, all humanity, all philosophy, yet if
thou know not Christ, thou know nothing. Now blessed is that soul that
knows Christ, albeit he knew no more for in the knowledge of Him stands
life everlasting.

Mark again, he says, because he was ignorant, therefore he was a
blasphemer and persecuter. Ignorance is a dangerous thing: they who are
ignorant of Christ, they who have not faith in Him, they who know not what a
glorious personage He is, what incomparable benefit He brought with Him unto
the world, who has not found His mercies, who have not been sensible of the
forgiveness of their sins, who have not found the image of God repaired in
them, and they who have not found that peace of conscience and joye in the
Holy Ghost, they will persecute Christ, and His Gospel, and His Saints. It
is a dangerous thing for the Saints of GOD to dwell among ignorantes and
unbelievers, for such men are unreasonable, yea, they are Atheistes. The
Apostle Paul requesteth the Thessalonians to pray to God for him, that he may
be delivered from froward and unreasonable men: for (says he) all men have
not faith, 2. Thessal. 3. 2. This Land is full of Atheistes: and give them but
a vvatch-vvord, they would soon make a Massacre. And it is a marvel that the
Church of God stands so long amongst them: for few is the number, and silly
is the flock of God that believes, in comparison of them who remain in
ignorance and infidelity. We should therefore pray to God daily, that He
would deliver His own Saints from them, and that by His powerful providence
He would restrain their malice and fury, and guard His own on all sides.
Further, think not that Paul alleges his ignorance that thereby he may
justify himself, as if it were without fault and offense: for no man's
ignorance shall serve to be a cloak to absolve him before God. It will not
serve a man to say, I thought not of it, I thought otherwise, I knew it not:
but if he get not mercy, he must die for his ignorance: but he alleges it
to let me^ see, that it was not of malice and despite that he set himself to
fight against God: and therefore that ye Lord was more ready to forgive him.
Then consider, that ye Lord takes heed and regards ye grounds and fountain
of sin where from it proceeds, and accordingly he is either more easy or
more hard to show mercy. There is a sine against Christ of ignorance, and such
was the sin of Paul: there is a sin against Christ of knowledge, this is an
higher degree, and this sin will hardlier get remission: this sin of knowledge
is of two sorts, for either it comes of infirmity, or else of malice: if it
come of infirmity, as fear of trouble, danger of life, it may find mercy:
such was ye sin of Peter, when at the voice of an handmaid he denied his
master Christ, for he knew in his conscience y^ he said and did wrong, yet it
proceeded of infirmity, for fear of his life: for as Bernard says, Petrus
peccau^ contra veritatem, no^ co^tra charitate^, for he loved Him in his heart,
who^ he was denying with his mouth, and therefore he found mercy, albeit his
sin was higher tha^ the sin of Paul was: but if it come of malice and despite
against God, and y^ light of His Gospel, it gets no mercy: yt is, if a man
come to this point, yt when he knows Gods truth, albeit he be not moved with
infirmity, fear, or danger, yt he will say in his heart, I know y^ this doctrine
is true it is ye truth of God, yet I will go of set purpose to fight against
God, I will go clean against it, I will do so much as in me lies to bring it to
naught: when a man comes thus far, this man carries a mark about with him,
whereby he may account himself a condemned person: such was y^ sin of Judas, and
of Julia^ y^ Apostate for of very malice they sinned against Jesus Christ and
his gospel: therefore they got no mercy. And well were it with many of this la^d,
and namely these whom ye Lord has promoued and preferred above others, who
have sold themselves to y^ Antichrist, y^ man of perdition, either quietly and
craftily to undermine, or else openly, if occasion offer, to persecute ye Church
and Saints of God: well I say were they, if either they did it of ignorance, or
of infirmity and weakness. Now to come to an end: In the last verse he returns
again to y^ grace and mercy, But the grace of our Lord super abounded so much
the more: my sin was great, but it reached above, and surpassed my sin. He
wondered before of the mercy of God but now finding unspeakable joy
proceeding of this mercy, his heart is enlarged, and his tongue loosed with
cheerfulness, to magnify His mercy. Where sin abounds, says the
Apostle, there grace super abounds, Roman. Chap. 5. verse 20. Go to thine
own experience, and consider what motions thou have found in using the means
of grace, sometimes at the hearing of the word, sometimes at the Holy
Sacraments, sometimes in prayer, and sometimes in meditation: and I will let
thee see, that grace superaboundeth. Will thou not feel when thine heart is
very sad, when it is burdened with exceeding grief and displeasure, when
thou art sighing, sobbing, and groaning under the burden of sin, and when
thou art pouring out tears abundantly before God because of thy sinful life,
and foolish race which thou have run: will ye not find exceeding yet,
incomprehensible joye, to arise out of that sadness at that same time, which
will swallow up all displeasure and sadness? such a joye, I say, as the like
whereof all worldly pleasures and comforts cannot be able to afford: No
question, but if thou be the child of God, sometimes thou will find this joy.
Now from whence proceeds this joy, but from the feeling of a superaboundant
mercy, forgiving thee al thy sins? for as sadness rises of sin, for offending
such a loving God, and merciful father: so the joy rises of the assurance of
forgiveness of sin in his superabu^dant mercy: and if there were not a super
abundant mercy ye, joy would never swallow up y^ sadness: so if there were no
more to testify, that ye mercies of the Lord superabou^deth, but ye unspeakable
joy mixed with sadness, it is as sure an argument as ever was in the world: yea,
and when thou feel this joy, will thou not be compelled sometimes to burst
out, and to say, Lord, thy mercies are superabundant, where sin abounds,
there thy grace and mercy abou^deth more: so if thou would feel this
surpassing joy, strive not so much by a general knowledge and bare
co^te^plation to know y^ the mercies of God are infinite, and to speak of them
ye they are above al His works, higher tha^ ye heavens, deeper tha^ ye sea, and
broader tha^ ye earth, but chiefly to find and feel the^ by experience in thine
own soul (for a bare knowledge and naked speaking without feeling auailes
nothing) and the^ thou shall find such a joy as will make thee co^te^ne and
disdain al joys ye thou found before in sin, or in these worldly courses: and
it shall make thee to say, y^ thou never knew before what true and solid joy
meaned: and to ye intent thou may find this superabu^dant mercy, which is ye
cause and fou^tain of this joy, strive to have sadness and bitterness in thy
soul for ye offe^ding of so loving a God and merciful father: for none is
capable of this mercy but he who has a co^trit, a broken and bruised soul. The
Lord, therefore, give us grace to feel the burden of sin, and to groan under
it, y^ we may taste of y^ superabu^da^t mercy, and so may find y^ true and
solid joy y^ passes all understanding in Jesus Christ,

Amen.
THE XVIII. SERMON.
I. TIMOTH. CHAP. I. But the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

Notwithstanding, for this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ
should first show on me all long suffering, unto the ensample of them, who
shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life.


THE Apostle Paul (well-beloued Brethren in Christ) considering that the Lord
JESUS had showed such mercy upon him, as to concredite to him the glorious
Eua^gell of the blessed GOD, immediately falls out in a thanksgiving to
Christ. There are two causes in the proposition of the thanksgiving: the one
is taken from the power of Christ, wherewith he is made strong: for when he was
nothing, the Lord Jesus made him strong: The other is from the mercy of Christ,
when he was unfaithful, (how could a blasphemer be faithful?) the Lord was
so merciful, that He made him faithful, and this he declares, because he
being before, a persecuter, the Lord made him an ambassador of that same
Euangell which he persecuted. He leaves not this mercy, but insisteth in
magnifying of it in regard, that not only he was a Preacher, but likewise he
was a true Christian man. Ere ever he set down this mercy, he tells what he
was before, and he ^ayeth, When I was a blasphemer, and not only that, but
with torments, compelled the Christians to blaspheme, I was a persecuter, and
yet further, an oppressor, he leaves nothing untold of himself, and he
thinks no shame to honor that God, who had mercy upon him, with his own
shame, and he regisirateth his own mis-behauiour to his shame, that every one
of the Saints of God, to the end of the world may say Glory be to God, that
has showed mercy on such a sinner: then he wondereth and says, but he had
mercy upon me, and therewith by the way he joyneth a reason, why the Lord
showed mercy sa readily on him, because he did it not of malice or knowledge,
but he was blinded, he did it of ignorance, he was destitute of Faith, but
as soon as he got mercy, he changed his course: yet he leaves not off but
enters into a deaper consideration of this Grace, and he says, The Grace of
the Lord abounded exceedingly, My sin abounded, but grace superabounded, and
these words are from the sense of the heart, the heart being opened with the
sense of Grace, opens the mouth that it utters these words: the grace of
Christ is superabundant, for if the heart be filled with the sense of grace and
mercy, it will make the mouth to proclaim the mercy of God, and to extol it
highly. The cause why we cannot set out ye mercy of God in hie terms, is,
because in us there is no feeling of mercy: therefore it is, that we utter
words so slender and of so little valor, when we speak of that love and that
mercy, as it were a thing of none importance. When he has told that the grace
of the Lord superabounded, he adds also. With faith and with love in Jesus
Christ, he declares that superabundant grace by a wonderful mutation and
change that was made in him by the power of JESUS CHRIST, that of a blasphemer
of Christ, he is made a believer, apprehending him by Faith, of a persecuter
and oppressor of the Saints of God, he was made a lover of them. The sense
of the mercy of God, and faith in Jesus Christ, brings forth love in the
heart. And whosoever has assurance of mercy and true faith, his heart will be
joined with Christ and he will have a great love toward Him: then for
Christ's sake he will love all His Saints: there will not be a soul in the
Church of Christ, but he will love him so entirely y^ he would give his life for
him, and as he will love him so he will pity him: for he y^ has faith, will
both love and pity me^: he y^ wa^ts pity, and cares not what becomes of ye
whole world, so he be well he has never found what was the mercy of God in
his heart. Alas! how few is the number of these faithful ones! how rare a
thing is faith in the hearts of men! What argues this coldness in the hearts
of men, this want of love and pity in the multitude? Nothing but this, that
albeit mercy be preached, yet ye multitude feels it not. And if thou had
all this world, and yet tasted not of that sweetness of this mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, thou knew never what joy, what comfort, what pleasure was.

Then in the next words he opens up the ground as it were of that mercy
that was showed upon him, which is the general end of the coming of Christ
into this world: and from the general he concludes on this manner, Christ
Jesus is come into the world to save sinners, and I am a sinner, therefore He
will save me amongst the rest. Before he come to the words of the proposition,
because it is a great and notable sentence, he uses a preface: as ye Lord
Jesus in matters of importance used to say, Verily, verily, I say unto you: so
here the Apostle says, This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be
received. In this preface he prepares not only Timothy, but all that ever
shall hear this sentence unto the end of the world: and he prepares them not
only to the attension of the ear, but he prepares them unto faith in the
heart: so that as soon as they should hear this sentence, they should apply
it with their hearts. Alas! why should so worthy and excellent sentences as
these are pass away without any attention or preparation on our part? It is
true, Brethren, we should never come to ye hearing of any part of the word
without preparation: we should not come to the holy congregation like as many
swine, without having any regard what we are doing, but we should come with
preparation: and not only with an ear prepared, but with an heart prepared: and
when thou enterest into the Church thou should say, The Lord prepare mine
heart, that I may receive some sponke of grace. So a preparation is requisite
in general to the hearing of the word. But yet the heart of man would be
better prepared for the hearing of such notable sentences as this is, Christ is
come into the world to save sinners: they require a more singular preparation.
There is no doubt he spoke through the full assurance of faith, and that which
he spoke, he assuredly believed: and therefore he spoke of it. When we speak
of that grace, the heart should rise with an assurance. Look to the Prophet
David, with what assurance he speaks of it, I believed (says he) therefore
did I speak, Psalm. 116. 10. Look to the Apostles, with what faith and
assurance they speak of it: because, says Paul, 2. Cor. 4. 13. We have the
same Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore
have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore we speak. So when thou hear
or speak of this grace of the Lord Jesus, seek to have this assurance in
thine heart, and say, Lord, give me Thy grace in speaking and hearing of the
benefit of Christ, that I may speak and hear with assurance. And if ye take
heed to the words of the preface, he rises up in commending of this sentence,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners: and he says not only,
This is a true saying, that we may assuredly believe: but likewise he
says, and by all means worthy to be received. He welcommeth (in a manner)
Christ Jesus coming into the world, he embraces that salvation that He
brought with Him. And would to God, whether we be Preachers or hearers, that
we could attain to that measure of grace, that so often as we name the
coming of Jesus Christ, that in speaking of it our hearts may be moved to
embrace Him, and that life and salvation which He has purchased for us. So
this preface serves to confirm our hearts, and deeply to imprint in them
the doctrine of the grace of Christ of remission of sins, of salvation
through Him, etc. for by nature there is in every one of us such a mistrusting
and doubting thereof: y^ albeit God would a thousand times offer it unto us:
albeit Christ himself would teach never so much unto us, yet are we ever still
in doubt and questioning in our own hearts, whether it be so or not. Against
all this mistrusting and reasoning of our own hearts, we must be armed with
this preface of the Apostle, as with a buckler, that it is a true saying, and
by all means worthy to be received. But to come to the saying it self, It
reckons up ye whole Euangell, for what is the Euangell in few words? The
Lord Jesus, the Son of God, is come into the world, by his manifestation in
the flesh and taking upon him our nature, and in it, he has suffered the
most shameful death of the Cross, for the sins of man, and rising again
from death, has passed up to glory, and all to this end, For the salvation
of man: There is the whole Gospel. Alas! if we took heed to these tithings,
our hearts would not be carried after so many vanities. The Apostle (1
Timoth. 3. 16.) calls this the mystery of godliness, and a great mystery,
That GOD is manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of the
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory, etc. All this he sets down here in a word, Christ Jesus came into
the world: and he tells us it was to save sinners: that we, who are
sinners, might have joye, and rejoice at His coming: for we should never
hear nor read such sentences, but with joye. But the words would be
weighed, he says, CHRIST came into the world to save sinners. What is this
that he calls sinners? there are two sorts of sinners in the world: The
first are they who think they have no sin, they are so hardened in their
sin, they never got their hearts opened to see their own sin, and
wretchedness: (for an endured sinner feels no sin) but by the contrary,
they think themselves just: they are puffed up with a conceit of their own
righteousness, they think themselves whole and free from the disease of sin,
and these are the greatest part of the world. An example we have in that proud
Pharisie, who would stand up and justify himself before God, and say, I thank
thee, O God, that I am not a sinner as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or eue^ as this Publicane, Luke 18. 11. But it is not for the
salvation of those men that Christ came into the world: no, mercy belongs not
to them, they will never taste of any mercy of God in Jesus Christ and therefore
Christ says, ( Mat. 9. 12. 13.) The whole need not a Physician, that is, they
who are whole and free of the sickness of sin in their own conceit: I am not
come to call the just, that is, endured sinners who think themselves just,
because they are touched with no sense of sin: and well had it been for them,
if Christ had never come into the world, for they want not only grace in Him,
but by the contrary, by the contemning of the grace that is offered, they heap
on condemnation on their own heads. There is another sort of sinners, who have
a true sense of sin, and groan under the burden thereof, who are sore grieved
in their own consciences for it: and it is of these sinners that the Apostle
speaks here: for Christ shows mercy only on these sinners, He came into the
world to save them only: therefore He says, Mat. 9. 13. I come to call sinners
to repe^ta^ce, meaning these sinners who have their consciences wakened with ye
sense of sin: these sinners only He inuiteth to come unto Him to get grace and
refreshme^t: Come unto me, says He, all ye that weary and laden, and I will
refresh you, Mat. 11. 28. These sinners will get grace to hear the word, and
will get their minds illuminated with it, whereas endured sinners, the more they
hear the more are they blinded: and therefore Christ says, Joh. 9. 39. I am
come unto judgment into this world, that they that see not, may see, to wit,
the penitent sinners: and that they see, that is, endured sinners, may be
blinded: and if thou be an endured sinner, thou can not hear the word with
profit, thou can not be enlightened thereby. But albert thou be a
blasphemer, an adulterer, an harlot, and the greatest sinner that is, if thou
harden not thine heart at the hearing of the word of God, O how wonderfully
will it work in thy soul! it will bring thee to a sense of thy sin, it will
make thee to be grieved for thy sin* and to lament and mourn unfeignedly for
it: it will make thee to run and seek for grace and mercy in Christ that thy
sin may be done away: an example of this ye have in David, when he had
committed adultery and murder: no sooner is ye word preached to him by Nathan,
but as soon his heart is pierced with the sense of his sin, he confesses and
acknowledges it, he is sore grieved for it, he cries for mercy in the
Messiah, to put away his iniquities, as ye may see, 1. Sam. 12. 13. and Psalm.
51. Such like ye see in Paul, who before was persecuting the Church, as soon as
he hears the voice of Christ, his conscience is wakened, he trembles, he is
astonished, he humble entreats for mercy, he offers service to the Lord, and
says* Lord, what will thou that I do? Acts 9. 6. And it is only such
persons as these, who are of a contrite Spirit, who tremble at the Lords
words, that do get mercy and salvation. Then in a word, a humble and
penitent sinner, how great so ever his sin be, he ^all get salvation. So
there is nothing that hinders thee from mercy and salvation, but the
malitiousnes of thine own heart. It is not Adultery, it is not Murder, it is
not Blasphemy or oppreslion, that depriueth thee of yt salvation, but the
hardness of thine heart that cannot repent: if thou have a contrite heart, and
can say, Woe is me, that I have offended so sweet and gracious a God, thou
shall get mercy. It is an heavy and Iamentable case, that sinners should want
mercy for fault of repentance. When he has set down this general sentence,
whereon he groundeth the mercy of God that was showed on him, that Christ came
in the world to save sinners, he comes to the particular application, and he
subjoyneth, But I am the first sinner in the world, the conclusion is
understood, therefore Christ Jesus came in the world to save me. Would to God
every sinner in the world could learn to apply this general sentence to
themselves in the same manner that Paul does here, and from his heart could say
with him, Christ Jesus is come in the world to save sinners, and then subjoyne,
Bot I am the first sinner in the world, that sa he might apply mercy and
salvation to himself, for without this application, these general sentences
can serve for no use. It is true indeed, Brethren, sciences of these general
sentences that are contained in ye Scripture, is very good, yea, the knowledge
of them is most necessary: for no man can have conscience without knowledge:
But it is as true on the other part, that science and knowledge avail not
without conscience, applying particularly to a man's soul the thing that he
knows. As when men know these general sentences set down in the word, if
they apply them not to themselves, the knowledge of them can serve to no
purpose: As for example: when a man knows this general sentence of the law,
Cursed is every man that continues not in every thing which is written in the
book of the law, to do them, if thou apply it not, it can do thee no good:
But if thy conscience be wakened, to acknowledge thy tra^sgressing of ye law,
and consequently to apply to thy self that curse of the law, and eternal
condemnation, what sorrow and grief will it work in thine heart? what earnest
desire will it work to be free from that curse and eternal condemnation?
Yea, thou would be content to give all the world to be free of that curse,
and the heavy burden of the wrath of God. And Brethren, look never for mercy,
nor salvation, except first thine own conscience condemn thee: if thy
conscience condemn thee not, the Lord of Heaven shall condemn thee. There is
never one that is freede from the curse and condemnation of the law, but they
who feel their sin and groan under the burden of it, and get a sight of
their condemnation for sin.

Another example we have of this general sentence that the Apostle has in
this place, Christ Jesus is come into the world to save sinners: If thou apply
it not, and say not as the Apostle does, I am a sinner, it can furnish thee no
joy nor comfort. The^ when we come to hear the doctrine of grace and mercy,
let us come with a conscience wakened and weary with the sense of sin: for if
the souls of men and women were weary, and laden with the burden of sin, they
would feel an unspeakable joye in their hearts at the preaching of y^
doctrine of salvation. But because we are casten up in a senseless security,
our consciences are asleep, and the thing that we have is but a general
motion: therefore it is, that at the preaching of the law there is no sorrow,
no grief no heaviness of heart: and if the glad tithings of the Euangell be
preached, there is no joye nor comfort: And this is the thing that we have
most to lament at the preaching of the word, that we have no feeling neither
of sadness nor of joy: and therefore the judgment is the nearer. And he or
she that l^eth hardest sleeping in greatest security, shall get the forest and
most terrible wakening when the judgment comes. Now the Lord waken our
consciences in time and give us grace to take heed to the preaching of the
word, and to beware of our selves, and ever pray to the Lord for grace: and
never let neither the memory of His mercy toward penitent sinners, nor of His
judgeme^t against endured and impenitent sinners, pass out of our mind. Mark
again: In application when he applies the general unto himself, he applies
not immediately salvation, but first he applies sin to himself, and then
salvation: he says not first, I am saved, but first he says, I am the
greatest amongst sinners, and thereafter he says, I have obtained mercy. Then
take heed to thy application. When thou hear, by the preaching of the
Gospel, salvation offered to sinners, take not first to thy self salvation,
but first take sin and death: then take life, and apply it to thy self:
Rejoice not first at the preaching of the glad tithinges of salvation, but
first conceive a displeasure: then let joy arise out of displeasure: for joy of
salvation must arise out of the displeasure, through the fear of damnation. It
shall pass thy power to find joye through the sense of mercy and salvation*
before thou find sadness and heaviness of heart through the sense of sin
and damnation. Even as ye see a spring of water will not break out of a rock
except the rock be broken: Even so is it with this effect, No joye can be to
the heart of a Christian man or woman, till the heart be contrite and broken
with sadness through the sense of sin: The heart is first exceeding heavy
and sorrowful, and out of that heaviness arises the joy: and the heavier the
heart is, the greater the joye is. Would to God we had this sorrow and
sadness, and the sense of the wrath of God in our hearts for sin: for the
saddest heart for sin will get the greatest joy, and evermore the greater
sadness, the greater joye. If our hearts be grieved, and weary with the sight
of sin, we shall have such a spiritual joy, as the world knows not: And
this joy is as sure an earnest-penny of that joy of Heaven, as ever was. And he
that has that joy that arises from that sorrow in the heart for sin, he has
a sufficient warrant of that joy in Heaven: and he that has not that joy, he
has no warrant of that Heavenly joye: Therefore Christ says, Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Now in this world this
joy is mixed with tears, but then it shall be a perfect joy, and all tears
shall be wiped away from our eyes. Now for Christ's sake put away vanity and
wantonness and let every one of us take up a new course of life, that we may
mourn and weep unfeignedly for our sins, (for we have all need) that in
stead of this worldly joy, we may get that solid and unspeakable joy that
arises out of sadness: otherwise we only enjoy the name of Christians, but as
the disposition of the heart which is required in a Christian, it is far from
us.

Yet mark further: His conscience is not only wakened with the sense of
sin, he is not only touched with a true sorrow for it, but also he makes
a clear and plain confession of it. Then mark it: Before thou gettest mercy
in Christ, thou must first of necessity acknowledge and confess thy sin: for
confession of sin must of necessity go before mercy. David found this by
experience, for so long as he held his tongue, and would not confess his
sin, he could find nothing but the wrath and heavy hand of God against him:
My bones (says he) were consumed, I roared all the day, etc: but as soon as
he takes this resolution with himself, I will confess against my self, my
wickedness unto the Lord: then he found the Lord to show mercy on him, and to
forgive him ye punishment of his sin, Psalm. 32. 3. 4. 5. And to what purpose
should any man cou^r his sins from God, whose all-seeing eyes pierce into
the brains and most secret corners of the heart, and to whom all things are
open and patent, and who knows every man's sins better than he can do
himself? Why should thou then dissemble with Him? why should thou not
make a plain and open confession of thy sins unto Him, that thou may get
mercy? Another thing would be marked: He is not content to confess his sin,
but he says, I am the chief of sinners: He says not simply, I am a sinner,
but the chiefest sinner, the first sinner in the world. Brethren, if we had a
sense of our sin, even the least sinner of us would think he were the
greatest, he would not go about to excuse his sin, he would not cloak it
as Came did, he would not extenuate it, much less would he have a proud
conceit of himself, and of his own righteousness: he would not enter in as
that proud Pharisee did, Luke 18. 10, who held up his head, and said, I am
not as other men* extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane:
The poor Publicane was in ye mean time hinging down his head: but he was a
greater sinner. But if thou enter into comparison with others, and have a sense
of thy sin, thou will think with thy self, There is not so great a sinner in
the world as I am, and thou will say with Paul, I am the first and chiefest of
sinners. Now when he has applied the general sentence to himself, and showed
that the Lord had given him mercy and salvation. He sets down next the end
of this grace: But herefore (says he) he had mercy on me, that he might
first show on me al long suffering: there is an end: another end is, that I
should be an example, to others in the world.

Now, Brethren, when God shows mercy on any man, it is not for nothing, it
is not without great and manifest causes, for He will not cast grace lightly
away: Indeed He will give these temporal benefits to the wicked, because He
esteems not so much of them: He will throw a lordship, an earldom, yea a
kingdom, to a reprobate: but as for one spunke of y^ spiritual grace of Jesus
Christ, He will know well to whom He gives it: He will take good heed to whom
He gives one drop of that precious blood of Jesus Christ, and He will love
them exceedingly. Think ye not that he would love a leprous man well, that
would wash him with his own blood? The preciousest liquor that ever was in
the world, is the blood of the Lord Jesus, yea, such is the worthiness and
preciousnesse thereof, that all the world will not buy one drop of it. Shall
we not think then, that He loves that man well, whom He washes with His
blood? Shall we not think, that He bears an unspeakable love to that man
whom He washes with His Holy Spirit? Mark it, Brethren: Mercy comes by
chance to no man: it is usually said, Kingdoms come of hap: but it is not so
with mercy and the grace of Jesus Christ: none gets it but these whose names
are written up in the book of life: none are called to the participation of
one spunke of that saving grace, but they who were predestined from all
eternity. And therefore, if thou have gotten one spunke of grace, count with
thy self, that thou wast predestined from all eternity to everlasting life,
and count with thy self, that thou have gotten a more excellent and precious
thing, than if thou had gotten all the world. Now as He will not lightly give
grace, so He gives it not for the person himself alone, who receives the
grace: but He will have a consequence following upon the giving of that grace
and mercy: first, He will have the glory of that grace and mercy to Himself:
and what more? He will set him, on whom He has vouchsased that grace and
mercy, to be a spectacle and example of His mercy before the world. To speak
of the first end, That he should show on me al clemency: that is, that
showing such mercy on me who was the greatest sinner, He might manifest and
declare the exceeding greatness of His mercy to the world.

Brethren, the thing that God looks to in His works, is, that He might be
glorified in His essential properties: but above all the rest of His
properties, He will be glorified in His mercy, He will be glorified in His
power, in His wisdom, in his justice. Sodom and Gomorrha was a spectacle to
sinners of His justice, to terrify sinners to the end of the world. But
above all, He seeks to be glorified in His own mercy. Above all things the
Lord will have His love and mercy to shine in the world, He will have the
creature to glorify Him in His mercy. What is the cause that He sent Christ
into the world? That in Christ His mercy might shine in the world. What is the
cause of this preaching of the Euangell? Why is it sent? That His mercy might
shine in the world: And all the Pastors should teach and proclaim this mercy
of God, and not speak of judgment, but when men regards not His mercy.
Look what the LORD will do, that His mercy should shine in the world, He
will take blasphemous persons, persecuters, oppressors, such as Paul was, and
He will show mercy upon them, He will make them to be spectacles of His
mercy in the sight of the world, that all the world should stand wondering,
that the Lord shows mercy upon them. And there is not one of them who are
justified by Christ, but they are spectacles of the mercy of God, set before
the world, to make the world to wonder at his mercy: that so we may learn to
know, and deeply to consider, the mercy of GOD, not only by His word, but
also by His works and examples of them that have obtained mercy. Now to come
to the second end, he says, Unto the example of them that shall in time to
come believe in him. Then Paul gets mercy not for himself only, but also
for other sinners, who seeing this mercy showed upon him, might reason with
themselves and say, Yonder blasphemer, yonder persecuter, yonder oppressor,
has gotten mercy, and may not I likewise be assured to get mercy? Therefore,
when thou see that the Lord is merciful to any man, say with thy self, It is
not for nothing that the Lord has given this man mercy: but it is for my
cause, that I may by his example be stirred up to seek mercy: therefore I will
go and get mercy at his hands. But alas! such is our security and
senselessness, that howbeit the Lord be continually calling upon us, and
offering mercy unto us by His word, and likewise by ever setting forth before
us godly men and women, that of unholy creatures are made holy creatures, to
be spectacles of His mercy, that by them we should take example: yet all
these means that God uses to testify His mercy unto us, moves us not to
consider and take up His mercy. But blessed is that soul that can learn by
any of these means, to take up the mercy of GOD, and to seek for it: for
mercy is the preciousest jewel that ever was. Therefore, when thou find
not assurance of mercy, then be sorry for it, and strive earnestly to obtain
it: for there is no surer token that the Lord is to show mercy to any soul,
than when upon the sight and feeling of the want thereof the soul is
grieved, and strives and endeavors more and more to obtain a more full
assurance thereof. And therefore, when I consider how men in this Land are
sleeping in sin, without any remorse of conscience, and are so careless to
seek to have assurance of mercy, I am afraid, that the LORD is about to
vvith-draw mercy from this Nation. The LORD auert His wrath, and be merciful
unto this sinful Nation, for CHRIST'S sake: To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, and glory, world without end, AMEN.

FINIS.

