A VIEW OF THE CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL LAW: And wherein the Practice of them
is streitned, and may be releeved within this Land.

Written by Sr THOMAS RIDLLY Knight, and Doctor of the Civil Law.

The second Edition, by I. G. Mr. of Arts.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by William Turner, Printer to the University 1635 Cum
Privilegio.

TO THE READER.
THis Learned and useful View of both the Laws, once more adventureth it
self upon the Opinion of Men, and it may now hope to receive a more
indifferent censure then before, as being committed to a season more mature,
and more perfectly disposed; for howsoever the Time that first brought this
forth, could not be charged with any notable distemper; yet the Commonwealth
we live in is of that thriving nature, that however the present time may still
be good, yet it always makes the succeeding Age better then it self. This
argues the State not near her ruin, though some unruly Spirits, led by an
irregular Motion, have been bold to anticipate; as if every one that bad so
much pity as to fear, had also judgment enough to foresee the ruin of a
Kingdom. 'Twas more then enough for such Men to set down the Fate of a
single-soule, without resolving upon the doom of a whole Nation. But these
that would seem to know such high things, are most properly punished by being
neglected: for to a Man that would be thought to know, and knows not, no
greater misery can happen, then that he should fail of his Expectation. If I
were to serve or follow any time, I would propose the Present, which as it has
less of the pretenses of former Ages, so it has much more of the Moderation:
and if it needs must be suspected that the State is not far from her fall,
let this be the only reason, because she draws so near to her perfection.
That which heretofore most of all encumbered these Dominions, was the
disproportion of the Civil Power to the Ecclesiastical. This a Great Prince
abated, and the Act was truly masculine, yet like those of the strongest
importance, would not be perfected by the same hand; therefore it was by him so
fully done, on the one side, that it might be feared lest it should run over
on the other. To prevent this, the discretion of these late discerning times
has warily provided; the wisdom of the Prince having so well tempered both
the Powers, that it may now be hoped, they shall agree one with an other as
both do in him, by a glorious correspondence. The State thus bending toward
the best, and the most perfect mediocrity, this Author whose hope that always
was, couldnot but revive again; therefore it is, that though he be dead, he
yet speaks. If still there be that will reprehend these our pains, as if
they were cast upon a man too much sought after, be it so; but these men have
least cause to complain, for if the matter of this Book be, as they suppose,
then the only way to suppress it will be to make it common, for things of
that nature are least of all enquired for, when they are most easily to be
found; but if they rarely appear, they are more eagerly sought after, and the
more obstinately esteemed.

When first I would see this Treatise, I beheld it at a distance, and not
without some prejudice; for so I was prompted by the insinuations of a fallible
Report; but finding it under the Protection of the High and Mighty Prince
James, I took liberty to resolve against all popular contradiction. And now,
to seek any other Patron for this new Edition, I have thought it altogether
inglorious. For what can the man do that comes after the King?

For a Note or two, which I have here and there timerously let fall, If the
Reader expect that I should ask his pardon; there may be cause, but there is
no convenience: for this kind of Complement is now adays indifferently set
before those things that are well, and those that are ill done. Besides, it
would argue Certain folly, to be engaged there for pardon, where our choice
is to offend. What I have here done amiss, I shall hereafter hope to
rectify, either by doing something that shall be better (if that may be) or
(which is the safest way) by doing so no more.

I. G.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince JAMES, by the grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MOST gracious Sovereign, since it has pleased Your Majesty of Your Princely
care toward the Church, and Your Commonwealth, to take knowledge of some
differences that are in Judicature between Your Ecclesiastical and Civil
Law, and the Temporal Law of this Land (by which jointly Your Majesty's State
is managed next after Your own most rare providence, and the wisdom of such,
whom it has pleased Your Highness to associate unto Your self in the great
affairs of Your Kingdom) I have been bold to offer unto Your Majesty this
simple Treatise, as that which does lay out the cause of those Differences,
more particularly than any man hitherto has expressed the same. In coming to
which (because I do speak for those parts of Your Majesty's Laws, which are
less known unto Your people, and esteemed no otherwise of them, than they see
the practice thereof to be here within Your Land) I have thought good, as it
were in a Brief, to set out the whole sum of both the Laws, to the view of
the people, that they may see, there is more worth in those for whom I speak,
than was by many conceived to be: So that the profession of the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Law may appear to the world, neither to be idle
nor unfit for the State; so far as it has pleased the Royal Predecessors
of Your Highness to give entertainment unto it, and Your Majesty Your self
to admit of it. In all which there is no other thing sought, than that such
greevances as have been of late offered by one Jurisdiction unto the other,
and in consequence, to all Your Subjects, who follow any suits in the Civil or
Ecclesiastical Courts, may by Your Princely wisdom be considered, and by Your
authority be redressed, if they be found to be greevances indeed: for now as
things are, neither Jurisdiction knows their own bounds, but one snatcheth
from the other, in manner, as in a batable ground lying between two Kingdoms;
but so, that the weaker ever goes to the worse, and that which is mightier
prevails against the other: the professors thereof being rather willing to
give Laws and interpretations to other, than to take or admit of any against
themselves. For which, the weaker appeals unto your Highness, humbly desiring
Your Majesty's upright and sincere Judgment to discern where the wrong is,
and to redress it accordingly, which is a work worthy Your Majesty's high
consideration. For as the Land is Yours, so also the Sea is Yours, and the
Church is under Your Highness protection, as a Child is under his Tutor; so
that all the Laws thereof appertain unto Your Majesty's care and comfort
alike: For which, not only the whole profession of Your Ecclesiastical and
Civil Lawyers that now are, but those which shall succeed in those places for
ever hereafter unto the worlds end, will praise and magnify Your Majesty's
gracious favor toward them, and we that now are will pray to God for the
long and happy prosperity of Your Highness, and Your Posterity over us,
during the continuance of this Heaven and this Earth, and after the passing
away thereof, a perpetual fruition of the new Heaven and the new Earth,
wherein righteousness only shall dwell for ever.

Your Majesty's most humble THOMAS RIDLEY.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I confess, as I meditated this Treatise upon mine own motion
(as I do sometimes matters of other argument, when my leisure serves me
thereto) so also I do not set it out to the view of the world upon mine own
motion, but was desirous it should have been kept in, saving that I must obey
where I am bound. The thing that gave me cause to this meditation, was, that I
saw many times how meanly men esteemed of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law of
this Land, valuing them by the practice of so much of them, as we have among
us. And therefore I thought good, although not wholly to unfold the riches of
them, yet to make show of them folded up, in such sort as Mercers make show of
their silks and velvets, laid up in whole pieces in their shops; whereby it
may be seen, what great variety they have of all these kind of wares,
although the goodness of the ware it self cannot be discerned, because it is
foulded up: Besides, seeing how frequent prohibitions are in these days in
causes of either cognizance more than have been in former time, I thought it
not unworthy my labor to inquire and see upon what just grounds they are
raised up in this multitude; not of any humor I have, to gainesay the lawful
proceedings of any Court (which I reverence and most readily acknowledge their
authority in all things belonging to their place) but to know and search out
the truth of those suggestions that give cause unto these prohibitions. For
whenas such Laws as are written of these businesses, are written
indifferently, as well for the one Jurisdiction as the other, no man is to be
offended if the one Jurisdiction, finding it self pres sed by the partial
interpretation (as it supposes) of the other, inquire the ground of such
interpretation, and labor to redress it if it may be, by the right
interpretation thereof: To the end, that either Jurisdiction may retain their
own right, and not the one be overtopt by the other, as it seems to be at
this day: And that in such matters (as they concern) of their own right, as
depend of no other authority but of the Prince alone: which is the thing only
that is sought in this little Treatise. And therefore the Reverend Judges of
this Land are to be entreated, that they will vouchsafe an equal
interpretation of these matters, as well to the one Jurisdiction as the other,
for so it is comely for them to do; and if they do it not, the other are not
so dull-senced, but they can perceive it, nor so daunted, but that they can
fly for succor unto him, to whose high place and wisdom, the deciding of
these differences does of right appertain. PENELOPE is said to have had many
wooers comely in person and eloquent in speech, but she respected none but her
own ULYSSES: Such should be the mind of a Judge, that whatsoever other
appearance or show of truth be offered, one saying, This is the true sense of
the Law, and an other that; yet the Judge should respect none but the very true
germane and genuine sense thereof indeed. Which if it were religiously or
indifferently observed in every Court, then needed not this complaint that now
is, but every Jurisdiction should peaceably hold his own right, such as the
Prince, Law, or Custom has afforded unto it.

THOMAS RIDLEY.

A VIEW OF THE Civil and Ecclesiastical Law: also wherein it is straightned,
and wherein it may be releeved.
PART. I.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
The Division of the whole book into four parts.

What right or Law is in general.

What is the Law public, and what the Law private.

What is the Law of Nature.

What is the Law of Nations.

What is the Law Civil.

BEfore I show how necessary it is for his Majesty and the Realm, to
maintain the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, as they are now practiced among
us in this Realm, I will set down, as it were, in a brief, what the Civil,
and the Ecclesiastical Laws are: then will I show how far forth they are
here in use and practice among us: thirdly wherein we are abridged, and put
beside the use and possession thereof, by the Common Law, even contrary to the
old practice thereof, and the true sense and meaning of the Laws of this
Realm, and the Statutes in this behalf provided: and lastly, wherein we might
be releeved and admitted to the practice of many things in the Civil Law,
without prejudice to the Common Law; and so both the Laws might know their
own grounds and proper subjects, and not one to be jumbled with the other, as
it is at this day, to the great vexation of the Subject. But before I speak of
the Civil Law in particular, I will define what Right, or What Law is.
Law is, in general: Law therefore is (as Vlpian says, L. 10. in fin. ff. de
Justicia and Jure) the knowledge of Civil and humane things, the understanding
of those things which are just and unjust. This Law is primarily divided into
the Law public, and the Law private. The 1. Jus publicum.
public, is that which appertains to the general state of the
commonwealth, for I mean the Law public, not in respect of the Form, that
they were publicly made, as we make laws in our Parliaments (for so all the
Civil Law is public, as made by public authority) but in respect of the
object, or end thereof, for that they concern the Church, the Clergy, the
Magistrate, and other like public functions, none of which level at the rule
of equity, or equality between man and man, as private laws do, but aim at
that which is most fit, ingenerall, for the common State. 2. Jus privatum.


The private Law, or the private men's Law, is that which concerns every
singular man's state; which, for that it is occupied in giving every man his
own, it must of necessity be proportionable to the rule of Equity and
Justice.

Private Law is of three sorts, the law of Nature, the law of Nations, and the
law Civil.

The law of Nature, is that which Nature has taught every living creature, as
the care and defense of every The Law of Nature.
creatures life, desire of liberty, the conjunction of male and female for
procreation sake.

The law of Nations, is that which common reason has established among men,
and is observed alike in all Nations, The Law of Nations.
as distinctions of men's rights, buildings of houses, erecting of Cities,
society of life, judgments of controversies, war, peace, captivity,
contracts, obligations, succession, and the like.

The law Civil, being largely taken, is the law that every particular Nation
frames to it self, as the Athenian 3. Jus Civil
laws, and the laws of Lacedaemon, in which sense also, the law of England
may be called the Civil law, for that it is the proper and private law of this
Nation: but in more strict sort, the Civil law is the law, which the old
Romans used, and is for the great wisdom and equity thereof, at this day, as it
were, the common law of all well governed Nations, a very few only excepted.

And certainly, albeit sundry other Nations by the light of Nature, have many
Rules and Maxims in the Civil law: yet, if all the constitutions, customs,
and laws, of all other people and countries were put together (I except none,
save the laws of the Hebrews, which came immediately from God) they are not
comparable to the law of the Romans, neither in wisdom nor equity, neither in
gravitie nor in sufficiency. Whereupon it is, that most of other Nations,
(saving our own) although they receive not the Civil law wholely for their
law, yet they so much admire the equity thereof, that they interpret their
own laws thereby. Peckius de regul. juris. Reg. Quae a jure communi. regul.
28.

SECT. 2.
That there be four Tomes of the Civil Law; The Digest, the Code, the
Authentic and the Feuds.

The Institutes are an Epitome of the Digest.

What is the Digest, and why it is so called, and why the same are called the
Pandects.

What are the Institutes, and why they are so called.

THe whole Civil law it self, is reduced or brought into 4. Tomes, whereof
the first contains the Digest or Pandects, taken out of 27. old reverent
Lawyers works, whereof sundry were before the coming of Christ; others
flourished in the Emperors days, even unto the time of Maximinus, as it
appears by Spartianus and Lampridius, in the life of the said Emperor:
Digests what.
which said Tome is divided into 50. books, of which, every one contains
sundry titles of great wisdom and variety.

To this Tome, I add the Institutions, which are a brief of all the former
books, composed of purpose by the Emperor in the behalf of young learners,
that thereby having the whole Digest drawn into a Compendium of 4. books
only, they might with more alacrity, go forward in the study of the law:
having, as it were, the first Elements of the whole profession in this little
Treatise; whereas otherwise without the help hereof, their weak minds might be
clogged with the multitude and variety thereof, and so either altogether leave
their studies, or with more labor and diffidence (which oftentimes
discourageth young men's minds in a long matter) come to the end thereof, to
which, by the direction of this brief, they might sooner attain, and that
without much travel or distrust.

The Digests have their name, of that they are put into a comely order by the
Author, ranging every book and why so called.
title into his proper place, such as either the course of Nature affords them,
or are fittest for the practice of the profession.

The same book again, is called Pandects, of the Greek words (...) and (...),
for that it compriseth in it self, all The Pandects.
whatsoever Justinian drew out of 150000. verses of the old books of the law.

The Institutes are so called, because they are, as it were, masters and
instructors to the ignorant, and show an easy The Institutes.
way to the obteining of the knowledge of the Law.

The matters wherein the whole law is occupied, are either the persons in the
commonwealth, or the things belonging or not belonging to them, or the actions
whereby men do claim in judgments such things as are due unto them by law.

SECT. 3.
The Pandects, or Digest are divided into seven parts, and they again into
fifty Books.

That the first part thereof contains four Books, and what is the sum
thereof.

Upon a more particular division, the whole Digest is divided into seven parts:
whereof the first part, standing upon four books, contains the principles,
and as it were, the first elements of the Law; as, what Justice and Right is,
from whence the Civil Law has his beginning, what persons be the object of
the Civil law, what Magistrates the commonwealth of the Romans had, by whom
either the laws were made, or executed: the diverse kinds of Jurisdictions,
which those Magistrates used; Mere, Mixed, or Simple, according to their place:
the corrections which the law used against such as disobey the Judge, either in
not appearing, or not performing that which is enjoined them: what provision it
made against such, as by violence rescued men out of the Judges hands: what
Holy Days there were, wherein the Courts were not held: what order the Law
took against the plaintiff, that having cited the defendant, had no Libell
ready to put into the Court, unless happily otherwise the parties upon private
agreement compounded the matter between them: who were to be admitted
advocates, and what causes barred them from the office: what is the office of a
Procurator, Solicitor, or Sindict, or Factor; and under what cautions they
were admitted, if they had no Proxy, or Mandat, or the party principal did
not in presence authorize them: how they were punished, who upon reward took
upon them to vex men unjustly in the Law, in manner as common Bar^^o^s (...):
what persons having lost opportunity to allege any thing for themselves
beneficial in Law, may be restored thereunto again; as Minors, and such
other, as by fear or craft of the adversary have been driven away from their
lawful defense: how persons of common trust, as Mariners, Inholders, and such
lik, are bound by Law to restore such things as they have taken in charge to
keep.

SECT. 4
That the second part has seven books, and what are the Contents thereof.

THe second part, being distributed into seven books, yields matter of
Judgment, as who may be Judge, and who not: where and before what Judge every
one is to be convented: how many kinds of Judgments there are, Civil,
Criminal, and mixed of both: by what actions things that are ours by right of
inheritance may be challenged, whether they be corporal or incorporall: what
action the Law affords, if any man conceal that is ours, that we may come to
the sight thereof: what action lies against him, who by evil persuasions, or
lewd inticement has corrupted another man's servant, or having run away by his
ill counsel, has concealed him from his master: what provision the Law has
against Dice-play, and such as keep Dicing-houses: how he is to be punished,
which being put in trust to measure any man's ground, makes a false report of
the measure thereof: that no man hinder a corse of a dead body to be carried to
burial, or to be buried in such places, as he and his predecessors have
right unto, or to build a Tomb to that purpose, and beautify the same.

SECT. 5.
That the third part stretches it self into nine books, and what they
contein.

THe third part, embracing nine books, concerns personal actions, which rise
not of cause of right or possession, but of covenant and obligation; as things
credited or lent in a certain sum; the means how to recover the same, if it
be denied, that is by oath of the party that denies it, unless he may be
convicted, either by witness or instrument, that he has forsworn himself:
how many kinds of oaths there are, voluntary out of Judgment: necessary
exacted by the Judge in doubtful cases, where otherwise there wants proof
to manifest the truth: Judicial, such as one party offers to another in
Judgment, and cannot be refused without just cause: and lastly, that which the
Judge offers to the plaintiff, as concerning the value of the thing which is
in strife, or the charges that he has been at in recovering of the same: what
exceptions there lies against Obligations, as that which for cause was given,
and cause did not follow: that the cause was dishonest, for which that is
challenged that was given: that the sum was not due which was paid, and
therefore not to be exacted, but to be repaid: actions for things lent for a
certain time, and to a certain use: actions for things pawned: actions that
either passengers have against Mariners for the goods or ware that they have
brought into the ship, or Mariners have against Passengers for their fraught:
actions of ejectment, wherein the passengers and Mariners are bound each to
other for contribution of the losses of such things that have been cast into
the sea, in the time of a storm or tempest, according to the quality or
quantity of the goods they have in the ship: actions whereby masters are bound
to answer for their servants contracts, and fathers for their children, in such
things, or negotiation, as they have put them in trust withal, saving where
the child borrowed money without his fathers privitie for riot, and for such
purpose as his father has no use thereof: Remedies for women, when by
weakness of their sexes, and lack of counsel, they have inwrapt themselves in
suretiship for other men: action of compensation, where a debt is demanded, for
which an equivalent portion has been received in lieu or satisfaction
thereof, actions of mandate, or commandment, wherein one has done some work,
or laid out some money upon an other man's mandate or word, and yet when he
requires allowance thereof, it is denied him: actions of society or
fellowship, wherein either the society is required to be maintained, or the
money put in common banck to be divided: actions of bargain and sale, either
pure or conditional, the bargain being once made, the loss and gain that
after happens is the buyers, unless the seller retain some further right in
the thing sold unto himself: actions of letting or setting either of the use
of a person, or the use of a thing upon a certain hyer: actions of change, and
such like.

SECT. 6.
That the fourth part contains eight books, and the contents thereof.

THe fourth part being digested into eight books, ministers actions for such
things as are accessarie to contracts, such as pawnes and pledges are, which
are given for the better security of the contract: actions for restitution
wherein a man has been deceived in a bargain, more than the half value of
the thing sold; or wherein the seller has concealed some fault in the thing
sold, which he ought by Law to have revealed; or promised some quality in the
same, which was not in it; or where the thing sold, has been evicted by an
other, out of the hands of the buyer, himself using all just defense of Law
for himself: actions for interest and usurie, and how many kinds thereof there
be that men use by land, Lucratory, Compensatorie, and Punitorie; whereof the
first is altogether unlawful, the other two allowed where either just gain
cease, or just loss follows, upon that occasion, that which is lent is not
paid according to the day of covenant. Sea-usurie, otherwise called nautick
usurie, is greater than land-usurie, and yet allowed by Law, for that the
seafaring man takes upon himself the danger of the transporting thereof, and
securing the same at such place as it is appointed to be delivered. In deciding
of matters of controversy, the Law proceeds sometimes by witnesses, sometimes by
instruments, sometimes by presumptions, where knowledge or ignorance of fact, or
Law is presumed. Spousals are mutual promises of a future marriage: marriage
is a lawful coupling together of man and woman, the company and society of
the whole life, the Communion of all Divine and humane rites and things, and of
one and the same house, wrought by the consent and mutual good will of the one
toward the other: in elpousals and marriages is to be considered, who is to be
joined together, at what years, and by whose consent: there does wait and
attend upon Marriages, Jointures, Dowries, and such like, and sometimes
Divorce, which Divorce what, and why so called.
is so called of the diversity of the minds of those that are married;
because such as are divorced, go one a diverse way from the other. The causes
whereupon Divorces The causes of Divorces.
grow, are Adultery, deadly hatred one toward an other, intolerable cruelty,
neernesse of kindred and affinity in degrees forbidden, impotencie on the one
side or the other: actions of Dowry after divorce or separation; actions
against a man's wife imbeaselling away his goods; actions against a husband
disclayming his own child; and his wife being with child, if he make doubt
thereof, means how and where she shall be kept until her delivery, so that no
false birth shall be put in place of the true child; or that she abuse not her
husband or the next heir, with a false show of that which is not. Tutelage and
government of children under age, which is either testamentarie, or due to the
next of kin, or dative, all which are either to be confirmed or disposed of
by the Magistrate. Administrations of Tutors and Curators, and how far they
are endangered by their office, and wherein they are to interpose their
authority and consent, and for what acts the pupils or minors may be sued,
done by the tutors or curators; how any may be argued to be a suspected tutor
or curator; and how, and by whom he may be removed, if there appear just cause
of suspicion against him. A tutor is chiefly set over the person of the child,
secondly over his goods: but the Curator or Guardian is chiefly set over the
goods, and then over the person of the child. A child (his father being dead)
by the order of the Judge, is to be brought up with his mother, unless she
has fled unto a second marriage, which if she have done, then is he to be
brought up with some of his nearest kin, such as is known to be an honest
man, and will have a care of his good education; with whom the Judge is to
allow him such maintenance, as all his stock be not spent therein, but evermore
something be left against he come to full age. When the time of tutelage, or
curatorship is ended, they are to render account unto the Judge, what they have
received, and how they have expended the same, and what residue is left, and
according as their proofs are, either by oath, or otherwise, so the Judge
either allows, or disalloweth the same. If the Tutors or Curators prove
bankrupt, or unable to satisfy the Pupil or Minor, then lies an action
against their suerties for the satisfaction of the same; and if both of them
fail, then lies it against the Judge, or Magistrate, if either he have not
received any caution at all of the Tutors or Curators, or has received an
unsufficient caution, or unsufficient suerties, knowing them to be
unsufficient; otherwise he is not to secure fortune, and future cases of the
child: the Tutors or Curators are to sell nothing of those things that are the
childrens, saving such things which by keeping cannot be kept, unless they
have the order or decree of the Judge thereunto, which the Judge is not to
decree, unless the child be so far in debt, that it cannot be satisfied,
without some part of the other goods, or there be some other like just and
necessary cause like unto this, which may not be avoided. As Minors have
Curators and Governors, so also mad persons, and prodigal persons are
appointed to have governors by law, for that they can no more govern their
own state, than the others can. Prodigal persons are they that know no time
nor end of spending, but riot or lavish out their goods without all discretion.

SECT. 7.
That the fifth part comprehends nine books, and the matter thereof.

Under the fifth Section, which compriseth in it nine books, are contained last
Wills and Testaments, and who they be that can make the same: and how many kinds
thereof there be, Solemn or Military, and they either put in writing, or else
Nuncupativewhat is an unjust, or Void Will: what is to be thought of those
things, which are found either to be blotted out, or interlined in a Will: how
Heirs or Executors are to be instituted, or substituted in Wills, and under
what conditions they may be either instituted, or substituted in the same: what
time an heir has to deliberate after the Testators death, before he prove the
Will: what is a Military Testament, and what privileges it has: how the
inheritance may be either got or lost: how Testaments are to be opened,
published, and writ out: what men's Testaments are to be opened, and published:
of the punishment of such, which, a Will being extant, seek by Administration,
or some other like means to possess the goods: and of those which either
forbid, or compel any man to make a Will: of the power or right of Codicils:
of Legacies, and bequests; as what things may be bequeathed, and what not; to
whom any thing may be bequeathed; and of the signification of the words, and
things which do appertain unto Legacies: of yearly and monthly Legacies,
what time they be due, in the beginning of the year, or in the end: which of
them be pure, and which conditional: of the use, profit, and benefit of any
thing bequeathed: of dwelling, and works of servants bequeathed: of Dowry
bequeathed, and what profit the Legatorie has thereby: or choice or election
bequeathed: of wheat, wine, and oil bequeathed, and what is contained under
every of them: of ground furnished bequeathed, and the instruments thereto
belonging, and what is to be understood by that bequest: of store bequeathed,
in Latin called Penus; what is comprised under that word: of household stuff
bequeathed: of education and bringing up bequeathed: of gold, silver, women's
attire, ornaments, and such like bequeathed, and what is to be understood by
every of them: how Legacies may be taken away: of things that are doubtful in
a Will, and how they are to be understood: of those things that are left for
punishment sake in a Will, whether they be available, or otherwise: of those
things which being bequeathed in a Will, are counted notwithstanding as not
bequeathed: of those things that are taken away from the Legatories in the
Will, as unworthy of them: of conditions, demonstrations, and causes; what
force they have, and how they prevail in a Will. Of the Law Folcidia, what it
is, and how men thereby are restrained from bequeathing any more than three
parts of their goods, so that a fourth part thereof should still remain with
the heir; and if any man had received in Legacy more than he might by the law
Folcidia, that he should put in band to restore that, if any unknown debt
after should appear, so the same were true debt: at what day a Legacy becomes
due; that is straight from the death of the Testator, unless it be left to be
paid upon a certain or uncertain day, or under a condition; and that the heir
enter into band to pay the legacy when the day comes, or the condition happen;
and if he refuse to do it, then the legatorie to be put in possession thereof
until the day or condition happen.

SECT. 8.
That the sixth part is spent in seven books, and the subject thereof.

THe sixth part spreading it self over seven Books, handles Of Administration.
matters of possession of goods, or Administration thereof, not growing out of
the Civil Law (which only makes heirs, and gives right of succession) but
out of the Pretorian law, or law of conscience, which in equity calls sundry
to the succession of other men's goods by administration, where there is no
Will, and in some cases where there is a Will, as where the Will is concealed,
or the Executor renounceth the Will, but if the Will once appear, then the
administration forthwith cease. In cases where Administrations are to be
granted, the children of the deceased have liberty to take it, within a year
after the death of the deceased, and if they be further off of kin, then they
have only a hundred days to take it in, unless those which are to take it are
Infants, mad, deaf, dumb, or blind, in which cases there is a longer time
assigned. The Praetor granted administration not only according to the tables of
the Testament, but many times even against the tables of the Testament: as
where a child is not disinherited in his Fathers Will by plain terms, but
passed over with silence only, as not remembered; or that the child was not
borne at the time of his death, and so not known whether any such child were
living, or to be hoped for, or not: In which case, if it do after appear, the
Mother is put in possession of that which is the childs part. If there appear
no Will, the Administration is committed in this order; First, the children of
the deceased are admitted: Secondly, those that are next of kin in the Male
line: Thirdly, those that are next of kin in the Female line, (which difference
notwithstanding between male and Female at this day is taken away, and they
that are next of kin are equally admitted in either sex) Lastly comes those
which have right thereto, either in that they are man or wife. The Law sundry
times, where a thing is done, or intended to be done, against an other man's
right, and there is no provision for it in Law, yields the party grieved an
Interdict or Injunction to hinder that which was intended to his prejudice, As
where one builds an house contrary to the usual and received form of
building, to the injury of his neighbor, there lies an Injunction de novi
operis nunciatione, which being once served, the offender is either to desist
from his work, or to put in suerties, he shall pull it down again, if he
do not within a very short time avow the lawfulness thereof. Again, there
lies an Injunction where hurt is not yet done, but feared to be done; as where
a house is ruinous, or the eves, or any outcast work thereof hangs
dangerously over the way, so that it is doubted it will fall and hurt some that
pass by, the owner or Lord thereof is to put in suertie to the Magistrate,
that if any be hurt, or miscarie thereby he shall answer for it. If any cause
the water of the river, or rainwater to run an other course than before time
it was wont to do, and that the neighbors are like to be prejudiced thereby,
the Law yields an Injunction; either to stay the work that is intended, or
to secure the neighbors for the hurt that is like to follow thereupon. If
Customers, Collectors, or Tolle-gatherers exact more subsidy, or other like
public duties, than by Law they ought; or distrain any man's goods, upon
pretense thereof, or stay in their hands such duties as they have received,
whereby the party that has paid it, falls into any forfeiture, or that they
repair not the public high ways, in which respect subsidies, tributes, and
other such like duties are given to Princes, they are to be punished in the
double value of that which they have received, and otherwise to be fined for
their ill dealing in that behalf. In gifts which are purely given, or under a
day, or condition, and specially in those that are given in contemplation of
death, which are compared to Legacies themselves, a right passes without
deliverance, and gives sufficient matter of challenge unto him, to whom they
are given. The means or ways whereby the Lordship or right of any thing is
gotten, be it natural, as by the first occupying the same, by finding the
same, by bringing it into a form or fashion, by gaining by the sea or river,
by delivery, or such like: or, be it by civil means, as by getting the
possession of any thing by good title, and good faith, so long as it will make
a just usurpation, or prescription, by holding it as heir, by holding it by a
gift, by taking it up as a thing forsaken, by holding it by legacy, dowry, or
inheritance, by coming to it by sentence definitive, or interlocutory, by
confession of the adversary, by cession of the party, by auctority of the
Judge, and the same have bin fraudulently alienated by the debtors, there lies
an Injunction to put the party injured into possession. All Injunctions for
the most part are prohibitorie, and serve either to get, or to keep, or to
recover possession, and are called commonly by the first name of the writ, as
where one is denied the possession of inheritance belonging to him, an
Injunction is granted him, to put him in possession, called Quorum bonorum; or
if it be for a legacy, Quod legatorum; and if it be in general cases, Ne vis
siat ei qui in possessionem missui ^st: That he that has gotten the custody
of the Will exhibit it: that no private building, or such like, be set up in a
holy and sanctified place, and if it be, that it be pulled down again: that no
Nuisance be done in public places, or high ways, other than such as by the Law
are allowable: that public high ways be repaired: that nothing be done in any
river, or the banks thereof, whereby Ships or Barks may not pass thereon:
that nothing be done in any common stream, whereby the water should be forced
to run otherwise this year, than it did the last summer before: that it may be
lawful for every man to sail or row in any public stream: that the banks
of the river be repaired. Of force, and force armed, where two are in
possession of one thing, and neither of them came by the same by force, or by
secret slight, or by sufferance of an other, there lies an Injunction for
continuance of either of their possession, called uti possidetis: That a man
may use such private way, as he has used the year past, and repair the same
without interruption of an other: That no man turn away the daily running
water, or the water which falls in Summer from an other man's house, or ground to
his hinderance: That watercourse in rivers, and other like places be
maintained: That such as have right to draw water out of any spring, or well,
be not forbid the use thereof, and that every one have free liberty to cleanse,
purge, and to repair the same, if there be any decay in it: That no man be
forbid to scour, purge, or cleanse his privies, sinkes, or vaults: That
whatsoever is done by open force, or secret subtilty, be restored where it was,
before such force or subtilty was done, unless the party greeved release the
same: That he that holds any thing at an other man's will, restore the same upon
competent warning, or knowledge given him thereof: That a man may lop or cut
the boughs of an other man's tree, annoying his ground, if after warning given
thereof, the owner thereof do not reform it. That it be lawful for a man to
gather such fruits of his, as fall from his own tree into an other man's ground,
without any trepasse to the owner of the ground, so that he gather the same
within three days after they are so fallen; for otherwise the law presumes he
makes no reckoning of them, and fruits lying upon the ground do easily
putrify: That a man may challenge his children out of an other man's hand that
holds them from him: That a Tenant after his lease is expired, may remove,
and quietly carry away such things from the farm, as he brought thither, so
that the Rent be paid, and those things which he brought thither, were not
bound for the payment thereof. Actions are taken away, and possessions
maintained by exceptions, prescriptions, and prejudices, which themselves are
many times in steed of actions, as is the exception de re indicata, which is an
exception that determines the cause in controversy. Of Exceptions, some are
perpetual and Exceptions.
peremptory, some are temporal and dilatory: Perpetual and peremptory are
they which evermore have place, and can never be avoided; Temporal and
dilatory are they, which are not evermore in place, but may be avoided:
Exceptions are alleged, either because that is done which ought to be done, or
that is done that ought not to be done, or that is not done that ought to be
done. Of Praescriptions Praescriptions.
likewise some are perpetual, some temporal; the effect of either of them, is
to determine the action, either in the manner of doing, or by the time when it
was done, or by the place where it was done, or by some other like circumstance.

An Obligation is a bond of the Law, whereby a man is Obligations.
necessarily bound to pay some thing to an other man: Obligations arise either
out of bargains between man and man, or out of some offense that is done:
Obligations by bargains, are procured either by some thing that passes
between the parties that do contract, or else is effected by words, or
consent. Out of obligations spring actions, which are nothing else, but a right
to prosecute that in judgment, which a man pretends to be due unto him,
whereof there are two sorts; of which, one is a challenge for right of a thing
due; the other, a suite against a person for some offense or trespass done.

SECT. 9.
That the seventh part is divided into six books, and the matter thereof.

THe seventh and last part being divided into six Books, treats of
Obligations, which stand in words, and their effect: how far two or more
principal debtors are bound to the creditor in the whole, or every one for his
own part: Of Suerties, and how far they are bound, and whether the discharge
of the one be the release of the other, and by how many ways Obligations by
words are dissolved or released, by renovation, by payment, by acceptance of
the debt not paid, as if it were paid. Of Obligations some are Civil, as those
which have been heretofore handled, some Pretorian or pertaining to the
Chancery, as those whereby Tutors, Curators, and Proctors, enter into band unto
a child, that his state shall be safe, that is committed to their hands: That,
that shall be paid which the Judge cease: That the Plaintiff shall ratify
and allow that which his Proctor shall do for him in judgment, and such like.
Criminal Judgments are private or public, that is, they are commenced either
upon private offenses, or upon public faults and suits. Private offenses
concern private men's revenge and injuries. Public, the revenge or injury of
the whole state. Private offenses which had ordinary proceedings, and ordinary
punishment, were many, among whcih Private offenses.
Theft is the chiefest, which is a deceitful fingering of an other man's goods,
with intent to gain either the thing it self, or the use or possession
thereof; so that the mind alone makes not theft, but the act joined to the
mind, be the quantity never so small. Of Thefts, some are manifest, other not
manifest; manifest is that, wherein the offender is taken in the deed doing,
or taken before he could carry away the thing stolen thither, whither he
intended: the punishment whereof was four double the value of that which was
stolen: Not manifest, was that wherein the party offending was not taken in the
deed doing, and the pain thereof was the double of that which was purloyned,
or taken away. If any pilfery or theft be done in a Ship, Tavern, or Inn, the
Master of the Ship, Tavern, or Inn, is to answer double the value thereof, if
the same be done by himself, or their selves, or any of their mariners or
servants: for it behooves them to have honest men, whom they are to employ in
such services: But if it be done by any of the passengers, or guests of the
house, the owners of the Ship, Tavern, or June, are not to answer for the
same, for they cannot turn away such guests as come into their house; neither,
in all likelihood, know they the quality or condition of their guests. If any
man privily, unwitting the owner thereof, cut down, hack, or bark any tree of
any sort whatsoever, or those that are of the nature of trees, as Ivy, Reeds,
Willows, so that they be spoiled, he is to answer the double value of that he
has cut down and spoiled: and further, if it be a Vine-tree, to be punished
as a robber. He that takes any thing away from another by violence, is to be
punished in the worth four fold, for that it is a sin more grievous than
theft: If any man upon any ill intent, make a Tumult, whereby any hurt comes
to any man, he shall anser double of that the party is harmed in: If any, upon
a burning of a house, or the fall thereof, or upon a shipwreck, or the spoiling
of a boat or ship, steal any thing away, or being put in trust to keep any
thing thereof, conceal the same, he shall pay the four double of the same;
but if any man set the same afire himself, he is either to be cast out to
wild beasts, or is to be burnt with the same fire he went about to burn an
other with. If any have spitefully, contumeliously injured an other man, his
wife, or children, in deed, word, or writing, they are to forfeit so much as
the party greeved shall esteem himself injured by, or the Judge shall tax
it at. A famous Libell is where a Libell what.
man has of malicious purpose writ, compounded, or set out any thing to the
infamy of an other, without a name, or with a name, and the punishment thereof
is death, and anciently was that he lost the power or liberty to make a Will;
the like punishment follows him, that having found an infamous Libell, does
not by and by spoil the same, that the knowledge thereof come not abroad,
especially where the matter thereof is capital or worthy death.

Extraordinary crimes, are those which have no ordinary Extraordinary Crimes.
punishment appointed them, but are arbitrarie at the Judges appointment, such
as are Sollicitors of other folks wedlockes, and Maids chastities, although
they miss of their purpose; such as of purpose cast mire, dirt, or any like
filth upon another, to the intent to disgrace him: such as, being with child,
of purpose cause themselves to miscarry: Such as keep brothell and
baudy-houses, or other unlawful company: Juglers, and such as carry about
Snakes, and other like Serpents and trumpery to put men in fear: Such as hide
and suppress Corn, to cause the price to be dearer: Such as either make, or
use false weights wittingly; for all which, because there is no proper
punishment provided in the Law, they are referred to the punishment of the
Judge, who is to punish them according to the quality of the fact, age, and
understanding of the offender, and other circumstances according as he shall
think good; so, notwithstanding that he exceed not a convenient measure
therein, neither stretch the same to death but upon some great and weighty
cause, he is to be content with meaner punishment, as temporal banishment,
whipping, or some moderat pecuniary mulct. For violating or defacing another
man's sepulcher, Imfamy was imposed, besides a pecuniary mulct to be divided
between the Prince and the party grieved, but if any dig up the corse of the
deceased, the punishment is death. If any, by fear of his office or authority,
wring any money from any man, or exact more fees in any matter than he ought to
do, or cause him to marry, or do any other thing he would not do, the
forfeiture is four double the value of that which has been taken, beside
further punishment at the discretion of the Judge. Such as drive men's cattle
out of their ground, or sever them from the flock or herd, with intent to
steal them, if they do it with a weapon like unto a Robber, are condemned to
be thrown to wild beasts, otherwise are more lightly punished according to the
discretion of the Judge. Such as in Judgment take money on both sides, or
taking upon them the defense of one side, betray the cause, and take money on
the other side, are infamous by law, and are punished at the discretion of the
Judge. Such as receive thieves, and other like malefactors, are punished in
like sort as the thieves or malefactors themselves are; especially if they have
assisted them in their wickedness: otherwise, if they only knew it, and
received them, they are more mildly to be punished, especially if the offenders
were their kinsmen: for, their offense is not like theirs, which entertain
those, which are no kin to them at all; when as it is natural for every one to
regard his own blood: and fathers are many times more careful for their
children, than for themselves; but if that he that received them knew nothing
of the offense, then is he altogether to be excused. Such as break prison, are
to be punished by death, because it is a certain treason to break the Princes
ward, but if they escape by the negligence of the Keepers, against whom the
presumption lies ever in this case, they are more lightly to be punished. If
any commit Burglarie, breaking up a door or wall, with intent to do a
Robbery, if they be base companions, they are to be condemned to the Mines or
Galleys; but if they be of better reckoning, they are to be put from the rank
or order wherein they are, or to be banished for a season. Juglers and like
Impostors, which go about deceiving of the people with false tricks and toys,
hooks and such like, which insinuate themselves into other men's houses, with
purpose to steal, are punished at the discretion of the Judge.

If any steal, or take away any thing out of the inheritance of another man,
before either the Will be proved, or administration be taken; an action of
theft lies not, because the inheritance, during the time, was counted no
bodies, but he is to be punished by the discretion of the Judge; yea, though it
were the heir himself that did it. Cosenage, whereby a man craftily
suppresseth some thing he should not, or puts one thing in another place,
to the deceit of him that he deals withal, or corrupts such wares which
he utters, or does any other thing collusorily, which is called of the Law
Crimen Stellionatus, (of a little vermin or creature called Stellio, much like
to a Lisard, most Crimen Stellionatus.
envious to man) is censured by some ignominious and shamful punishment, or by
disgracing the person, by putting him out of the Office, Place, or Order he is
in, or by injoyning him some servile work, or by banishing him for a time, or
by some like punishment, at the discretion of the Judge. If any plough up a
Mere balke, or remove any other mark which has accustomed to be a Mark or
bound between ground and grounds, which anciently was counted reverend and
religious among men, the offense is punished either by a pecuniarie mulct, or
by banishment, or whipping, at the discretion of the Judge. Unlawful
Colleges, Corporations, and assemblies, gathered together to bad uses, as to
eating, drinking, wantonness, heresy, conspiracy, are punished as public
Routs or Riots, otherwise at the discretion of the Judge: All these, before
recited, are called Popular Actions, because, not only he that is injured, but
every other honest subject may pursue and prosecute the same.

Public Judgments are such, which immediately pertain Public Judgments.
to the punishment of the commonwealth for example sake, and are examined,
tried, and punished by a public order appointed by Law, the party grieved,
making himself party to the suite, and following the same; the party accused
in the mean while remaining in prison, or putting in suerties for his
appearance, and the party grieved for the prosecuting of the same. The
chiefest of which sort is Treason, which is a diminishing or derogation of the
Majesty of the people, or Prince, on whom the people have collated all their
power, which is punished with death, and confiscation of the Lands and goods of
the offender, and the eternal abolishment of his memory. The next is
Adultery, which is violating of an other man's bed, whose punishment anciently
was death, both in the man and in the woman, but after it was mitigated in the
woman, she being first whipped, and then shut up in a Monastery: but by the
Canons, other pains are inflicted. Under Adultery are contained Incest,
Sodomy, Baudery, and all the rest of the sins of that kind. Public force, is
that which is done by a company of armed men, collected together, and the
correction thereof is perpetual banishment. Private, which is done without
Arms, the pain thereof is the loss of half the parties goods, and the
infamy of his name. Murderers and Poysoners, Witches and Sorcerers, the crime
being proved dye the death: such as set men's houses a fire, are to be consumed
with fire themselves: such as kill either Father or Mother, or those that are
in the place of Father or Mother, or any that are of next a kin, their
punishment is death; and in case of the Father and Mother, beside the pain of
death, the Parricide being first well whipped, so that the blood do follow in
good plenty, he being sowed up into a sack, together with a Dog, a Cock, and
an Ape, is thrown into the depth of the Sea. Such as make false Certificates,
forge false Wills, Depose false wittingly, suborne witnesses, take money either
to say, or not to say their knowledge of that which they are demanded of in
Judgment, corrupt Judgment, or cause it to be corrupted, interline, put in,
or raze out any thing out of any writing, that the truth thereof may not
appear as it is written, suppress Wills or Testaments, or other like writings,
counterfeit other men's hands and Seals, open any man's Will yet living, and
impart the secrets thereof to the parties adversary, unseale such instruments
or writings, as are left with him to keep; bequeath unto themselves Legacies
in an other man's Will, without his good will and privitie; wash or clip gold,
or sowder therein any corrupt metals, make base silver money; pretend
themselves to be Noble men or Gentlemen, whereas otherwise they are but base
persons; wilfully challenge unto themselves an other man's name, or Arms; cog
and foist in women's labors or otherwise, false births, or adulterous children,
in steed of true and rightful heirs; sell one and the same thing to two men,
carry about false Pasports; use false Measures, or corrupt those that are
true, in some cases, are punished by death, in other by banishment,
imprisonment, or cutting off both or one of the hands of the offender. If any
bearing any public office, abuse the same to gain, and does that for money,
which he ought to do for thanks, the Law orders, that the offender shall be
called to account for his supposed bribery, and if he be found guilty thereof,
fineth him four fold to the party grieved, and beside, decrees him to be
banished. Such as by ill devises and policies, raise up the price of corn, and
other victual, or get the whole sale of any merchandise into their hands, that
they may sell it the dearer, are punishable at the discretion of the Judge,
which according to the quality of the person and fact, reaches sometimes to
banishment, sometimes to death it self. If any take, purloyne, or intervert to
his own use any money dedicated to holy and public uses, or cause the same to
be taken, purloyned, or interverted; or if any take away any brazen table,
wherein any public Laws are graven, or the bounds of any Lands are described,
or blot out, or change any thing thereof, or covenously pay in less money into
the Exchequer, than by right he ought to have done, and has not cleared with
the Exchequer for the residue, is to be condemned in the three double of that
which is the residue, and is beside to be banished.

If any, to get an Office, procure a number of hired voices, besides the loss
of the Office he sueth for, his punishment is temporal banishment. If any
steal away any child, the body of any freeman, and sell the same away, or
detein them against their will, the fault is death. If any slanderously charge
an other with any false crime, or wittingly bear any false witness against
him, or willingly give any wrong Sentence against him; or on the contrary side,
dissembleth such faults as he knows, and colludeth with the adversary, or
gives over the prosecution of a crime he has undertaken to follow, until he
have leave granted him by the Judge, to desist from his accusation, the same is
to be punished with the like kind of punishment, that he would have the other
punished by, unless he be acquitted therefrom by the Princes pardon; or that
the Adversary be dead. In public Judgments where the Offender appears not,
Process is to be awarded out against him for his appearance, by a certain day to
clear himself; at which day if he appear not, an Inventory is taken of his
goods, not to the intent they should be spent, but that they should be reserved
to his use, if he return again within a year, and clear himself; otherwise
they become the Exchequers for ever, how innocent soever the party afterward
appears to be. If the Offender be present in Judgment, and deny the fact, he
is to be confuted by witnesses, or other proof; or if there be just matter of
suspicion, to be put on the rack; which, albeit in matters of less danger, is
great cruelty, yet in great and horrible crimes it is necessary: If the
Off(...)r have either confessed the crime, or be convicted thereof, then it
follows, that the party convicted, be punished either by death or otherwise,
according to the quality of the person, or condition of the offense.
Punishments by death are four, Hanging, Burning, Heading, and casting the
Offender to be devoured by wild beasts, amongst which may be reckoned, Exile
or Banishment, for that it takes away a man's liberty, and bereaves him of his
country, which to every good subject, is as dear unto him as his life it self.

Punishments which did not inflict death, were many, and such as it pleased the
Magistrate in his discretion to appoint. The Law having passed upon the
Offender in such sort, as should be to the loss of his life, liberty, or
country, his goods became forthwith forfeited to the Prince, such (I mean) as
are of value: but for the other, the Law allows them the prisoner, for his
maintenance during the time of his imprisonment, and satisfying such fees as
are due to the Officers thereof; which has place where the offender has no
children, otherwise the one half of his goods comes to his children, unless
it be in case of Treason, where all is confiscated. They are also held for
convict and guilty, which either upon a guiltiness of mind make away
themselves before Judgment, or stop their Adversaries with a bribe, that they
shall not follow the Law against them, and their goods are no less confiscat
than the others. But it is otherwise in those which are banished for a time, or
to a certain place, or in such as the Law having once passed upon them, are
either in their life, or after their death, by the bounty and mercy of the
Prince restored; in which case they recover Goods, Name, and Honor: the body
being executed, the carcass, for the most part, is granted to burial, unless
it be for matter of Treason, or other such like offense. If any have been
unjustly condemned, either by the iniquity or unskilfulnesse of the Judge, the
law allows him an appeal, that is, a provocation to a higher Judge, that he
may hear the cause anew, and reform that which is judged a(...)e into better:
and if the higher Judge find the party grieved has well appealed, he is to
reverse the former sentence, otherwise to send the Offender back to the Judge,
from whence he came, there to receive his punishment: yet some persons there
be, from whom no appeal lies, as from the Prince, or Senate, because they
represent the Prince; neither may he appeal, which has renounced his
appeal. Appeals are made from lower Judges to higher, and from him that is
Delegated, to him that did Delegate: Appeals are to be made within ten days
after sentence given, or within ten days after the Notice is come to the party
against whom the Sentence did pass, unless there attend thereon a continual
grief, in which case, a man may appeal so long as the grief indures: the
time to ask Dimissorie Letters, is thirty days from the Sentence given; the
time to present the same to the Judge, is at the discretion of the Judge from
whom; the time of prosecuting the same is a year, or, upon just cause, two
years; in which time, if the suit be not ended, the cause is deserted, and to
be sent back unto the Judge, from whom the Appeal was first made: while the
Appeal hangs, nothing is to be innovated, because by the Appeal, the
Judges hands are, as it were, bound: but if the former Sentence were void by
law, (as in sundry cases they are) then there needs no Appeal; for such
Sentences never pass into a case judged. Appeals in criminal cases, cannot
be justified by a Proctor; but it is otherwise in Civil Causes. An Appeal in
one cause does not exempt the party appellant from his own Judge, in other
causes: If the appellant die during the time of the Appeal, and leave no heir
behind him, the Appeal cease; but if he leave an heir behind him, and the
matter of the Appeal concerns none but himself, he is not to be compelled to
follow it, for every one may renounce his own suit: but if it concern the
Exchequer, or any other body, then may he be compelled to follow it.

The Exchequer is the Princes Treasury, and the patrimony of the
commonwealth, and has many and singular prerogatives, which private men have
not. Such as are taken captive by the enemy, become their servants, who have
taken them, unless either they escape home again themselves, or be ransomed by
their friends; in both which cases, they recover all right and privileges they
had in their own commonwealth before. By the Law, all Subjects whatsoever,
are bound to serve the commonwealth in war; in so much that if any, being
pressed, withdraw himself, or his child from it, he is to be counted as a
rebel, and for his punishment, is to be banished, and mulcted or fined in the
greatest part of his goods. As the privileges and rewards of Soldiers were
many to encourage them to virtue and manhood; so their shames and punishments
were great, to fear them from cowardice and vice: But among the rest of the
privileges of Soldiers, the old Soldiers were the greatest. Of Subjects,
some dwelt in Shires, and lived after their own Laws, and yet nevertheless
were made partakers of the honors of the City: some other were inhabitants
only in the commonwealth, and had only a house in the same place to dwell
in, and had no right to bear office: some other were strangers brought in,
which were ruled by the Law of them among whom they dwelt. Amongst those that
dwelt in Shires, the chiefest Magistrate was he whom they called Decurio, who
was not sent by the people of Rome thither (for he was a Magistrate of
Magistrates) but elected by the people there; and his office was, to keep the
treasury of the Country to provide victual, exact tribute, and govern the
state there, in manner as our Sherifes do here: His office was only annual,
lest by liberty, and lust of government, and continuance thereof it might grow
into a tyranny. Such as are Subjects, are to serve the commonwealth in such
offices, places, and services, as their ability is fit for, and the necessity
of the commonwealth requires. The services of the commonwealth were of three
sorts; Patrimoniall, such as belong to every man's patrimony to perform, which
stood chiefly upon payment and charges, which were to go out of every man's
inheritance toward the performance of such burden as lay upon him by law,
custom, or command of him that had power thereto: Personal, which were to be
performed by the care and industry of the party and his corporal labor,
without expense of his purse. Mixed, which required both care of the mind, and
labor of the body, and expense of the purse, and are imposed as well in
consideration of the thing, as the person, which every subject is to undergo,
unless by the Law, or by the indulgence of the Prince they are excused; as
some are excused by reason of old age, some by young age, some for their
dignity, some for their calling, some for their state of body, some for that
they serve in the necessary services of the commonwealth at home, or abroad,
as Ambassadors do, some for that they are in necessary places of services for
Gods Religion, as cathedral Churches, and other Churches are; some for that
they are of good and necessary places for Seminaries for the commonwealth, for
learning and such oath employments, as Colleges, Societies, and Schools of
learning and nurture are. Legates and Ambassadors had immunitie from all
public servivices, not only the time of their embassage, but also two years
after their return; They were called Legates, in that they were chosen as fit
men, out of many; their person was sacred both at home and abroad, so that no
man might lay violent hands on them without breach of the Law of Nations. Such
as are Magistrates of Cities ought so to govern, that no negligence may be
justly imputed unto them, otherwise they are to answer it, and that when their
office is expired, they give up a just account, both of what they have
received, and what they have laid out, and pay in the residue, if there be
any. Governors of Cities, together with the consent of the Burgesses thereof,
may set down such orders and decrees, as are for the benefit and well ordering
thereof, which are to be observed of all those which are Inhabitants thereof,
and being once well and duly set down, are not to be reversed, but to the
good of the City or Commonalty. New public works, such as are good for the
Commonweal, every one may make without the leave of the Prince, unless it be
done for aemulation, or cause of discord; but for old works, in which stands
the security of the Commonwealth, as Castles, Towers, Gates, and Walls of
Cities, nothing is to be done or innovated in them, without the Princes
warrant; neither is it lawful for any man to grave his name in any public
Work, unless it be his, at whose cost the work is done. Faires are
authorized by Princes only, and are invented for trade of merchandise, and
uttering of wares, which Countrymen have cause to buy, or sell: and have their
privileges, that no man in any Fair can be arrested for any private debt;
they were called Nundinae, because that among the Romans, they were anciently
holden in one place or other upon every ninth day. He that for ten years space
intermitteth to use his Fair, loses the privilege thereof. If any make any
promise to a City or Commonwealth, to do any thing upon certain cause, as
that he might be made Consul, or that he would repair some part of the City
that was burnt, he shall, by the Law, be compelled to perform his promise; for
it is not meet that such promises should be satisfied with repentance. Such as
profess liberal Sciences in any Commonwealth, whereby youth is instructed,
and brought up to knowledge, or be Schoolmasters, or Professors of Physic,
or be Midwives, Notaries, Auditors, or Casters of accounts, or Registers, the
Law allows, not only a competent stipend in recompense of their skill and
pains, but also affords them means, how the same may be recovered if it be
denied. But as for Philosophers and Lawyers, the Law has appointed them no
stipend, not because they are not reverend Sciences, and worthy reward or
stipend, but because either of them are most honorable professions, whose
worthiness is not to be valued or dishonored by money: yet in these cases
many things are honestly taken, which are not honestly asked; and the Judge may
according to the quality of the cause, and the skill of the Advocate, the
custom of the Court, and the worth of the matter that is in hand, appoint them
a fee answerable to their place, as also to such as are Interpreters between
parties in matters of traffic, when one understands not an others language.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
The second Volume of the Civil Law, is the Code, which is distributed into
twelve Book.

Why the Code is so called.

THe second Tome of the Law, is the Code, and stands in twelve Books, whereof
eight, for the Titles, follow in a manner the order of the Digest, a few titles
only excepted, which are added, besides those of the Digest; but as for the
four other, which are the first, the tenth, the eleventh, and the twelfth;
although the subject they treat of be named in the Digest; yet the things which
are there named, are not handled in the Digest; and therefore will I pass over
those eight other, lest happily I might seem to do one thing twice, and
therefore will I refer the Reader over to that which has been said of them
before, in the handling of the Digest; for they are almost twins of one
mother; so that whosoever knows the one, shall with no great difficulty
discern the other, and come to the other four; yet not mentioned there: But
yet before I lay open the matter thereof, I will in a word or two show why this
Volume of the Law is called the Code, who is the author thereof, and out of
whom it was collected, what moved the author, after so many learned titles set
down before, of such things as are in the Digest deduced, by such a number of
worthy Lawyers (as the Laws of the Digest themselves do by their inscriptions
show; for every law, carries with him in his forehead, the name of his Author)
to make a new flourish of the same, and what the knowledge of the Code does
confer unto a Student or practiser of the Law, more than the knowledge of the
Digest does.

The Code therefore is named of the word Caudex, that is, the trunk or timber
of the tree, from which the bark of the tree is pill'd or pulled off, of which
men anciently used to make writing-tables, artificially binding them up into
the form of a book, and using them for books, before the use of paper or
parchment was known; insomuch, as many of these tables being bound together,
they were called a Code, or book: besides, whereas the ancient Lawyers Why
this Tome of the Law is called the Code.
before Justinians time, used to write their pleas and answers in scroules of
paper or parchment, Justinian himself first put them in a book, and therefore
termed them by the name of a Code.

The Code it self is compiled of the answers of 56. Emperors, and their wise
Council, whereof sundry were What the Code is.
learned and skillful Lawyers, as the story of that time does show, and the
laws themselves do name some of them, as that most excellent and famous man
Papinian, and some others; that is, from the days of Adrian the Emperor, unto
the age of Justinian himself.

The cause that moved Justinian hereto, was, that in the The reason which moved
the Emperor to compile the Code.
Digest he found not every case decided, that falls out in common use of life
(for how is it possible, when as every moment there falls out new matter, for
which former laws made no provision?) and therefore thought good to supply
that by new Laws, which he found defective in the old: so that the
multiplication of those titles grew not, that the Emperor had any meaning, to
fill the world with multitude of Laws, for he had found the inconvenience
thereof already, and therefore had repealed and abolished so many thousand of
old Laws, as he had; but it came rather of that, that the multitude of causes
were so many, that every day there fell out some unexpected thing that was
never heard of before: beside notwithstanding the carfulness of the Emperor
himself, and his great Lawyer Tribonian, and others, whom he used for the
selecting and choosing out of the purest, best, and most agreeing Laws among
themselves, out of that indigested heap of Laws he then abolished; yet they
were not so quick sighted, but in that great work, sundry antinomies or
contrary Laws past them, which had need to be expounded and amended, and the
Authors to be recited. Further, sundry of ancient Laws were so subtilely
written, that there was more wit than profit in them; so that it was expedient,
the Emperor should explain the same, and putting all subtility aside, give a
right sense unto the Law. Lastly, whereas many things were delivered by them
briefly, and therefore obscurely, the Lawgiver in his Princely wisdom, set
out the same in other Laws more plentifully and distinctly, all which were the
chiefest causes, why the Emperor set out the book of the Code.

The Code neither in style, nor in method comes to The difference between
the Digest and the Code.
the perfection of the Digest, as that which for the style is a barbarous
Thracian phrase Latinized, such as never any mean Latinist spoke; whereas
notwithstanding the style of the Digest is very grave and pure, and such as
does not much differ from the cloquentest speech that ever the Romans used; and
for the method, it has no particular disposition, other than such as is
borrowed of the Digest it self, and otherwise is rude and unskilful, where it
does recede from the same: yet does it not lack his good use, for to such as
follow the practice of the law, the knowledge of the Code is much more
expedient than the knowledge of the Digest is, for that the laws of the Code
do determine matters in daily use of life; which, because they are a like in
all ages (for the same is evermore upon the stage, the persons a little
altered) it cannot be but the learning thereof must be very profitable and
expedient for the Commonwealth, whereas notwithstanding the learning of the
Digest stands rather in discussing of subtle questions of the Law, and
enumerations of the variety of opinions of ancient Lawyers thereupon, which
have more commendation of wit, than benefit toward the commonwealth in them;
but hereof hitherto.

SECT. 2.
The Argument of the first Book of the Code.

THe first Book of the Code treats of Religion, and the Rites and Ceremonies
thereto belonging, whereof I said there was no special Tractate in the Digest,
saving that it devideth the public right into that which concerns the Church,
and Churchmen, and the Magistrates of the Commonwealth, prosecuting the later
branch thereof only, and omitting the first, because out of that Heathenish
Religion, which was used in those ancient Lawyers days, and those
superstitious Rites, whereof their Books were full, nothing could be taken
that might serve for our Religion: whereupon he instituted a new discourse
thereof in the Code, beginning first with the blessed Trinity, one in essence,
and three in person, wherein he sets down a brief sum of our Christian
faith, agreeable to the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles, and the four
first general Counsels, the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Ephesine, and
Calcedon, forbidding any man publicly to dispute, or strive thereabout, taking
occasion upon the Nestorian heresy, which not long before had sprung up, and
had mightily infected the Church, which Justinian by this confession of Faith
so published to the whole world, and a penal Edict joined thereunto, hoped to
repress: After he has set down a full and sound confession of the Christian
faith, conformable to the Primitive Church; next he adds a title of the holy
Church it self, and of her privileges, which either concern Ecclesiastical
men's persons themselves, or their state and substance, or the actions one
Ecclesiastical man had against an other, or with, or against Lay persons:
where also he prosecuteth the degrees of Priests, or Ministers, their offices,
orders, and how the same are to be come by, (that is, without bribes or
Simonie, or other worldly respect, save the worth of the person only) and the
rights of holy places [Priests in the Law are called, from the Latin,
Sacerdotes, either because their office was Deo saera dare, to sacrifice to
God; or else, because they were consecrated, and as it were, severed from the
rest of the people, and given up to God: they were also called Elders,
answerable to the Greek (...), either for that they were so in age, In
Authent. de sanct. Episcop. Presbyterum, Collat. 9.
(the Law having provided, that no man should be promoted to the dignity of a
Priest, till he were 35 years old) or else, because they ought to be such in
manners and careful carriage of themselves.] Amongst Priests or Ministers,
Bishops have the first place, who are, as it were, the (...).
Overseers and Superintendents of the rest, so called of their watchfulness,
care, labor, and faithfulness in teaching the people, and doing other duties,
which they owe unto the Church. [The lowest degrees of men in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, were the Clerks, as the word Clericus is restrein'd
to a narrower acception. For in the general, it is most properly applied to
all degrees of the Clergy, and is a term contradistinct to the Laity: and
they are called Clergy, from the Greek (...), quia de sort Domini sunt, vel
quia Dominus sors est and part Clericornm, either because God is their portion
and lot, or because they are his; as Papias has observed.] To Bishops,
Priests, and other of that rank, did appertain the care of Hospitals, whereof
some were for Orphans, some for Infants, some for impotent and diseased
persons, some for poor people, some for strangers, and other like miserable
persons; and therefore together with the title of Bishops and Clerks, is joined
the title of Hospitals, or Almeshouses. In place next after the Bishops
themselves, comes their power and audience; for albeit the chiefest office of a
Bishop, is to instruct the people in the doctrine of the Word, and in good
example of life: yet forasmuch as all will not be obedient unto the Word,
neither brought by the persuasion thereof to good nurture, and to be kept in
order, and the eminency of the degree, wherein the Bishops are placed, is not
sufficient to keep the people in obedience without some power and
jurisdiction, and because the Church it self is the mother and maintainer of
Justice, therefore there is by the Emperor himself, and his predecessors, as
many as professed Christianity, certain peculiar jurisdictions Ecclesiastical,
assigned to the Bishops, more worthy than the Civil, over persons and causes
Ecclesiastical, such as touch the Soul and Conscience, or do appertein to
any charitable or godly uses: and over the Laity, so far forth, as either
the Laity themselves have been content to submit themselves unto their
government, that is, so far as either it concerns their Souls health, or
the outward government of the Church in things decent or comely, or that it
concerns poor and miserable persons, such as widows, orphans, captives, and
such other like helpless people are, or where the Civil Magistrate cannot be
come by, or does voluntarily delay judgment; in all which, anciently a Bishop
was to perform double faith and sanctity; first of an incorrupt Judge, and
then of a holy Bishop. But in many of these matters in these days, the Laity
will not suffer themselves to be controlled, and therefore has taken away most
of these dealings from them, yea, even in charitable causes. Immediately
follows a title of Heretics, Manichees, Samaritans, Anabaptists, Apostataes,
abusers of the Cross of Christ, Jews, and worshippers of the host of heaven,
Pagans, and of their Temples and Sacrifices; whom the Bishop is not only to
confute by learning, but also to suppress by authority, for he has not the
spiritual Sword in vain. The Heretics, Jews, and Pagans shall not have
Christian men and women to be their servants: that such as fly to the Church
for Sanctuary, or claim the aid thereof, shall not be drawn from thence,
unless the offense be heinous, and done of a pretensed and purposed malice, in
which case no Immunity is to be allowed them, but wicked people are to be
punished according to their desert, agreeable to the word of God it self,
which would not have his Altar to be a refuge unto the wicked: And so far of
that part of public right, which appertains to the Priests, or Ministers,
and their Function, which was omitted in the Digest, but prosecuted in the
Code. Now it follows, that with like brevity I run over the three last Books
of the Code, which themselves were rather shadowed in the Digest, in the title
of the right of the Exchequer, than in any just proportion handled.

SECT. 3.
The Argument of the 10. Book of the Code.

THe first therefore of them sets out, what is the right of the Exchequer,
and in what things it stands, as in goods excheted, because there is no heir
unto them, or that they are forfeited by any offense worthy death, or
otherwise. How such as are in debt to the Exchequer, and their suerties are to
be sued. Of the right of those things which the Exchequer sels by outcry, where
he that offers most, carries it away, and how the same may be revoked,
unless all rights and ceremonies be solemnly performed therein. How things
that are in Common between the Ecchequer and private men, may be sold, and
that the Exchequer evict nothing that it has once sold, for that, it were a
thing against the dignity of the Exchequer, and would terrify private men for
bargaining with it. Of those that have borrowed money out of the public
receipts, and what penalty they incur, if they repay it not at their days
covenanted, sometimes the forfeiture of four double of that they have borrowed,
sometimes danger of life it self. That in cases of penalties, the Exchequer be
not preferred before such as the Offender was truly indebted unto, but that
they be first served, and then the Exchequer have only that which is left.
What usurie the Exchequer may take, that is, for money lent, and not for such
sums as grow out of Mulcts and Penalties. That such sentences that are given
against the Exchequer, may be retracted within three years following, although
ordinarily all other Sentences are irrevocable after ten days; neither can be
reformed after that time, either by rescript of the Prince, or by pretense of
new proof. Of the goods of such as excheat, by reason they have made no Will,
and of the goods of Incorporations, that is, of such as dye without heirs,
that they come not to the common bank of the city, but that they excheat unto
the Prince: Of Promoters, by whose informations any goods are confiscate,
either by reason of the goods themselves, for that they are adulterine, or that
they are prohibited to be exported or imported, or upon some other like cause,
or by reason of the persons that have offended, and crimes wherein they have
offended; and their punishment, if they give in any wrong information, or other
than such as they are bound unto by virtue of their Office: and that they give
no information in, but by advise of the Attorney of the Exchequer, and that
they make no information against their Lord and Master, but in case of Treason.
That it shall be lawful for no man to make suit unto the Prince for those
things that are confiscated unto the Exchequer, as though it were more
Honorable for the Prince to bestow such things on his Courtiers, than to keep
them to himself: and therefore, such as are the Princes Secretaries, his
Masters of Requests, and others that are of his remembrance, are forbidden to
make any Acts, Instruments, or other writings hereof, unless the Prince of his
own motion, and at no other man's suit, will or command the same: Of such as
put themselves into the Exchequer, upon any confession made against themselves:
Of such, to whom the Prince jointly has given any farm or like thing, that
where one of them dies without an heir, the other may succeed him: Of
Treasure found, that the Exchequer be made acquainted with it; and that if it
be found in a public place, half goes to the Exchequer, the other to the
finder: but if it be in a private place, then half to the Lord of the soil,
and the other to the finder: Of provision for Corn, and such other like: Of
Tribute, which was an ordinary payment: Of imposition and super-impositions,
which were payments laid upon the subject above ordinary tax, for some
present necessity, to which charges, the ordinary tax does not suffice; which
was not to be done, but upon great and urgent cause, by a Council called
together, and with the consent of the subject: Of Collectors of the Subsidies,
and in what manner they are to be collected and brought into the Exchequer, and
of the punishment of those that in the collection thereof extort more than is
due: that it shall be lawful to distrain for Tribute unpaid: that such
acquittances as the Exchequer shall deliver unto the accomptants, shall be
their full and final discharge: and that the Subsidy Books shall every
quarter be sent up into the Exchequer with the account of the Collectors, that
thereby it may appear how much every man has paid or owes unto the Exchequer:
and that nothing may be done for the grievance of the poor, or the favor of
the rich: Of the Book of accounts of yearly gifts that commonly Subjects
present unto the Prince at New-years-tide and otherwise, and that they be
divided from the accounts of the Exchequer: That no man be freed from the
payment of Tribute: Of spending out such ancient gain, and other like
provision, as is laid up in the common storehouse, and making provision for a
new, and compelling the subjects, such as have plenty of such grain, if it
happen to be vinoed and mustie, to buy the same, that the whole loss thereof
may not lie upon the Exchequer: What pension such Manors as the Prince has
given or released from payment of Subsidies shall give, and that no man be so
hardy to beg such a matter of the Prince, lest the revenues of the Exchequer be
thereby diminished: Of Manners that have been translated from the payment of
one kind of provision to an other, or that have been in their taxation
over-rated: Of Brass that Mineral Countries are to yield, or money in lieu
thereof: Of Controllers, whose Office it was to cast over again such accounts
as were brought into the Exchequer, or to examine them anew, lest perhaps,
there might be an error in them.

And so far as concerning those things which do appertain to the account of
the Exchequer, or the patrimony thereof, or such pensions or payments, as are
due unto the same. Now follows the other part of this tenth Book, which
contains the burdens, duties, or offices imposed on the subject by the
Exchequer, and what excuse the subject might allege in this behalf.

Burdens or duties, were either personal, as places of Honor, which were not
to be continued from the father to the child; or they be Patrimoniall, which
are charged upon men's inheritance, either for the good of the commonwealth, or
to enrich the Exchequer against dangers that are like to ensue: which are
undertook and performed either by those which are of necessity to obey that
which is enjoined them, or by those which offer themselves voluntarily thereto,
which seldom happens in patrimoniall charges: but in matters of Honor and
personal services, it many times comes to pass, that men excuse not
themselves from bearing of Offices, or doing of personal services, although
they have an immunitie from them, either by the grant of the Prince, (which is
to be understood of extraordinary service only, and not of ordinary) or by the
benefit of the Law; for by the Law men are many times upon just causes excused
from Personal services, so it be not from such services as no man can excuse
himself from; such as are Postings and carriages, when the Prince passes by,
or the Tenure of his Inheritance do so require it, and the erecting and
repairing of Bridges, Ways and Walls, the provision and carriage of Corn, and
other like kinds necessary for the maintenance of the Princes house. Men are
excused either generally from all kinds of services, or particularly from some:
as all Minors, specially such as are Students in any famous University, whilst
they give themselves there unto their book, are excused from all Personal
services, but not from Patrimoniall services; as also all old men of the age of
seventy years and upward, all professors of Liberal Sciences, whereby the
commonwealth is benefited, all professors of Physic, Grammar, Oratorie, or
Philosophy, so they be allowed by the Magistrate and seven skillful men, in
the profession which they make show of, and be not Supernumerarii, or above the
number of those that are to be allowed, in which number are neither Poetae
nulla immunitatis preoragativa (...)tur. Cod. de Professo^th. l. 3. lib 10. But
the Interpretation is more merciful than the Text. For the Gloss says,
Poetae hoc ipso quod Poetae immunitatem non ha ^e^^, non quod came Divini
Spiritus non mereantur; sed quod lex deficit.
Poets nor The Law has it: Non etia^ Calculatores: l. 4. De Pro^^. and Med.
lib. 10. Cod. And ^f. de Excu: Tut. l (...), where the Law expounds
Calculatores by (...), that is, says Brisson and the Gloss, Qui Artem
numerandi docent: answerable to that which Cujacius has noted out of the
(...), and then it may be thought, that the Law here means by Calculatores,
those that taught to cast an Account, Ciphering-Masters.
Auditors: they are also excused, which upon just cause are dismissed, either
out of the Army, or out of the Schools, either for lack of health, or that
they are so wounded, that they can neither serve in war any longer, nor
longer endure study, which are so to be understood, that they yield excuse
from Personal servicesonely, and not from Prediall.

Those things that yield excuse in part, from Personal services are these; the
Renting of the Princes custom, the baseness of the persons state, not fit to
bear any Office of credit, infamy, banishment, an a motion from a man's place
and degree, feminine sex, which are to undergo such Offices only, as are
agreeable to their sex. Embassages imposed upon any by the Prince and his
Council, which has immunitie also of two years after their return, if the
Embassage were into places beyond the sea, or into any far country, not if it
were into any country near at hand. Skill in any manual Art or Mysteries, to
the intent that they may have both time to learn their Arts, and so become the
skilfuller in the same, and also have more alacrity to teach others in their
Mystery. That care be had, that such be chosen to office, that be of the
worthier sort for their virtue and place, and the richest for their state: that
no man be chosen to office for envy, and if any be, and the same be proved, he
that did choose him thereto is to be fined, and to pay the expenses of the suit,
unless he which is chosen die within a short time after the choice, then his
successors are not bound thereto. Further, men are excused, if being in one
Office, they are chosen unto an other, to the intent, they may the better
execute and perform that office they have in hand: Such as are Remembrancers,
which make Books of what is due to the Exchequer, and what is brought in,
Auditors, receivers, Tellers, Granarers, Weighers, such as weigh and try such
gold, as is brought and paid into the Exchequer; Collectors, that is, such as
gather up the gold that is due in the Provinces to the Exchequer, and send the
same over into the Exchequer, who are in no case to hold the same longer in
their hands than the Law allows them, much less to turn the same to their
own use, without great offense to the Prince and commonwealth: the like is
for a Crown of gold, that is, of such gold that is put in Crowns, and offered
to the Prince upon any public gratulation, or any exployte that has been
happily achieved.

Justices of Peace, which are distributed by countries, for the more quiet and
peaceable government of the same, whose care was to seek out thieves and
malefactors, and to foresee that the country people did make no mutiny, by
reason of the Taxes and Subsidies that were levied upon them: that for gold,
there might be paid silver; and again, silver for gold into the Exchequer, so
that the value thereof were made equal. Usurers, although they have no
possessions, yet they are no less bound to all Patrimoniall or Prediall
charges, than if themselves had Lands and Hereditaments, although, for their
infamy, they are excluded from all Personal charges that are of credit.

SECT. 4.
The Argument of the 11. Book of the Code.

THe eleventh Book proceeds in the enumeration of other vocations, that are
exempted in personal services of the commonwealth, besides those that have
been named in the tenth Book: as Masters of ships and Mariners, which served
to bring in any Merchandise or provision for the Princes household, out of
foreign Countries into the Princes storehouse; yea, although they were
private men's ships, which were employed to that service, so that if a private
man's ships were laden with any public provision, there could not any other
private burden be imposed upon him: for that, if the ship perish by shipwreck,
by reason of the private burden that is put therein above the public charge,
then he is to answer the loss thereof unto the Exchequer, otherwise than in
the case of private men, who are themselves to bear the loss of those things
which are exported or imported; neither can they make gain of private men's
shipwreck, or of those things which are cast out into the sea, to ease the
lading of the ship, but are bound to restore it to the owner, under pain of
confiscation of their goods by the Temporal Law, and excommunication of their
persons by the Ecclesiastical Magistrate. Add to this, Myners or Metallers,
and the governors of the same; gatherers of Muskles and other like shellfish,
with whose blood, either Purple is made, or out of which Pearls are taken:
which color Princes only might use, as also velvet and cloth of gold; neither
was it lawful for any man (under the degree of the Prince) to wear the same,
saving only women in some sort, for that such ornaments are fitter for women
than men. Join to these Monetaries, which served to coin money, Wain-men or
Car-men, which with their own cattle carried or conveyed things, which
belonged to the Princes Treasury. The like privilege had they which made
Armor for the Princes Armorie, as Spears, Brest-plates, Darts, and such like;
or made Bridles, Girdles studded with pearl or precious stone unto the Court,
for the Kings household, who only were allowed to wear the same. Such as had
the care and government of any Corporations, as the Princes Bakers, Vintners,
Paper-sellers, Money Changers, professors of Liberal Sciences, specially in
Rome, and Constantinople, which after the seat of the Empire was translated
thither, had all the privileges of old Rome, saving the Ecclesiastical
primacie, for which, notwithstanding there was long dissension between the two
Cities.

Next after Rome and Constantinople, Nullius rei^diga, as Patricius has it. In
the Emperors days it was much renouned for the study of the Law. Digest.
Proem. Haec autem* unde Impp. Theodosius and Valent. AA. eam urbem
Metropolitano nomine ac dignitate exornarunt, as B^sson relatet^.
Beritus a chief City of Syroph^nicia had great privileges, for the famous
Universitie which was in the same, and such Provinces or Countries as served
the same, or any of them with yearly provision of Corn, Oil, Beef, Mutton,
Porke, and such other like victual: which provision was to be distributed
among the poor and impotent of the cities, and not to be given to stout and
valiant beggars, which are able to get their living with their own hands, and
therefore were to be compelled to work. The Aldermen or Governors of Cities,
for that they are employed in matters of greater services, yet none of them
were to be called to any office before he had been even with the
commonwealth, if happily any of them were in debt to it; neither were they or
any of them excused more than from personal services, but in prediall duties,
they paid every one according to his rate. But as for Enterlude-players and
houses of baudery, they had no exemption at all, but paid double charges to the
rest. Of Husbandmen, some are servants, as Copyholders, others are free, as
Freeholders, who notwithstanding themselves are, as it were, bound unto the
soil, and are rated in the Subsidy according to their Acres; and if they have
no Land, then according to the head or number of their household; which
notwithstanding, at this day is taken away; and these, as well pay rent to the
owners of the ground (wherein notwithstanding, the Landlord cannot exact of
them, or charge them above that which has been covenanted between them) as
Tribute, and Headsilver to the commonwealth: for the declining of which, and
avoiding of necessary services of the commonwealth, as no man can put himself
under the patronage of any Noble man, so also they cannot be called from this
service of the commonwealth, to any other. Countrymen, such as were addicted
to the ground they tilled, although the ground were their own, yet could they
not sell it to any man, but to him that was of the mother-village wherein
himself was. A Mother-village was that, whence all the villages round about
were derived. Although all such husbandmen as dwell in any village, are to pay
Subsidy for such goods as they possess, or such lands as they hold; yet one
neighbor is not to be disquieted or arrested for an other man's due: for that
it is a thing unlawful to trouble one for another, or not to cesse men
indifferently, according to the value of their lands, and the worth of their
goods. And therefore, the Romans in rating of matters of taxes, had first
Cessers which rated men according to that which they thought their state to be:
then had they Levellers or Surveyors, who considered the rate set down, mended
it, and made it even, easing such persons or grounds as were over-rated, and
charging more deeply such others as were overlightly taxed, procuring that
such grounds as were waste and barren; should be brought to tillage, and that
the barren should be joined with the fruitful, that by such means the Prince
might receive subsidy out of both: March-grounds, and such as lie in the
bounds of any kingdom, serve for the maintenance of such Garrisons as are
there placed for the defense of the Marches, and such as hold the said lands,
are to pay a yearly provision or pension for the same; as also the Princes
pastures, woods, and forests, which are let out upon a certain yearly rent,
either for a certain time, or in fee farm for ever, which in respect they pay
an ordinary payment to the Prince, either in money, or in provision, are
discharged from all other ordinary and extraordinary burdens. Public things
are those which appertain to the Exchequer, or to the Church, which may in like
sort be rented out for a season, or for ever, as the possession of the
Exchequer may, so it be done to the certain benefit of the Church, and under
such solemnities, as in this case are required, otherwise it cannot be let out
but for 30. years, or for three lives. Fee-farme is, when lands and tenements,
or other hereditaments, are let out for ever, under a certain yearly rent, in
reacknowledgement of the soveraigntie thereof, belonging still to the first
Lord, whereby both the right and possession passes to the former in fee.

SECT. 5.
The Matter of the 12. Book of the Code.

THe third and last of these Books, treats of the honors that the Exchequer
gives; of which the first and chiefest was the Pretorship, which anciently was
a great dignity, but after became an idle name only, and a burden to the
Senators, as in which at their own charges they were to set out plays and
shows, and gave unto the Emperor, in consideration of his or their glebe
land, a certain quantity of gold called Aurum glebale, or if they had no glebe
land, then offered they to the Emperor an other piece of gold, called Follis
aurea, both which afterward were taken away. Next was the Consulship, which was
not to be sought by ambition, or by scattering money among the people, but by
clear suffrages and desert: After the Consulship came in place the Constable,
or Master of the Soldiers, and those which were called Patricii, for that
their fathers had been Senators, whose place under Augustus was equal to the
Consuls, although they were in no office and function of the commonwealth; and
the other is not so much an administration as a dignity, as the Senatorship
anciently was, into the which who that were admitted, were accounted as Parents
to the Prince, and Fathers to their Country: Fourthly in place were the
Princes Chamberlaines, who were adorned with sundry privileges, and had the
title of honor: Fifthly followed the Treasurer, who was Master of all the
receipts and Treasure of the Prince, public or private, and of all such
officers as were underneath him: Then the Prenotary, chief Notary or Scribe of
the Court, who was called Primicerius. [To this purpose note, that the Ancients
for want of those more proper materials, which Experience has discovered to
our times, were wont to write in waxen Tables, as may be observed out of the
Junior Pliny in an Epistle to Tacitus. Lib. 1. Epist.
Note also, that upon occasion given for inrolling of their names, who bare any
office or dignity, the use was, to set the highest degrees in prima cera, in
the first place of the Table, from hence they were called Primicerii: therefore
he that is chief of any dignity or office, may be called Primicerius,
according to that of Phovorinus: (...), the first of any Austin calls S.
Stephen Primicerium Martyrum, and the Archbishop of Dole in his Hist. of
Jerusalem called S. Peter Primicerium Aposto lorum.
order: hence it is, that we find in Codin, Primicerios Aulae, Lectorum,
Barangorum, etc. and for this cause, the Law here calls the chief Notarie
Primicerium.] After him that was first Secretary, there was an other, called
Secundocerius, the second Secretary, and after them, other Clerks of the
Council, who were not all in one degree, but some were first, some were
second, and so in order, as their person, place, and time did require: Over
whom was the Master of the Rols, who now is called Chancellor, and such as are
of the Princes privy Council, or Assessors of his privy consistory, wherein
he hears Embassages, and debateth the greatest affairs of the State, and
other weighty matters. The President or Tribune of the Schools, where young
men were trained up to feats of Arms. The Martials or Presidents of Military
affairs: the Physicians of the Princes body, Constantine in old time honored
with the title of Earls, as he did the rest of his chief officers, but now
they are without the dignity of that title: The Earls of the Countries who
governed the Provinces or Shires whereof they were Earls: Professors of Law,
and other sciences twenty years together, deserved by the Law to be made
Earls. The Porters of the Court, and the Princes watch, which watched nightly
for the defense of his body, the guard or protectors of the Princes body, and
their Captain, among which were chief the Standerd-bearers, as in whom the
Prince reposed most trust, and used them chiefly in all matters of danger. Next
unto the Chancellor, or Master of the Rolls, were the Clerks, and others that
served in the Rolls, in which the decrees and rescripts of the Prince, the
Supplications of the subject, and the orders thereupon set down are recorded,
laid up, and kept, as the Rolls of Remembrances, of Epistles, Libels,
Ordinances, Gifts given by the Prince, and such like: besides such as serve the
Prince, not in matters of learning, or war, or the pen, or other like places
abovenamed, but in actions of the commonwealth, and in public offices either
of peace or war, and their Presidents or Governors, among whom are Post
masters, to whom the care of the public course does appertein: the Treasurer
of the Chamber, who has the keeping of the privy purse, and such things as
come to the Prince by the way of gift; the Master of the horse, his Queries and
riders; the yeoman of the Styrrop, and the Princes footmen; the They are called
in the Title Castrensiani. Cod. De Cast. and Minist. lib. 12. And these were
Pars Regiae familiae Servitiis and Ministeriis Principis interioribus, in aula
and castris devota, ut Praegustatores, Pincernae, Vesitores, Pastores, etc.
Cujacius hic, and Wesenbec. in O^conom. Juris p^g. 225.
Castellians or officers of the household, which were part of the Princes
family, appointed for the inward services of the Prince in the Court, as his
Tasters, Butlers, Wayters, Chamberers, and such other, and their Governors,
Harbingers, which upon remove provide for the Princes lodgings; all which had
sundry privileges and immunities, for that they were all accounted as
Soldiers, as also the eleven Schools in the Code are Corpora sive ordines
officialium, hoc est, eorum qui munere and officio aliquo quod ad Principis
Ministerium pertineret, fungebantur. Prat. Concerning these, see Panciroll,
upon the Notitia Imperii. The Author whereof (Marian a Scot, if it be as
Cujacius says) reckons no more then ten Schools, but the Emperor makes
mention of eleven. Cod. de Locat. and Cond. l. fin.
Schools for Henchmen, wherein sundry youths, under masters appointed for
that purpose, were trained up, some in learning, some other in Military
discipline, that they might be made fit for the service of the Prince and
commonwealth, and had for their better education an annual allowance of the
Prince; and from thence when they were sufficiently instructed, or trained up,
were sent out to such services as they were fit for.

Of such as were attendants about the Prince, and were employed in his service,
the chiefest of all were the Senators, and therefore are called in the Law, the
Companions of the Prince, and have all the privileges that Soldiers have: The
second order was of them that were Knight-riders, which either did, or might
serve in war: In the third rank were such as were in dignity. All may be
compelled to serve in war, which have neither just excuse, nor exemption, nor
have any leave of the Captain to be absent, unless they be Merchant men, or be
indebted unto the common wealth, or obnoxious to the Law, for any crime they
have committed.

Under the title of Military discipline is declared, how men are to be trained
up to the knowledge of war, what oath is to be taken of such as are pressed to
be Soldiers, how they are to be distributed into bands, what use or benefit
the commonwealth has by them; what is their office, and how they are to be
mustered, or else translated from one degree to an other, how they are to be
judged, if they offend, what privileges belong unto them; what stipend or
wages is due unto them; as allowance of Corn, and the baking of the same into
biscuit, which was a kind of bread twice baked for the better durance of it, and
the carriage thereof from place to place, so often as they happened to remove;
their livery or apparel, and the times of the delivery of the same, or money
in steed thereof; lodging, and provision of salted meat the longer to endure:
how long Soldiers may be absent from the camp, and who is to give them leave
for absence, and what is the punishment of them, that without just cause be
longer absent from the Army, than they have leave. Of young soldiers, and of
their trayning up; of old soldiers, and of their privileges: Provision for
keeping safe the Sea coast, and ordinary high ways of the Country, that such
as journey may pass free without hurt or damage: of runagates out of the
Army, and such as conceal them, and of either of their punishments: of the
sons of such officers as have died in the war, and of their preferment, if
any be fit for it, that they succeed in their fathers office, or room: Of the
Sergeant Major, the Clarke of the band, and other such officers of the Camp,
and of their office, reward, and punishment: Of places disposed of, for public
poasts, and carriages in high beaten ways, and other bywayes on necessity, and
how the same and the Cattle are to be used, that is, that they be not driven
forward with staves or clubs, but with whips only: and that no poast-horse, or
carriage be taken, but for public use of poast-letters; to whom they are to be
granted, and for what time: Of the Apparitors, Sergeants, Sumners, or Baylifes:
Of sundry great officers, and of their Scribes, and Registers, and of their
trials: Of the fees of Advocates, and of the extortion of Apparitors. And this
is the sum of those things which are specially contained in the Code, besides
other things which it has, common with the Digest; the knowledge whereof at
this day, is not so necessary for the Civilian (who in this age has little use
thereof) as it is expedient for Councillors of State, and such as are called
to place in Court, who may there-out mark many things to direct them in their
place, as the variety of those things which are herein handled does very well
show.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1.
What the Authenticks are, and why they are so called.

THe third Volume of the Law is called the Authenticks, of the Greek word
(...), either because they have authority in themselves, as proceeding from the
Emperors own mouth, or that they are originals to other writings, that are
transcribed out of them.

The Authenticks therefore, are a Volume of new Constitutions, set out by
Justinian the Emperor, after the Code, and brought into the body of the Law
under one Book.

In the Authenticks, is not that order observed in the disposition of the
Laws, as is either in the Digest, or the Code, but as occasion was offered of
any doubt, wherein the Princes resolution was necessary to every thing, so it
is set down without any other method or form.

The whole Volume is divided into In the Latin translation, for the Greek
text acknowledges not this division into Collations.
9. Collations, Constitutions, or Sections; and they again into 168. Novels,
which also are distributed into certain Chapters.

They were called quod novissime promulgatae sint post Cod. Justin. Repetitae
Prae^ectionis: and therefore the Greek calls them (...): so likewise the
constitutions of the Emperors, which were newly published after the (...),
were called the Novels of Leo, Nirephorus, Michael. etc.
Novels, because they were new Laws, compared to the Laws of the Digest, or
the Code.

Of these Constitutions, some were general, and did concern all, who had like
cause of doubt; some other were private, and did concern only the place or
persons, they were writ for, which I will overpasse with silence.

SECT. 2.
The sum of the first Collation.

OF the general, the first title and first Novell of the first Collation is,
that Heirs, Feoffees, Executors, Administrators, and their Successors, shall
fulfill the Will of the deceased, and within one year after his decease, shall
pay his Legacies and Bequests: and if they be once sued for it, they shall
forthwith pay that which is due upon the Will, (deducting only a fourth part,
which is due unto the heir by the Law Falcidia) or else, to lose such
bequests, as themselves have in the Will.

That it shall not be lawful for a Widow, coming to a second marriage, after
her first husband is dead, to sequester one of her children from the rest, upon
whom she will bestow such things, as her first husband gave her before
marriage, but that the benefit thereof shall be common to them all: Neither
that she convey it over to her second husband, or his children, and so defraud
her first husbands children. And that a man in like sort surviving his wife,
shall do the like toward his first wives children, as concerning such Dowry as
the first wife brought to her husband.

Of Suerties and Warranties, that the Creditors shall first sue their Debtors,
and take execution against their goods, and finding them not payable, shall
then take their remedy against the Suerties.

Of Monks, that they build no Monasteries, but with the leave of the Bishop,
who is there with prayer to * lay But the Emperor makes no mention of this
Rite; for thus says the Law: None shall presume to erect a (Church or)
Monastery, till the Bishop of the place, beloved of God, having been made
acquainted with it, shall come, and lift up his hands to heaven, and consecrate
the place to God by prayer; (...): and there erect the Symbol of our
Salvation, we mean, the venerable and truly precious Rood. In Auth. De
Monach. Illudigitur. Coll. 1. See also Novell. 123. and 131. And the like is
commanded in the (...): Yet that this Ceremony of laying the first stone, has
been of ancient use in the Greek Church, may be observed out of their
Euchologue, where it is said, that the Bishop, after some other Rites
performed, (...), etc. (...): standing in the place where the holy Altar shall
be set, says a prayer, which being ended, he gives the Ite Missaest, and then
takes up one of the stones, and having cut a Cross upon it, himself with his
own hands lays it upon the Groundwork, then he pronounces the (...),
etc. and so the workmen begin the building. That which follows in the
Euchologue, discovers the form and manner of setting up the Crucifixe, which
the Law calls (...): the Reader may see (...) of the Euchologue. The like
Ceremonies are used in the Latin Church at this day, as may be seen in their
Pontificale, page the 281. of that which Clement the 8. set out at Rome, in the
year 1565.
the first stone: And that the Bishop shall appoint such an Abbot over the
Monks, as in virtue and in merit excels the rest: And besides of their habit,
conversation, professions, and change of life, and who is to succeed them in
their goods and inheritance.

Of Bishops and Clerks, that is, that Bishops and Clerks be of good fame, of
competent learning, and age, and that they be ordained and promoted without
Simonie, or briberie, or the injury of the present Incumbent: And that there be
a set number of Clerks in every Church, lest the Church and Parishioners
thereby be overcharged.

SECT. 3.
What is contained in the second Collation.

THe second Collation treats of the Churches State, that the lands of the
Church be neither sold, aliened, nor changed away, (but upon necessity, or that
they be let to farm for a time, or upon other just cause) no not with the
Prince himself, unless the change be as good, or better, than that which he
receives from the Church: and if any man presume contrary to this form, to
change with the Church, he shall lose both the thing he changed, and the thing
he would have changed for it, and both of them shall remain in the right of
the Church: And that no man give or change a barren piece of ground with the
Church.

That Judges and Rulers of Provinces be made without gifts: of their office,
power, authority, and stipend, and that they swear, they shall so sincerely
and uprightly execute their office, as knowing they shall give an account
thereof to God and the King; which oath they shall undergo before the Bishop
of the place, and the chief men of that Province, whither they are sent to be
Judges or Governors.

Of the Masters of Requests, and their office, which offer to the Prince suitors
Petitions, and report them back from the Prince unto the Judges.

Of wicked and incestuous Marriages, and that such as marry within those
degrees, forfeit all that they have unto the Exchequer, for that when they
might make lawful marriages, they rather choose to make unlawful marriages.

SECT. 4.
The Argument of the third Collation.

THe third Collation contains matter against Bawdes, that they be not
suffered in any place of the Roman Empire, that being once warned to forbear
their wicked profession, if they offend therein again, they die the death
therefore. If any man let any house to a bawd, knowing him to be a bawd, that
he shall forfeit Sciat se december librarum auri sustinere poeram, and circa ipsam
periclitaturum habitationem, In Auth. De Lenonibus. Sancimus. Coll. 3.
x. li. to the Prince, and his house shall be in danger to be confiscated.

Of Majors and Governors of Cities, that such be chosen that be honest people,
and men of credit, and that no man of the City being thereto chosen, refuse
the same, and that such as are thereto chosen, shall swear they will proceed
in every matter, according to Law and Conscience.

That there be a certain number of Clerks in every Church, and that it be
neither diminished, nor increased, and therefore that there be a translation of
those that abound in one Church, into an other Church that wants.

The precepts which Princes gave to Rulers of Provinces, were these in effect:
that whereas themselves were freely chosen thereunto, they should in due sort
and order go into their Provinces, that they should keep their hands pure
from bribes, that they should carefully look unto the Revenues of the
Exchequer, and the peace and quiet estate of the Province, repress outrages
and rebellions, procure that causes be ended with all indifferency, and
ordinary charges: to foresee, that neither themselves, nor any of their
officers, or under ministers, do injury to the people, and so those that
ought to help them, should hurt them: To provide that the people want not
necessary sustenance, and keep the Walls of the City in reparation: that they
punish offenses according to the Law, without respect to any man's privilege,
neither admit any excuse in the examining or correcting of the same, save
innocence only: that they keep their Officers in order: that they admit to
their Counsel such as are good men, and are mild toward such as are good,
and sharp toward such as are evil: that they afford not Protections to every
man, neither to any one longer then it is fit and convenient it should be: that
where they remove, they vex not the Contrymen with more carriages then is
needful: that they suffer not Churches, and other like holy places, to be a
Sanctuary to murderers, and other such like wicked men: that they suffer not
Lands to be sold without fine made to the Exchequer: that they regard not
Letters or rescripts, contrary to Law, and against the weal public, unless
they be seconded: that they suffer not the Province to be disquieted under
pretense of Religion, heresy, or schism, but if there be any Canonical or
ordinary thing to be done, they advise thereabout with the Auxiliabuntur autem
tibi ad hoc etiam Deo amabiles Ecclesiarum defensores De Mand* Princip. Neque
autem homicid.
Bishop: that they do not confiscate the goods of such as are condemned: that
they patronize no man unjustly: that no man set his Arms or Cognizance upon an
other man's Lands: neither that any carry any weapon, unless he be a Soldier.

What is an hereditary portion, and how children are to succeed: of such as
deny their own handwriting, and Condem(...)onem adversus eum duplicem in
utroque cas^ fieri sancimus. De Trient. and semiss. Studium vero.
how they are to be punished, as well in personal as in real actions: and
that such deniers after their denial be not admitted to other exceptions: and
the taking away the thing in controversy from him, which denied the true owner
to be Lord thereof.

SECT. 5.
What is comprehended in the fourth Collation.

THe fourth Collation handles matters of Marriage, and that marriage is made
only by consent, without either lying together, or instruments of dowry: Of
women that marry again within the year of mourning, which by Law in sundry
sorts was punished, for confusion of their issue: that there be an equal
proportion in the Dowry, and the Jointure: Of Divorce and separation of
marriages, and for what causes, by consent, for impotencie, for adultery: and
that Noble women, which after the death of their first husband, being noble
personages, marry to inferior men, shall lose the dignity of their first
husband, and follow the condition of their second husband.

Of Appeals, and within what time a man may appeal, and from whom, and to
whom the appeal is to be made.

That none which lends money to a husbandman, take his land to morgage, and
Nihil amplius quam siliquam unam pro singulo s^l^do annuam praestare. Nequia
quod Agricol Sancimus.
how much usury-money a man may take of a husbandman.

Of her that was brought to bed the eleventh month, after her husbands
decease, and that such as are borne in the The Gloss relates a matter of fact
contrary to this Law A widow in Paris that was delivered of a child the 14.
month after her husbands decease, nevertheless the good repute which was
generally conceived of this woman's continency, prevailed so much against the
letter of the Law, that the reverend Judges awarded the case of childbirth to
be extraordinary* the woman to be chaste, and the child legitimate: Haec tamen
in exemplum trahi facile non oportet, as the Gloss there concludes.
beginning of the same month, are to be accounted for legitimate, but such as
are borne in the end thereof, are to be holden for bastards.

Of instruments and their credit, and that in every instrument there be
Protocols left, that is, signs and notes of the time when such a contract was
made, and who was notarie and witnesses to the same, and that after it be
written fair, and engrossed in a lidger or fair (...): Chartam puram.
mundum Book

SECT. 6.
What is comprised in the fifth Collation.

THe fifth Collation forbids the alienation or selling away of the
immovable possessions of the Church, unless it be done under certain
solemnities, and then only when the moveable goods are not sufficient to pay
the debts of the Church or holy place.

Further, it provideth that the name of the Prince for the time being, be put
in all instruments, and the day and year when the instrument was made.

That the Oath of the deceased, as concerning the quantity of his goods, so
far as it touches the division of the same among his children, be holden for
good, but that it be in no sort prejudicial to the creditors.

Of women tumblers, and such other of like sort, which with the feats of their
body, maintain themselves, that no oath or suertie be taken of them, that will
not leave that kind of life, since such oath is against good manners, and is of
no value in Law.

That such gifts as are given by private men to their Prince, need no record,
but are good without enrolling of them; and in like sort such things as are
given by the Princes to private men.

That no person, thing, or gold of an other man be arested for an other man's
debt, which they now call reprisals, and that he which is hurt by such
reprisals, shall recover the four double of the damages that he has suffered
thereby, and that one man be not beaten or stricken for another.

That he that calls a man into law out of his Territory, or Province where he
dwells, shall enter caution, if he obtain not in the suit against him, he
shall pay him so much as the Judge of the Court shall condemn him in. And that
he who has given his oath in Judgment, shall pay the whole costs of the suit,
but after shall be admitted to prosecute the same if he will, so that he put in
suerties to perform it.

That such women as are unindowed shall have the fourth part of their husbands
substance, after his death, and in like sort the man in the woman's, if the man
or woman that surviveth be poor.

That Churches or Religious persons may change grounds one with an other: for
that one privileged persons right cease against an other, that is in like
sort privileged.

That such changes of Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as are made
by Churchmen to the Prince, be not fained matters, and so by the Prince come
to other men's hands, who have set on the Prince to make this change, and that
the change be made to the Princes house only, and if the Prince, after convey
or confer the same upon any private man, it shall be lawful for the Church to
reenter upon the same again, and to repossesse it as in her former right.

That in greater Churches, Clerks may pay something for their first admittance,
but in lesser Churches it is not lawful.

That such as build, found, or endow Churches (which must go before the rest)
do the same by the authority of the Bishop; and that such as are called
Patrons, may present their Clerks unto the Bishop, but that they cannot make or
ordain Clerks therein themselves.

That the sacred mysteries or ministeries be not done in private houses, but
be celebrated in public places, lest thereby things be done contrary to the
Catholic and Apostolic faith; unless they call to the celebrating of the
same, such Clerks, of whose faith and conformity there is no doubt made, or
those who are deputed thereto by the good will of the Bishop. But places to
pray in, every man may have in his own house; if any thing be done to the
contrary, the house wherein these things are done, shall be confiscated, and
themselves shall be punished at the discretion of the Prince.

That neither such as be dead, nor the Corse or Funeral of them be injured by
the creditors, but that they be buried in peace.

That women's Joyntures be not sold, or made away, no not even with their own
consent.

In what place, number, form, manner, and order the Princes Council is to sit,
and come together.

That he that is convented in judgment, if he wilfully absent himself, may
be condemned after issue is joined.

That no man build a Chapel or Oratorie in his house, without the leave of
the Bishop, and before he consecrate the place by prayer, and set up the
Cross there, and make Procession in the place; and that before he build it, he
allot out lands necessary for the maintenance of the same, and those that
shall attend on Gods service in the place: and that Bishops be not
non-residents in their Churches.

That all obey the Princes Judges, whether the cause be Civil or Criminal
they judge in; and that the causes be examined before them without respect of
persons, and in what sort the Process is to be framed against such as be
present, and how against those that be absent.

SECT. 7.
What is the matter of the sixth Collation.

THe sixth Collation shows, by what means children illegitimate, may be made
legitimate, that is, either by the Princes dispensation, or by the fathers
Testament, or by making instruments of marriage between the Mother and Father
of the children, so that the Mother die not before the perfecting of them, or
that she live riotous^y with other men, and so make her self unworthy to be a
wife.

That Noble personages marry not without instruments of Dowry, and such other
solemnities as are usual in this behalf, that is, that they profess the same
before the Bishop, or minister of the place, and three or four witnesses at
the least, and that a remembrance thereof be left in writing, and kept with the
Monuments of the Church; but that it shall not be needful for meaner persons
to observe the former solemnities.

That such as were indebted to the Testator, or they to whom the Testator was
indebted, be not left Tutors or Guardians to their children; that if any such
be appointed a Tutor, a Curator be joined to him to have an oversight of his
dealing: that Tutors or Curators are not bound by Law to let out the Minors
money, but if they do, the interest shall be the Minors; and the Tutor shall
have every year two months to find out sufficient men, to whom he may let the
money out to hyer, for that it is let out at his peril: that if the Minors
state be great, so that there will be a yearly profit above his finding, the
Tutor shall lay up the residue for a stock against he comes to age, or buy land
therewith, if he can find out a good bargain, and a sure title: but if the
childs portion be small, so that it will not find him, then the Tutor or
Curatot shall dispose of the Minors state, as he would dispose of his own, to
which also he is bound by oath.

How such instruments as are enrolled before Judges, concerning matters of
borrowing and lending and such like may have credit: how men may safely bargain
either with writing or without writing, if themselves be ignorant men; and of
the comparison of Letters, and what credit there is to be given to an
instrument, when the writings and witnesses do vary among themselves.

Of unchaste people, and such as riot against nature, whose punishment is death.

Of such as despitefully, on every light trifle, swear by God, and The crime
of Blasphemy was so odious to the Emperor, that he thought God would never
suffer a blasphemer to go unpunished; and for sins of this nature, says he
the world is visited with famines, plagues and pestilences therefore the Law
here provideth, that a blasphemer shall undergo ultimum suppltoium. If thou
meetest (says Chrysostom) a man blaspheming, (...): S(...)ke him a box on
the ear, give him a dash in the mouth and sanctify thy hand with a (...)
(...). a. free Hom. 1. ad P^p. A(...) chenum. page 46^ ed^. Sancti.
blaspheme his holy name, against whom also is provided the sentence of death.

That the Justices of Peace, or other Officers to that purpose appointed,
speedily dispatch the business of those which are of their Jurisdiction: that
such as come as strangers and forreiners out of other countries, having no just
cause of their coming, be sent back again with their substance, to such
places as they came from; but if they be idle vagabonds and rogues, or other
like valiant beggars, they either drive them out of the place, or compel them
to labor: yet evermore having regard to provide for such as are honest, poor,
old, sick, or impotent.

That Clerks be first convented before their Ordinary, and that the Ordinary
do speedily end the matter, that they may not be long absent from their
benefices: and that they be not drawn before temporal Judges, unless the
nature of the cause do so require it, as that it be a mere civil cause, or a
criminal cause, belonging wholely to the Temporal court; wherein, if a Clerk
shall be found guilty, he shall first be deprived from his ministry, and then
shall be delivered over into the Secular hands: but if the crime be solely
Ecclesiastical, the Bishop alone shall take knowledge thereof, and punish it
according as the Canons do require.

That where one dies without issue, leaving behind him brethren of the whole
blood, and brethren of the half blood; the brethren of the whole blood have
the pre-eminence in the lands and goods of the deceased, before the brethten of
the half blood, whether they be of the fathers side, or the mothers side.

That no man make Armor, or sell it, without the Princes leave, unless they
be knives or other such like small weapons.

SECT. 8.
What is the matter of the seventh Collation.

THat proof by witnesses was devised to that end, that the truth should not be
concealed; and yet all are not fit to be witnesses, but such alone as are of
honest name and fame, and are without all suspicion of love, hatred, or
corruption; and that their dispositions be put in writing, that after the
witnesses be published, and their depositions be known, there be no more
production of witnesses, unless the party swear those proofs came a new
unto his knowledge.

If Parents give profusely to one of their children, the other notwithstanding,
shall have their lawful portions, unless they be proved to be unkind toward
their parents.

That women, albeit they be debtors or creditors, may be Tutors or Curators to
their children; and that there is not an oath to be exacted of them that they
will not marry again, so that they renounce their privilege granted unto them
per Senatus consultum Velleian: and perform all other things, as other Tutors
do.

That Governors of Provinces are not to leave their charges, before they are
called from thence by the Prince, otherwise they incur the danger of Treason.

That women's Dowries have a privilege before all other kinds of debt; that
what Dowry a woman had in her first marriage, she shall have the same in her
second marriage, neither shall it be lawful for her father to diminish it, if
it return again unto his hand.

That a man shall not have the property of his wives dowry, neither a woman
the property of that which is given her before marriage, but the property of
either of them shall come unto their children, yea though they marry not again.

SECT. 9.
What is comprised in the eigth Collation.

Wills or Testaments, made in the behoof of children, stand good, howsoever
imperfect otherwise they De Testament, imperfect Nos ^g(...)
are, but they are not availeable for strangers (but strangers are they which
are not children) neither mattereth it whether the Will or Testament be writ by
the fathers hand only, or by some other body by his appointment; and as the
father divides the goods among the children, so they are to have their parts.

Of Heretics, and that such are Heretics, which do refuse to receive the
holy Communion at the Ministers hand, in the Catholic Church: That Heretics
are not to be admitted to rooms and places of honor, and that women-Hereticks
may not have such privilege as other women have in their Dowries.

That is called mariners usurie, that is wont to be lent to Mariners, or
Merchantmen, specially such as trade by sea; which kind of lending, the Law
calls passage-money, in which kind of usury, a man cannot go beyond the
100. part.

That Churches enjoy a 100. yards prescription.

That such things as are litigious, during the controversy, are not to be sold
away. A litigious thing, is that which is in suit between the plaintiff and
defendant.

That while the suit depends, there be no Letters or Edict procured from the
Prince concerning the cause in question, but that the cause be decided
according to the general Laws in use.

That in Divorces, the children be brought up with the innocent party, but at
the charges of the nocent; and that Divorces be not admitted, but upon causes
in Law expressed.

That no woman, whose husband is in warfare, or otherwise absent, shall marry
again, before she have certain intelligence of the death of her former
husband, either from the Captain under whom he served, or from the Governor of
the place where he died; and if any woman marry again without such certain
intelligence, how long soever otherwise her husband be absent from her, both
she and he who married her, shall be punished as adulterers; and if her former
husband after such marriage, return back again, she shall return again to
her former husband, if he will receive her, otherwise she shall live apart
from them both.

If any man beat his wife for any other cause, than for which he may be justly
severed or divorced from her, he De haered. (...) inteslat. Si quis autem.
shall for such injury be punished.

If any man conceive a jealousy against his wife, as that she uses any other
man more familiarly than is meet she should, let him three several times
admonish him thereof, before three honest and substantial men; and if after
such admonition he be found to commune with her, let him be accused of adultery
before such a Judge, who has authority to correct such offenses.

SECT. 10.
What is the matter of the ninth Collation.

THe ninth and last Collation contains matter of succession in goods, that as
long as there be any Descendent, either Male or Female, so long neither any
Ascendent, or any Collateral can succeed; and that if there be no Descendent,
then the Ascendent be preferred before the Collateral, unles they be brethren
or sisters of the whole blood, who are to succeed together with the Ascendent;
but in Ascendents, those are first called which are in the next degree to the
deceased, then after those which are in a more remote degree: that in
Collaterals all be equally admitted, which are in the same degree, and of the
same Parents, whether they be male or female.

That the lands of any Church, Hospital, or other like Religious place, be not
sold, aliened, or changed, unless it be to the Princes house, or to, or with
an other like Religious place, and that in equal goodness and quantity, or
that it be for the redemption of Prisoners: and that they be not let out to any
private man more than for 30. years, or 3. lives, unless either the houses be
so ruinated, that they cannot be repaired without great charges of the Church,
or other religious houses, or that it be overcharged with any debt or duties
belonging to the Exchequer, and thereby there comes small revenue to the
Church, or Religious place there-out; in every of which cases it is lawful to
let out the same for ever, reserving a yearly competent rent, and other
acknowledgement of other sovereignty therein.

That the holy vessels of the Church be not sold away, unless it be for the
ransoming of Prisoners, or that the Church be in debt; in which case, if they
have more holy vessels than are necessary for the service of the Church, they
may sell those which are superfluous to any other Church that needs them, or
otherwise dispose of them at their pleasure for the benefit of the Church, or
other holy place whose they are.

Where Usurie in process of time does double the principal, there Usurie for
the time to come does cease, and those particular payments which afterward do
follow are reckoned in the principal.

What kind of men are to be chosen Bishops, such as are sound in faith, of
honest life and conversation, and are learned, that such as choose them, swear
before the choice, they shall neither choose any for any reward, promise,
friendship, or any other sinister cause whatsoever, but for his worthiness and
good parts only.

That none be ordained by Symonie, and if there be, that both the giver, taker,
and mediator thereof be punished according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, and
they all made unworthy to hold or enjoy any Ecclesiastical living hereafter.

That if any at the time of any Bishops election, object any thing against him
that is to be elected, the election be staid, till proof be made of that which
is objected by the adversary against the party elected, so that he prove the
same within three Months; and if any proceeding be to the consecration of the
same Bishop in the mean time, it is void.

That the Bishop after he is ordained, may with out any danger of Law, give or
consecrate his goods to the use of the Church, where he is made Bishop, and
that he may give such fees as are due to the electors by law or custom.

That Clerks be not compelled to undergo personal functions, and services of
the commonwealth, and that they busy not themselves in secular affairs, and
so thereby be drawn from their spiritual function.

That Bishops for no matter or cause be drawn before a temporal Judge,
without the Kings special commandment, and if any Judge presume to call any
without such special warrant, the same is to lose his office, and to be
banished therefore.

That no Bishop absent himself from his Dioces without urgent occasion, or
that he be sent for by the Prince, and if any do absent himself above one
year, that he shall lack the profit of his Bishopric, and be deposed from the
same, if he return not again within a competent time appointed for the same.

What manner of men are to be made Clerks, such as are learned, and are of good
Religion, of honest life and conversation, and are free from suspicion of
incontinencie: that no Minister be less than 35. years of age, and that no
Deacon or Subdeacon be under 25. that all Clerks and Ministers be ordained
freely.

If any build a Church, and indow the same, that he may present a Clerk
thereto, so that he be worthy to be admitted thereto: but if he present an
unworthy man, then it apperteineth to the Bishop to place a worthy man therein.

If any Clerk be convicted to have sworn falsely, he is to be deprived of
his office, and further to be punished at the discretion of the Bishop.

That Clerks be convented before their own Bishops, and if the parties
litigant stand to the Bishops order, the Civil Judge shall put it in
execution: but if they agree not upon the judgment, then the Civil Judge is
to examine it, and either to confirm or infirm the Bishops order, and if he
confirm it, then the order to stand, and if not, then the party grieved to
appeal.

If the cause be criminal, and the Bishop find the party guilty, then the
Bishop is to degrade him, and after to give him over to the secular power: the
like course is to be held, if the cause be first examined before the temporal
Judge, and the party found guilty, for then he shall be sent to the Bishop
to be deprived, and after again shall be delivered to the secular powers to be
punished.

That Bishops be convented before their Metropolitans.

That such as in Service time do abuse, or injure the Bishop, Si vero etiam
Litaniam concusserit capitale periculum sustinebit. De Sanctissim. Episcop. and
Deo. Si quis cum sacra minist.
or any Cleark in the Church, being at divine service, be whipped, and sent into
banishment: But if they trouble thereby the divine Service it self, they are
to dye the death for the same.

That Lay men are not to say or celebrate divine Service, without the presence
of the Minister, and other Clerks thereto required.

That such as go to Law, swear in the beginning of the suit, that they have
neither promised, or will give ought to the Judge, and that usual fees be
taken by the Advocates Counselors, Procters, or Attournies, and if any man
take more than his ordinary fees, he shall be put from his place of practice,
and forfeit the four double of that he has taken.

That the 4. general Councels be holden as a Law, and that which is decreed in
them.

That the Bishop of Rome has the first place of sitting in all assemblies, and
then the Bishop of Constantinople.

That all Clergy men's possessions be discharged from all ordinary and
extraordinary payments, saving from the repairing of Bridges and High ways,
where the said possessions do lie.

That no man build a Church, or holy place, without the leave of the Bishop,
and before the Bishop there say Service, and set up the sign of the Cross.

That no man in his own house suffer Service to be said, but by a Minister
allowed by the Bishop, under pain of confiscating of the house, if it be the
Lord of the house that presumes to do it, or banishment, if it be done by the
tenant.

If any bequeath any thing to God, it is to be paid to the Church where the
Testator dwelled.

If any devise by his last Will a Chapel, or Hospital, to be made, the
Bishop is to compel the Executors to perperforme it within five years after
the decease of the Testator; and if the Testator name any governor, or poor
thereto, they are to be admitted, unless the Bishop shall find them unfit for
the room.

That the Bishop see such Legacies performed, as either are given for the
redemption of prisoners, or for other godly uses.

That Masters of Hospitals make an account of their charge, in such sort as
Tutors do.

That such as lust against nature, and so become brutish, receive condign
punishment worthy their wickedness.

That such as make Eunuchs, themselves be made Eunuchs, and if they escape
alive, their goods to be forfeited to the Exchequer, and themselves be
imprisoned all the days of their life.

Such as by force steal away women; themselves, and such as are their
abbetters and helpers, are to dye therefore; and that it shall not be lawful
for her that is carried away, to marry to him that does carry her away: and
that if her father do give his consent to such marriage, he is to be banished:
but if she marry him without her fathers consent, then is she not to take
benefit by her fathers Will, or any other thing that is her fathers.

These, and sundry matters of great importance, and necessary for the well
governing of a commonwealth, are contained in the Authenticks, which I pass
over with dry foot, not because they are not necessary to be known, but
because I would not cloy the Reader even with those things which are good.

All these works are the labor of Justinian, as either gathered together by
him out of ancient Lawyers books, and such Emperors decrees, as went before
him, or else were decreed and ordained by himself, as matter and occasion
offered it self, and the youngest of them is near eleven hundred years of
age, that is, within 500. years after Christ, or not much otherwise.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. 1.
That the last Tome of the Civil Law is the Feudes, and what they are.

THe last Tome of the Civil Law is the Feudes, that is the books of Customs
and Services that the subject or vassal does to his Prince, or Lord, for such
lands or fees as he holds of him.

This piece of the Law, although it was not much in use in the old Emperors
days, yet Justinian himself seems to acknowledge them in his Novell
constitutions, calling them (...), and those which are more careful to seek
out the beginning of them, bring them, some from the ancient Clienteles or
retinews the ancient Romans before Christ's time had, as Budeus does; some other
from Alexander Severus time, who, as Lampridius in the life of Alexander says,
gave such lands as he won out of the Enemies hands to his Lords Marchers,
and his soldiers, that they should be theirs, and their heirs for ever, so
they would be Soldiers, neither should they come at any time to the hands of
any private man, saying, they would more lustily serve, if they fought for
their own land; which opinion comes next to the ancient border-grounds of
the Romans, whereof there is a title in the eleventh Book of the Code, De
fundis Limitrophis, that is, of Border-ground: Others refer it over to
Constantines time the great, who enacted for the benefit of his soldiers, that
such Lordships and lands as before time they had their wages out of, should
pass over unto their heirs, and be appropriated to their family, or stock,
so that they found and manteined continually a certain number of soldiers.

From whence soever it descended, this is certain, that it came very late to
be a particular volume of the Law it self: The compilers or gatherers together
thereof, were Obertus S(...) (...)us, but specially S^ Henry Sp^^mans Glossa^^.
de Horto, and Giraldus Compagist, two Senators of Millaine, who partly out of
the Civil Law, and partly out of the Customs of Millaine drew the same, but
without form or order.

The word it self is a barbarous word, but had his original, notwithstanding,
as Isidore says, from the word Foedus, being a good Latin word, and so is to
be interpreted tanquam Feodum, that is, as a thing covenanted between two:
Others deduce it from the word Fides, as it were in Latin Fideum, and by a more
pleasant pronunciation Feudum; whereupon such as are Feudataries to other, are
called in Latin Fideles, because they owe faith and allegiance to such whose
Feudataries they are, who in the Lombard tongue are called Vassals. Besides,
Fealty, which some call Hominium, by the Feudists is termed Homage: for the
nature of a Feude is this, that it draws with it faith and homage: so that
such as are Feudataries, or fee-men, profess themselves to owe faith to such,
to whom they are in fee, and that they are his men; insomuch, as when a fee-man
dies, his heir does make faith, and does his homage to the Lord, as is well
seen both in the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this land, who both in
their creation, and also in their succession one after an other swear an oath,
and do their homage to their Sovereign, and do pay other duties which are
Symbols and signs of their subjection to their Sovereign: And for others that
are under the degree of Baron, and yet are fee-men unto the King, and so do
not manuell obedience unto his Majesty, they pay yearly something in respect
of their homage, according to the quantity or quality of the fee or tenure
they hold of the Prince.

A Fond in English may be called a Tenure, which caused Littieton, when he
treated of Feudes, so far forth as they are here in use in England (such as are
all those which are called in Latin Feuda militaria, and Feuda scuti^erorum,
called by Justinian (...), which are by the Laws of the land, termed by the
names of Knights-services, and Escuage) to call them by the names of Tenures.

A Feude is a grant of lands, honors, or fees, made either to a man at the
will of the Lord, or Sovereign, or for the Feudataries own life, or to him,
or his heirs for ever, under condition, that he and his heirs in case where
the Feude is perpetual, do acknowledge the giver and his heirs to be their
Lord and Sovereign, and shall bear faith and allegiance unto him and his,
for the said Tenure, and shall do such service to him and his for the same, as
is between them covenanted, or is proper to the nature of the Feude.

SECT. 2.
That Feuds are either Temporal or Perpetual, and how.

OF Feuds, some are Temporal, some other are Perpetual.

Temporal Feuds are those that are given, either for term of a man's life, or
for years, or at the will of the Lord, for some service done, or to be done;
such as are Annuities given to Lawyers for counsel, Pensions given to
Physicians for their advise, Stipends to any Teacher of Arts and Sciences, Fees
for keeping of Towers and Castles, called by Feudists Castalia, and is by
Littleton called Castle-ward, although by him it is taken for a state of
inheritance.

Perpetual Feuds, are rights which a man has by grant from the Sovereign, or
chief Lord of the soil or territory, to have, hold, use, occupy, and enjoy
honors, manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, to him and his heirs for
ever, upon condition that the said vassal or party, his heirs and
successors, do homage and fealty to his Lord, his heirs and successors, for
such honors, lands, or hereditaments, and do him either service in war,
according as it is covenanted between the Lord and his vassal, or such other
service as the nature of his tenure does require, or if he fail therein, he
shall either find some other in his room to do the same, or else pay a
certain sum of money in lieu thereof.

Although this Tenure by the first creation thereof be perpetual, yet that the
sovereignty thereof should not still remain unprofitable to the first Lord,
the whole benefit thereof going continually to the vassal or tenant; it is
provided, that the Sovereign or chief Lord the first year, the heir or
successor of the vassal comes unto his land, shall have the whole revenue of
his livelihood for that year, or a certain sum of money in token of the
return thereof unto the Lord, and the redemption thereof made again by the
tenant, which by the Law of the Novels is called (...), and is well nigh the
same that we call livery, which every heir that holds in Knights service,
sueth out before he take possession of his land, as heir to his Ancestors.

This Tenure is gotten either by Investiture, or by Succession.

Investiture is the same that we call Creation, and is the Investiture what it
is.
Primier grant of a Feude or Tenure to any, with all rights and solemnities
thereto belonging, wherein the homager, or feodatarie for the most part upon
his knees promises faith and allegiance under a solemn oath unto his Lord,
and his successors.

Succession is, whereby the eldest son succeeds the What is Succession in
the Feuds.
father in his inheritance, and if he fail and have no issue, then the next
brother, and so in order successively; and if there be no son, then the next
heir male, and if there be no heir male, then the land escheats unto the
Lord. For the Lumbards, from whom the Feuds first came, or at the least were
chiefly derived from them, directing all their policy as the Lacedaemons did,
to matters of war, had no feminine Feuds among them, but after by process of
time, there were created as well Feminine Feudes as Masculine Feuds, in so much,
as where there was no issue male to put them from it, women did succeed in the
inheritance.

SECT. 3.
Of Feudes Regal and not Regal, Liege and not Liege, and how Feuds may be lost.

OF Feuds, some are Regal, some not Regal: Regal are those which are given
by the Prince only, and cannot be given by any inferior.

Of these, some are Ecclesiastical, as Archbishopricks, Bishoprics and such
like: Others are Civil or Temporal, as Dukedomes, Earledomes, Vicounts, and
Lords, who by that, are distinguished from the rest of the people, that they
have the conducting of the Princes Army at home, and abroad, if they be
thereto appointed, and have right of Peers in making of Laws, in matters of
trial, and such other like businesses.

Not Regal are those which hold not immediately of the Prince, but are holden
of such Ecclesiastical or Civil States which have had their Honors
immediately from the Prince.

Besides of Feuds, some are Liege, others not Liege; Liege Feuds, are they in
the which the vassal or feodatorie promises absolute fealty or faith to his
Lord, against all men without exception of the King himself, or any other more
ancient Lord to whom besides he owes alleagance or service. Of this sort
there is none in this Realm of England, but such as are made to the King
himself, as appears by Littleton in the title of Homage, wherein is
specially Salve le Foy que je doy a nostre Signour le Roy. Littleton. tit.
Homage.
excepted the faith which the Homager owes to his Lord the King.

Feuds not Liege, are such wherein Homage is done, with special reservation of
his faith and allegiance to the Prince and Sovereign.

Of such as are Vassals or Liege men, some are called Valvasores majores;
others Valvasores minores. Valvasores Vavasors.
majores are such as hold great places of the state under the Emperor or King,
(as are the degrees of Honor before-named, and are called Peers of the Land)
who only gives Nobility. Valvasores minores, are those which are no Peers of
the Land, and yet have a pre-eminence above the people, and are, as it were, in
a middle Region between the people and the Nobility, such as are Knights,
Squires, and Gentlemen.

The Feuds are lost by sundry ways, by default of issue of him to whom it was
first given, which they call Apertura feodi; by surrender thereof, which by
them is termed Refutatio feodi; by forfeiture, end that was in two sorts,
either by not doing the service that his tenure did require, or by committing
some villainous act against his Lord, as in conspiring his Sovereigns death,
defiling his bed, or deflowring his daughter, or some other like act
treacherous to his Lord, and unworthy of himself.

CHAP. V.
SECT. 1.
What the Canon Law is in general: What the Decrees are, and of how many parts.

AND so much of the Civil Law, and the Books thereunto pertaining. Now it
follows, that I do in like order speak of the Canon Law, which is more
hardly thought upon among the people, for that the subject thereof, in many
points, has many gross and superstitious matters used in the time of
Papistrie, as of the Mass, and such other like trumperie; and yet there are in
it beside, many things of great wisdom, and even those matters of superstition
themselves, being in a generality, well applied to the true service of God,
may have a good use and understanding. What is the Canon Law.


The Canon Law, has his name of the Greek word Canon, which in English is a
Rule, because it leads a man straight, neither draws him on the one side or
the other, but rather corrects that which is out of Level and Line.

The Canon Law consists partly of certain Rules, taken out of the holy
Scripture, partly of the Writings of the ancient Fathers of the Church, partly
of the ordinances of general and provincial Councels, partly of the Decrees
of Popes of former ages. Of the Canon Law there are two principal parts, the
Decrees and the Decretals. The Decrees are Ecclesiastical constitutions, made
by the Pope and Cardinals, at no man's suit, and are either Rules taken out of
the Scripture, or Sentences out What is the antiquity of Decrees and who were
the Authors that compiled them.
of the ancient Fathers, or Decrees of Councels. The Decrees were first
gathered together by Ivo, B. of Carnat, who lived in the time of Urban the 2.
about the year of our Lord God 1114. but afterward polished and perfected by
Gratian, a Monk of the Order of S. Bennet, in the year Trithem. in his second
Book De viris illust. says, that Gratian wrote this Work at Bononia, in the
Monastery of S. Felix Anno 1127. Others say, it was done in the year 1151.
Bellarmine to reconcile the difference, says, that Gratian might begin the
work according to the first account, and finish it according to the second.
1149. and allowed by Eugenius the Pope, whose Confessor he was, to be read
in Schools, and to be alleged for Law.

Of all the several Volumes of the Canon Law, the Decrees are the ancientest,
as having their beginning from the time of Constantine the great, the first
Christian Emperor of Rome, who first gave leave to the Christians freely to
assemble themselves together, and to make wholesome laws for the well
government of the Church. The Decrees are divided into three parts, whereof the
first teaches of the origin and beginning of the Canon Law, and describes and
sets out the rights, dignities, degrees of Ecclesiastical persons, and the
manner of their elections, ordinations, and offices, and stands of one
hundred and one distinctions.

The second part sets out the causes, questions, and answers of this Law,
which are in number 36. and are full of great variety, wisdom, and delight.

The third and last part, contains matter of consecration of all sacred
things, as of Churches, bread and wine in the Sacrament, what days and Feasts
the Primitive Church used for the receiving thereof, of the ministering of the
Sacraments in Baptism, and the use of imposition of hands, all which is set
out under five distinctions.

SECT. 2.
What the Decretals are, and how many parts they comprehend.

THe Decretals are Canonical Epistles, written either by the Pope alone, or by
the Pope and Cardinals, at the instance or suit of some one or more for the
ordering and determining of some matter in controversy, and have the
authority of a law in themselves.

Of the Decretals there be three Volumes, according to the number of the
Authors which did devise and publish them.

The first Volume of the Decretals was gathered together by Raymundus
Barcinius, Chaplain to Gregory the ninth, at his the said Gregory's
commandment, about the year 1231. and published by him to be read in
Schools, and used for Law in all Ecclesiastical Courts. The second is the
work of Boniface the eight, methoded by him about the year 1298. by which, as
he added something to the ordinance of his Predecessors, so he took away many
things that were superfluous and contrary to themselves, and retained the
rest. The third Volume of the Decretals, are called the Clementines, because
they were made by Pope Clement the fifth of that name, and published by him in
the Council of Vienna about the year of grace 1308.

To these may be added the Extravagants of John the xxij. and some other
Bishops of Rome, whose authors are not known, and are as Novell constitutious
unto the rest.

SECT. 3.
What is contained in the first Book of the Decretals.

EVery of the former Volumes of the Decretals are divided into five Books, and
contain, in a manner, one and the same titles, whereof the first in every of
them, is the title of the blessed Trinity, and of the Catholic faith, wherein
is set down by every of them a particular belief, diverse in words, but all
one in substance, with the ancient Symbols, or belief of the old Orthodoxe, or
Catholic Church.

Secondly, there comes in place the treaty of Rescripts, Constitutious and
Customs, and the authority of them, and when they are to be taken for Law:
after follows the means whereby the greater Governors of the Church, as
namely, Archbishops, Bishops, and such like, come unto their room, which was
in two sorts, according as the parties place or degree was when he was called
unto the room, as if he were under the degree of of a Bishop, and was called
to be a Bishop, or being a Bishop, was called to be an Archbishop, or to be the
Pope himself, he was thereto to be elected by the Deane and Chapter of the
Church where he was to be Bishop, or by the College of the Cardinals in the
Popedom; but if he were already a Bishop or an Archbishop, and were to be
preferred unto any other Bishopric or Archbishopric, then was he to be
required by the Church, he was desired unto and not elected, which in the Law
was called Postulation; after Postulation followed translation by the
superior, to the Sea to which he was postulated or required: after Election
followed Confirmation and Consecration of him that was elected, which both were
to be done in a time limited by the Canons, otherwise the party elected lost
his right therein.

Bishops and other beneficed men, sundry times upon sundry occasions resign
their benefices, and therefore is set down what a renunciation or resignation
is, who is to renounce, and into whose hands, and upon what causes a man may
renounce his benefice or Bishopric: and because under-Ministers are oftentimes
negligent in their Cure, that the people, in the mean time may not be
defrauded of Divine Service, the Sacraments, and the food of the word of God;
it is provided, that the Bishop shall supply the negligence of such Ministers
as are underneath him in his Jurisdiction: besides, because holy orders are not
to be given but by imposition of hands, with prayer and fasting, The old Romans
instituted three yearly Solemnities in honor of their Gods for the Fruits of
the Earth: These also the Romish Church observed, having first moderated their
superstition, and directed them to a more sacred end. To the three, one of
their Popes (as they say) added the fourth, with a respect had to those of the
Jews, in Zech. 8. 19* and so they were called Iejunia quaiuor temporum. Their
institution at the first had many other causes, for which see the Sermons of
Leo and Durants Rationale, but in after times at these Solemnities, especial
regard was had to the Ordination of Priests and Deacons, which had been
formerly performed only once a year, in the Month of December, (as Amalarim
has observed.) It seems therefore to be otherwise, then as Bellarmine has
disputed, whose opinion it is, that these Fasts may be fetched from the
Apostles times, and that one of these four is mentioned by S. Luke in S. Paul's
voyage to Rome, Act. 27. though the Syriack Paraphrast in that place plainly
sets down for the Greek (...) calling it, a Fast of the Jews, not
Christians. But the great and learned Cardinal in his devotion to sacred
Orders, took any opportunity to make these Solemnities in every circumstance
Apostolical.
Four fit times in the year are limited for the same; where also is set down
how they are to be qualified which are to be ordered, what trial or
examination is to be had of them, what age they are to be of, and what gifts of
body or mind they are to be endowed withal: what Sacraments may be
reiterated, what not: that Ministers sons are not to succeed their Fathers in
those benefices, wherein their Fathers immediately before were Pastors or
Governors, lest happley thereby there might In what manner, and with how much
care and Christianity these Fasts have been heretofore observed, it may be
noted out of the second Council of M^l^aine, Tit. 1. Decret 22. where the
Bishop is to command, that upon the Sunday before these Fasts, Paro^ht non
solum solenne illud jejuntum denunctent, verumetiam in sua unusquisque eorum
parochtali Ecclesia supplicationes Litaniasque pie ac religiose vel intus
habeat vel prosequente fidelium multitudine foris, Ecclesiam, sicut moris est,
obeat, ut Dei open implorata tum Episcopus in eorum delectatu quibus ordenes
conferet Spiritus Sancti lumine illustretur; tum illi quibus conseruntur in
vitae sanctitate, doctrina, religiosisque virtutibus proficiant.

In the fourth Council of Millaine is set down out of Leo, the form of
bidding these Fasts in the Church, Quod sacrorum temporum ratio, etc. and
afterward, Quartaigitur, sexta feria and Sabbato ^e^unemus, frequentes in
Cathedrali Parochialique Ecclesia ad litanias Orationemque conveniamus, and quo
sacris illis Feri^^ ^ cibo abstinentiores esse debemus, ^o abundantsore
eleemosynarum liberalitate erga Christ's pauperes effusiores sinius: tum Sabbato
sub vesperum orationem Parochialem communem celebremus, qua and pro spe
foelicitatis aterna ad quam per fidem currimus, and pro sacra ordinatione, quam
eo die a Reverendissimo Episcopo haberi solenne est, and pro ^is commodis qua
singulorum annorum revolutione consequimur Deo omnipotents gratias agamus, etc.
Tom. Council. 4. Edit. Bin.

These four Fasts at this present day are observed in our own Church, and are
known unto us by the name of Emberweekes. And (so I find it in Thomas Becon)
by opinion of much people, these days been called Imber-dayes, because that
our elder Fathers would on these days eat no bread, but Cakes made under
ashes, so that by the eating of that, they reduced into their minds that they
were but ashes, and so should turn again, and wist not how soon, etc. And
that these Imber-dayes were duly and devoutly observed by our Ancestors, we
may be persuaded out of the Laws of King Cnute. where it is said Chap 16.
(...) man (...), That every man observe the Fasts which are commanded, with all
earnest care, whether it be the Imber Fast, o^ the Lent Fast, or any other
Fast: And Chap. 17. (...). where the Law says, That it is meet and right,
that at these Fasts, all malice being laid aside, all men should be at peace.
And concerning the outward observance in the 43. Chap. it is said: (...). Evil
it is, that upon a fast day, a man should eat any thing till Meal time, and
it is much worse if he should eat flesh meat. This was the Religion of our
Ancestors; and if ignorance could admit of so much devotion, how much more
would be expected from these knowing times?


be claimed a succession or inheritance in the same: that no bondmen or
accountants, men distorted or deformed in body, bigamists or twice married men,
be admitted to holy orders.

Of wandering Clerks, and how that they are not to be admitted to minister in
an other Diocese, than where they are ordered, without the Dimissorie Letters
of the Bishop, under whom they were ordered. Of Archdeacons, Archpriests,
Sacrists, Vicars, what they are, and wherein their particular offices do
consist. Of the office of Judges in general, and their power, whether they be
Delegats, Legates a latere, or Judges ordinary. Of difference in Jurisdiction
between Ministers and Ministers, and what obedience the inferior Ministers
are to yield unto their superiors. Of Truce and Peace which Ecclesiastical
Judges are to procure; that truces be kept from Saturday in the Evening, until
Monday in the Morning, and that there be no fighting from the first day of the
Advent, until the eight day after Twelfe tide, and that war likewise do
cease from the beginning of Lent, until the eight day after Easter, under
pain of Excommunication, against him that presumes to do the contrary; and
that in time of war, neither Priests, Clerks, Merchantmen, country men,
either going to the field or coming from the field, or being in the field, or
the cattle with which they plough, or the seed with which they sow, be hurt or
violated. Judges, before men enter into the dangerous events of Law, are to
persuade the parties litigant by private covenants and agreements to compound
the controversy between them, wherein if they prevail not, then the parties
are to provide themselves of Advocates, Proctors, or Sindects according as they
are private men, or bodies politic to furnish their cause, and direct them in
proceeding.

If any Church has been hurt in any contract of bargain, or sale, or in
demising of any Lease, or by the Proctors negligence, it is to be restored
again into her former state, to allege and plead that for it self, which is
agreeable to Law and conscience. The like grace is to be granted to all other
Litigants whatsoever, who have by fear or violence, or any other like unjust
cause, been hindered from the prosecution of their right.

If any, seeing a suit like to be commenced against him, do either appeal
before he be served with Process, or alienate away the thing whereupon the suit
was like to grow, he is to be compelled to hold plea of the same cause, before
the Judge from whom he did appeal, and to answer his adversary, as though
still he were owner of the thing he did in policy sell or alienate away.

Many times, things which otherwise can have no speedy end by Law, are
compounded by Arbitrament. Arbitrators ought to be odd in number, that if they
disagree, that which is concluded by the greater part may prevail. An
arbitrament is a power given by the parties litigant to some, to hear and
determine some matter in suit between them, Arbitrament
and to pronounce upon the same, to which they are to bind themselves under a
penalty to stand.

SECT. 4.
What is contained in the second Book of the Decretals.

THe first Book having set out the first object of the Law, which stands in
the persons who make up the Judgment, as in the person of the Judge himself,
the Advocates, Proctors and Clients, there follows in the second Book, the
second object of the same, which is the Judgments themselves, which are to be
commenced by a Citation, and that in a competent Court fit for the same, by a
Libell offered up in the Court by the plaintiff to the Judge, which is to
contain the sum of that which is required in Judgment; where, if the
defendant do again reconvent the plaintiff, he is to answer, albeit the
defendant be not of that Jurisdiction: the Libell being admitted, the defendant
is to join issue, and yet before either of them enter any further into the
cause, that there may be fair and sincere dealing in the same, and that all
suspicion of malicious dealing therein may be taken away, each of them are to
take an oath, the Plaintiff, that he does not of any malice prosecute the suit
against the Defendant, or the Defendant of any malice mantaine the suit against
the Plaintise, but that they verily believe their cause is good, and that they
hope they shall be able to prove, the one his libell, the other his exceptions,
if he shall put in any into the Court. The cause being begun, delays are often
granted, if either there come any holiday between, or any other like just
cause be offered, as for producing of witnesses and such like: if there be no
just cause of delay, then the Judge is to go on in the due course of Law,
(provided always that more be not demanded by the plaintiff than is due) and
that the cause possessory be handled before the petitorie, and that he that is
spoiled, be first and before all things restored to that thing or place whereof
he was spoiled, or from which he was put; yea, though he have nothing else to
allege for himself, besides the bare spoliation it self. If the one side or
other wilfully or deceitfully decline Judgment, the Judge is to put the other
in possession of that which is in demand, or at the least, to sequester the
fruits and possessions of that which is in controversy; but if both parties
appear and join issue affirmatively, then is it but a question of Law, and
not of fact, neither does there remain ought else to be done by the Judge, but
that he give sentence against him that has confessed it, and put his sentence
in execution. But if issue be joined negatively, then is the plaintiff to prove
his Libell, so far as it consists infact, by witnesses which are to be
compelled by Law if they will not come, or appear voluntarily, by public and
private instruments, by presumptions, by conjectures, by oath; which being
done, the Defendant in like sort is to be admitted to prove his exceptions, and
clear his prescription if he be able to allege any, in which he is Plaintiff,
neither is he bound thereto, before the Plaintiff have perfected and proved
his own right.

After proofs are brought on either side, and the same thoroughly disputed on
by the Advocates, the Judge is to give sentence, which he is to frame according
to the Libell and proofs formerly deduced in the cause. The sentence being
given, Execution is to be awarded, unless there be an appeal made from it
within ten days by the Law (but fifteen days by the Statute of this Land)
from the time the party, against whom sentence was given, had knowledge
thereof, or unless it be appealed incontinently at the acts, and in writing
before a public Notary, or at the least the party against whom the sentence
proceeded, with due time, take their journey toward the higher Judge to
prosecute the same, by whom the former sentence is either confirmed or
infirmed, in the second instance.

SECT. 5.
What is the subject of the third book of the Decretalt.

THe third book contains such Civil matters and causes as are liable to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, as the honest life or conversation of Clerks, and
their comely comportment in all their demeanor, with what women they are to
cohabit, and dwell with, whereby they may be free from all suspicion of ill
life, and with whom not, which of them may be married by the law of the
Canons, and which not, in what cases they may be allowed to be non-resident,
and in what not, and how such as are non residents may be called home unto
their cure, and if they return not upon process sent out against them, how
they are to be punished, namely by deprivation or sequestration of the fruits
and commodities of their benefice.

Prebends and dignities are preferments for Clerks, but not for such as are
idle or absent from the same without just cause: but if any Clerk or Minister
be sick, and his disease be curable, he is to receive the benefit of his
prebend or dignity in his absence, as though he were present; but if it be
contagious, or uncurable, then he is to be put from the exercise of his office,
and a helper or coadjutor to be joined unto him, and they both to be maintained
of his stipend.

Prebends or dignities are to be got by institution, which are to be given by
the Bishop, or his Chancellor, or such other as have Episcopal jurisdiction,
without which, neither any benefice is lawfully gotten, nor can lawfully be
retained. Benefices not void, ought neither to be granted, neither to be
promised; but such as are void ought to be granted within six months after
knowledge of the voydance thereof, otherwise the grant of them devolveth, and
comes unto the superior: he that causes himself to be instituted into a
benefice, the Incumbent thereof being alive, himself is to be deposed from his
orders.

While any Benefice, or Bishopric is void, nothing is to be changed or
innovated in it; and such gifts, sales, or changes of Ecclesiastical things,
as are made by the Bishop, or any other like Prelate, without the consent of
the Chapter, are void in Law: and such Benefices as do become void, are to be
bestowed without any impairing or diminution of the same.

In what case the goods and possessions of the Church may be alienated, and in
what not; and that such things as are alienated, be alienated by the greater
part of the Chapter, otherwise the alienation is void: What goods of the
Church may be lent, what sold, what bought, what changed, what demised, or let
to lease, what morgaged, or let to pawn. After these follow Tractates of last
Wills and Testaments, of succession by way of Intestate, of Burials, of Tithes,
first Fruits and Offerings: Of Monks, and their state in sundry sorts; of the
right of Patronage; of Synodals and Procurations; of consecration of Churches;
of Celebration of Divine Service, and the Eucharist; of Baptism, and the
effect thereof; of a Priest not baptized; of Fasting, Purification of women,
and other like ceremonies pertaining to Ecclesiastical discipline: Of building
and repairing Churches, and of their Churchyards, and the immunitie that
belongs to them both, and of sundry other things in like sort pertaining to the
Church. That Clerks and other Ecclesiastical men trouble not themselves about
Civil matters, contrary to their office and profession.

SECT. 6.
What is contained in the fourth Book of the Decretals.

THe fourth Book disposes of matters of Espousals and Matrimony, and shows
what words make Espousals, what Matrimony, of the Betrothing of such as are
under age, of clandestine Espousals and Contracts, and of what account they are
to be had of in the Church, and how they may be made good: Of her that has
betrothed her self to two men, whose wife she shall be; what conditions may
be put in Espousals, and what not; what Clerks or Votaries may marry, and what
not: Of him that has married her, with whom before he has committed
adultery, and whether the same second Matrimony be good, whereupon the
resolution of the Law is, that if the woman knew not that he had an other wife,
he cannot leave her, his first wife being dead, under pretense he had an other
wife alive when he married her; but if she knew of it, and did join with him
in practice for making away his wife, he cannot marry her, no though he were
separated from the other, as concerning bed and board: Whether leprous men, and
other which are infected with like contagious diseases may marry, and whether
being married, the marriage may not be dissolved upon this point: Of kindred
Spiritual or Legal, and in what sort they hinder marriage; of him that has
known his own wifes sister, or his own cousin german, and whether this
offense do break the Matrimony that is contracted, or do hinder the
Matrimony that is to be contracted: Within what degrees of consanguinitie or
affinity a man may marry: Of such as are cold of Nature, or enchanted by
Sorcery, whether they may marry; the like respect is of women, who are unfit
for men: Of such as marry against the Interdict or prohibition of the Church,
and what penalty they incur: What children be held legitimate: who they be
that may be accusers or witnesses in cases of dissolution of Marriages between
man and wife: Of Divorces between man and wife, which are caused by the
diversity of minds that are then between them, for that one seeks to go
apart from the other; and in what cases divorces are allowed, and how many
kinds there be of them: of gifts between man and wife, what security they
have in Law, and that the Dowry after the divorce be restored to the woman, so
that it be not in case of Adultery, and other such like filthiness: Of second
Marriages, in what cases they are to be permitted, in what not.

SECT. 7.
What is the subject of the fifth Book of the Decretals.

THe fifth Book treats of such Criminal matters as are handled in
Ecclesiastical Courts, wherein the proceeding is either by accusation, whereto
the Accuser does subscribe his name, because it tends to punishment: or else
by denunciation, whereto the Informer does not subscribe his name, because it
tends only to the amendment of the party: or by Inquisition, which for the
most part is not used, but upon fame precedent, albeit sometimes it be without
fame: if once the fame be proved, then may inquiry be had of the truth of the
fact, but yet without malice or slander. The Criminal matters which are
prosecuted in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and censured by Canonical
punishments, are Symonie, and selling of Ecclesiastical graces and benefices;
whereupon Prelates are forbid to let out their Jurisdictions under an annual
rent, and Masters and Preachers to teach for money. The punishment of Jews and
Saracens, and their servants, that is, If a Jew have a servant that desires to
be a Christian, the Jew shall be compelled to sell him to the Christian for
xij. pence: That it shall not be lawful for them to take any Christian to be
their servant: That they may repair their old Synagogues, but not build new:
That it shall not be lawful for them upon good Friday, to open either their
doors, or windows: That their wives neither have Christian Nurces, nor
themselves be nurces to Christian women: That they wear diverse apparel from
the Christians, whereby they may be known, and other ignominies of like sort.
Who be Heretics, and what be their punishments: who be Schismatics, and what
be their punishments. Of Apostates, Anabaptists, and their punishments: Of
those that kill their own children, and their punishments: Of such as lay out
young children, and other feeble persons to other men's pity, which themselves
have not, and how they are to be punished: Of voluntary or casual murders:
Of Tilts, Barriers, and Tornament: Of Clerks that fight in combat: Of Archers
that fight against Christians: Of whoredom, and adultery, and how they are to
be punished: Of such as ravish women, and their punishment: Of Thieves and
Robbers: Of usurie and the pain thereof: Of deceit and falsehood: Of Sorcerie:
Of collusion and cosenage, and the revealing of the same: Of childrens
offenses, and that they are not to be punished with the like severitie as men's
offenses are: Of Clerks hunters, or hawkers, who if they often times use and
sport themselves therein, if they be Bishops, they are to be suspended from the
Communion three months; if Ministers or Priests two, but if he be a Deacon, he
is to be suspended from his office: If a Clerk often times strike other men,
and being admonished to forbear such kind of violence, do nevertheless
continue in his folly, he is to be deposed: If a Bishop cause any man
rigorously to be whipped, he is to be suspended from saying service two months:
Such as speak ill of Princes, and other like great persons spiritual or
temporal, are to be punished, so that others by their example may take heed to
speak ill, specially such as blaspheme the Majesty of the Almighty God: If
Clerks excommunicated, deposed, or interdicted, or that came to the highest
order without passing thorough the inferior orders, or that came to the same
order covenously, and deceitfully, or being not ordered at all, or at the least
not ordered lawfully, dare take upon the^ either to minister the holy
Sacraments, or to say divine Service, they are to be deposed from their office,
and from their benefice, and never after to be ordered: Prelates are not to
greeve their subjects, either with rash suspension, or excommunication of their
persons, or interdicting of their Churches, but they are to execute all those
censures of the Church in judicial order: they are not easily to suffer any
man to hold two Benefices, where one may suffice, or to retain any thing to
his own use, in a Church wherein he has collation or subjection, and that he
is not to bestow any benefice upon any that is unworthy for the same, either in
life or doctrine, with sundry other excesses of Prelates in the like sort: If
any begin to build a Church or Chapel to the prejudice of an other, and it be
denounced unto him by the Parson or Parishioners of the other Church: That he
go no further in the said work, until the Law has determined it, whether it
be a nuisance or not. Of the Privileges of Prelates, and wherein they exceed
their privilege: Of Canonical purgation which is enjoined, when as yet there
is no certain proof of the crime, but there is a common voice and fame of the
fact, which is to be cleared by the oath of him who is charged by the fame,
that he has not committed the fact, and the oath of his good neighbors, who
swear they believe that he has taken a true oath: Other kinds of this vulgar
Purgation were observed by the Ancients, as the trial by Water, by the Cross,
and by the Body of our Lord, etc. and these were of ordinary use amongst our
own Ancestors, especially in the darker times. The Saxons (besides the trial
by Combat, which they called Campe-fight) commonly used their fire and water
Ordeals. Their trial by water was performed, either in hot or cold. In cold
water, the parties suspected were judged innocent, if their bodies were not
borne up by the water, contrary to the course of Nature. In hot, they were to
put their bare arms up to the elbowes, which if they brought out without hurt,
they were concerved to be clear of the crime. They that were tried by the
Fire-ordeall, were either to pass barefooted over a certain number of hot
glowing ploughshares, or otherwise to carry burning irons in their hands, a
certain number of paces, and according as they sped, they were judged nocent
or innocent. This horrible experiment of Fire-Ordeall in the first kind, was
tried upon Queen Emma, the Mother of Edward the Confessor, with a success
worthy of her chastiue. An example of the second kind, and the like event, is
recorded by Eadmerus, who relates, that in the reign of William the second, A
company of fellows being suspected to have destroyed the Kings Dear, were
enjoined for then trial, to carry burning irons, which accordingly they did
without hurt; the issue thereof being reported to the King, was entertained
with such a remarkable indignation, that he suriously replied, Quid est hoc?
Deus est justus Iudex? pereat qui deinceps hoc crediderit. How solemnly and
superstiuously these Ordeals were performed; see Lambard out of his ancient
Author, in the word Ordalium. Read also the Saxon Laws of King Aethelstane,
chap. 23. where it is said, that the party suspected, three days before his
trial, must go to the Priest, and hear Mass, and feed for that time upon
bread, and salt, and water, and wurts, etc. See the rest in the Law. These
kinds of Purgations remained in use amongst our Ancestors, till the time of
Hen the 3. in whose reign they began to be abolished, rather by desuetude and
in reverence to this Canon Law, than by any Statute of the Realm: as learned
Mr Seldom has observed in the Notes upon his forementioned Eadmerus P. 204
where also the Reader may see, how far forth they were forbidden. Only the
trial by Combat, though it be abrogated by the Canon here, is
notwithstanding permitted by the Law of this Land, but of very rare and
considerate practice.
Of vulgar purgation, which was performed by combat, and passing by burning
fire, which is worthily rejected, for that thereby the innocent many times was
condemned, and God thereby did seem to be tempted: Of injuries and wrongs
done: Of Ecclesiastical punishments due to offenses, among which one is, That
so often as one offends, so often he is to be punished: And that Prelates
do not take reward, to wink at men in their sins, or turn corrections into
pecuniary pains, for gain of filthy lucre: Of Penances and Pardons, or
remissions: Of Excommunication, which is the greatest punishment in the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and who, and in what cases men are to be stricken
thereby.

PART. II.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
What uses the Civil and Canon Law have in this our Realm; and that the
Civil Law respects, matters of ordinary and extraordinary Cognizance.

OF all those goodly and excellent Titles of the Civil and Canon Law, so full
of wisdom, so full of variety, so well serving for every moment, and state of
the commonwealth, in peace or in war, as nothing can be more, the
Professors thereof have very little use here within this Realm.

For first, for the Civil Law, (beside the two Universities of this land, that
of Oxford, and the other of Cambridge, to whom the Kings of this Realm have
granted a larger liberty, in the practice of these Laws, than to any other
place of the Kingdom; for that their purpose was, to have young men trained up
there, in a more ripe knowledge of these professions, that when they came
abroad, they might be more ready in all matters of negotiation and commerce,
that the Prince or state should have need of the^ to deal in with foreign
Nations, when they were thereto called; to which the Laws of this Land serve
nothing at all, by reason of the difference that is between their Law, (which
is either wholly the Civil Law, or for the most part grounded on it) and the
Law of our Nation) a very few Titles are left to the practisers thereof to
deal in, and most of them seldom and rare in use, as shall be hereafter
showed, so that I may well divide all the profession of the Civil Law here
with us, into matters Ordinary and Extraordinary.

SECT. 2.
That the matters of ordinary Cognizance are Marine, of which some are Civil,
others Criminal, and what the Civil Marine matters are; and what manner of
proceedings they have.

THe matters of ordinary cognizance of the Civil Law here in this Land, are
Marine matters, of which some are Civil, some are Criminal.

Civil matters are those which concern either the free use of the Sea it
self, or the rights that men have to trade and traffic thereupon, or the
bargains, sales, or contracts, or as it were contracts that are made or done
beyond or upon the maine Sea, or any creek thereof, or within as much space
from the Sea, as the greatest winter wave runs out, for any matter belonging
to any negotiation or merchandise, or any other thing to the Ship or trade
appertaining

And first for the use of the Sea it self; the Law holds it to be ff adlegem
Rhodian. de Jactu. tot. tit.
common, and that every one has right to trade and traffic upon the same, so
that it be without the prejudice of that Prince or Land, to whom the Sea is
adjoining. The like may be said for the shore it self, so that it be either
for the refreshing of themselves with water, or victual, or for the repayring
of their Ships, or buying any thing necessary thereunto, or it be either for
uttering of any commodity they have, or buying any thing again of the people,
upon whose land they touch: In which case it were barbarous to repel any,
coming in peaceable manner; albeit it may happen upon some jealousy of the
State, either for that it has some great foreign Enemy, whose continual
invasion they fear, or that the Sea coasts are much infested with Pirates,
that in this case resistance may be made; but when it is made manifest by flag
of Truce, or otherwise, they are no other but well meaning men, they are to be
entertained with all kindness

For Contracts in Marine causes, some are contracts in deed, some are as it
were contracts: Contracts in deed are all bargains and sales whatsoever, made
between Merchant and Merchant for any commodity, fraught or traffic in the
ship, or any sale or bargain made of the ship, or any thing thereto belonging,
as Masts, cordage, anchorage, victuals, or any other thing of like nature,
necessary for the employment of the ship.

Those things which are as it were contracts, are those perpetual rights,
which are between the Purser or Master of the Ship, and the Passengers, or
between one passenger and an other.

The perpetual right which is between the Purser or Master of the Ship, and
the Passengers is, that the Purser or Master be answerable for all such wares
or goods as are brought into the ship, whether it be delivered to himself, or
any of his Mariners: for he ought not only to be just and honest himself, but
also use the ministry of honest people about him; and therefore the Master of
the ship is no less bound for their persons than his own. The Passengers
again are honestly and readily to pay the Master of the ship their fraught,
and all such other charges of diet, and other provision as they have put him
to; wherein if there be any default of any side, the Law affordes an action
called Exercitoria, whereby the one or the other may be releeved.

The Master of the ship is he, who has the charge of the L (...). si. de
exercitoria axion.
whole anchorage and government of the ship, and his office is either to let
the ship to hire, or to buy and sell Merchandise, or to plie fares, or to
provide tacle and furniture for the ship.

The Purser, whom the Law calls Exercitor Navis, is D. ead l. prima 16. de
exersit. action.
he to whom all the profit or revenue of the ship does come, whether it be in
his own right, or in an others.

The perpetual right that is between passengers and passengers, and sailors
and passengers is, that in case of ejectments, and casting out of goods, and
other merchandise into the Sea in time of tempests, or other dangers, by rocks
or quick sands, for the lightning of the ship, because it is for the common
good of all that are in the ship, and the preservation of the rest of the
fraught of the ship, it be made up with the common contribution of all: for
good reason it is, that they whose goods are saved hereby, should again with
their goods redeem the others loss, according to such proportion of goods, as
they have in the ship, and the Law of the Sea allows.

But in cases of Ejectments, the Law of the Sea is this, (which was taken from
the people of Rhodes, who in old time were great seafaring men, and discoverers
of sundry countries, whose Rules even to this day are holden for good among all
Mariners, for the great equity and indifferency that is in them) that as
well the Master or Purser of the ship himself shall contribute for the
preservation of his ship, as also the passengers for such ware as they have in
the ship, of what sort soever it be, albeit happily it be but of small weight,
as pearls, precious stones, and such like; and if perchance there be some
passengers in the ship, who have no ware nor merchandise in it, yet because
themselves are a burden to the ship, estimate is to be made of his or their
apparel, rings, and jewels, according to which, he or they are to contribute
toward the loss of such things as are cast out into the sea: neither is there
any thing in the whole ship excepted, save only those things which are put
therein to be spent, for the common good of all, as victuals, fuel, and such
like; for those things are not brought in for any one private man's use, but for
the benefit and service of all: and so much the rather, for that if victuals
fail, or other like necessaries want, every one must contribute thereto, or
impart of that which he has for his own private provision; but of men's own
bodies, unless they be servants, there is no rate to be set, because a
free-mans body cannot be esteemed.

In prising, estimate is to be made as well of those things which are lost, as
those things which are saved, and the price is to be set down, not for how
much they were bought, but for how much they might be sold, and that for the
present, lest the contributors should be overmuch charged. Neither is it to the
purpose that the goods which were lost, might have been sold for more, for
that herein regard is not to be had of the gain, but of the loss. And if any
thing that was thrown out were known to be decayed or made worse by washing
with salt water, it is not to be esteemed as a new fresh thing, but the price
thereof is to be abated accordingly.

Now the contribution is to be made in this manner, first the loss is to be
set down, then the rate of those things which are saved, out of which must be
drawn an equal portion, porportionable to the quantity of every man's goods he
has in the ship, to make up the loss, deducting out of the losers goods for
himself, so much as is answerable to his proportion, so that he shall neither
be made a clear saver, nor a clear loser, but in a certain quantity
rateable to his part.

But this contribution is in that case to be made, if the ship be saved; for
otherwise if a wrack happen, either before the ejectment, or in the ejectment,
then whatsoever any of the vectors or passengers catch, is his own; neither is
there any regard to be had of the loss of the ship, or of the goods, unless
perhaps afterward they be drawn out of the sea.

But here we are to note, that neither the things that are thus ejected, cease
to be the first owners, neither become his that takes them up; for because the
first owner does not count them for goods cast away, but still he bears that
mind to them, that if he may recover them, he will hold them as his own
goods, and in consideration of so much as afterward he shall recover, the
contribution in the rest shall cease.

Neither if the Master of the ship himself by violence of the tempest, shall
lose a Maste or a Sail, shall he be more allowed therefore, than a Carpenter
to whom a house is let out to be built, shall be allowed for his axe or saw,
if he break it.

Beside in matters of wrack, there is, as it were, a contract between them
which have lost their goods by shipwreck, and them upon whose Lands the said
goods are-driven, that the same be restored to them or their heirs, if they
come in due time to claim the same: and therefore it is precisely forbid by
the Law, that no man shall meddle with such L. ne quid. ff. de incendio, ruina,
and naufragio.
goods as are wrecked, and such as are proved to have stolen any thing thereout
are holden for robbers; for that such goods being cast on land, and recovered
out of the sea, remain still his who was the owner thereof, and descend upon
his heir, neither excheat unto the King, neither to any other whom the King
has privileged in this behalf. And therefore L. 1. lib. 11. C. de naufragiis.
the Emperor Constantine the great, says worthily in this case; If any ship
at any time by shipwreck be driven unto the shore, or touch at any land, let
the owners have it, and let not my Exchequer meddle with it: for what right
has my Exchequer in another man's calamity, so that it should hunt after gain
in such a woeful case as this is? And yet if no kindred appear within a year
and a day, or appearing, prove not the goods shipwracked to be theirs, the
goods come to the Exchequer even by that Law: so much that law condemns
carelessness, which is written Vigilantibus and non dormientibus. And with this
agree the Laws of this Land, as taken out of these imperial laws; whereby it
is ordered that such goods as are saved out of the wrack, shall be kept by the
view of the Sheriff, or some other chief Officer, and delivered to the hands
of such as are of the place where the goods were found, so that if any sue for
them, and prove them to be his, or to have perished in his keeping, they shall
be restored unto him without delay; otherwise they escheat unto the King, or to
him to whom the King has granted the same: And if any convey away any part of
the same goods contrary to the law, and be attainted thereof, he shall be
awarded to prison, and make fine at the Kings will, and yield damages unto the
party grieved: and a wrecke by the laws of this land, is where all living
things within the ship do perish, Mes si ud homme, ou un chien ^u c^tte escape
^iue i(...)t que le partiea que les biens sont veigu deins lan and jour, and
procue les biens destreses il avera eux arere per provision del Statute de
Westminst. I. cap. 4. fait en les ^ours del R^y E* F. 1,
but if a man, a dog, or a cat do escape out of the ship alive, it is otherwise.

For matters of contract, they are either in the petitorie, or in the
Possessorie. The Petitorie is where the property of any thing is challenged,
this of all other suites Institut. de rerum dimissione singulorum ff. de
acquirendo rerum dominio. l. adeo and toto (...)ul. C. de qua driennij
prescript. l. been
is the hardest, because the proof thereof is very difficill: for albeit the
property of things may be got by many means, as well by the law Civil, as
by the law of Nations; yet it is not a thing so easy to be proved, for that
there must concur many things to the proof of a property otherwise you shall
fail in your suit, as in a case of bargain and sail, that there was such a
contract between the buyer and the seller, that there was either money paid for
it, or that he that sold it was content to take the buyers word for it, C de
(...)uirend. possess. l. 1. ext c. 1. de consuetud^n.
that delivery was made thereof, otherwise the property passes not, but only
in some few cases, in which neither possession nor delivery is required.
Lastly, that he which sold it was rightful owner of it, otherwise can he not
pass over a thing he had no right unto.

The Lordship or property of things, is bipartite; for either it is direct or
full, such as men have when they have not only the thing it self, whereof they
are Lords or Proprietaries, but also the use and commodity thereof; or else it
is profitable, as is the hold of Tenants and Farmers, who have the use, gain,
and possession of the thing, but the Lord the property and rent in
acknowledgement of his right and Sovereignty.

The Possessorie is that right, whereby the use or possession of a thing is
claimed, of which there be three sorts: for it is either in getting of the
possession of that a man has not, or in keeping of the possession of that a
man has, or in recovering and regaining of the possession of that which is
lost.

The proceeding in all these Civil matters, is by Libell concluding to the
action, the party agent giving caution to prosecute the suit, and to pay what
shall be judged against him, if he fail in the suit; the Defendant on the
contrary part, securing his adversary by sufficient suertie, or other
caution, as shall seem meet for the present to the Judge, that he will
appear in Judgment, and will pay that which shall be adjudged against him,
and that he will ratify and allow all that his Proctor shall do in his name:
for to all these ends satisdation in Judgment is, which is nothing else but a
course to secure the adversary of that which is in debate before the Judge,
that on what side soever the cause shall have an end, the clients may be sure
to get that, which by law shall be adjudged unto them.

SECT. 3.
What are the Criminal marine matters, whereof the Law Civil holds plea
here with us, and what proceeding they have.

ANd so much of those Civil Marine matters whereof, the Civil Law here in
England usually holds plea. Now of the Criminal matters which belong to that
Court, but yet by way of Commission from the Prince, and that is that horrible
crime of Piracie, detested of God and man, the actors werein Tully calls
Enemies to all, and to Cicer. 3 lib off.
whom neither faith nor oath is to be kept.

Piracie is called of the Greek word (...), which is In an Attick sense, for
they said (...), and from this sense, (...), were called (...), Pirates, as the
Scholiast of Sopho^les has noted upon Ajax.
Deceptio in Latin, and in English Deceit, for that many times they pretend
friendship, when they intend nothing else but robbery and bloodshed; or they
are so termed of the word (...), that is, of their wandering up and down, and
resting in no place, but coasting hither and thither to do mischief.

A Pirate is a Sea-thiefe, who for to enrich himself, either by subtilty, or
open force, sets upon Merchants and others, trading by sea, ever spoiling
them of their loading, if they get the upper hand, and sometimes bereaving them
of their life, and sinking of their ships.

The proceeding of these Criminal matters, is by accusation and information,
and after by trial of twelve men upon the evidence, according to the laws of
this land, and the laws of the ancient Feudes of Lombardie, where the like
trial is, and from whence, it seems, this of ours was first derived. But
here must we note, that matters of reprisals are no piracies, although many
times there falls out no less outrage in them, for spoiling and slaying of men,
than does in the other: for that Reprisals are done by the Princes commission,
granted to the subject, for redress of some injury done to himself or his
subject, by some other foreign Prince or subject, and amends has been
required by law, and cannot be had, whereupon license is given to the subject
to releeve himself by what way he can against the other Prince, or any of his
subjects, by taking so much goods of his, as himself was indamaged; which
course is held among Princes, the rather to afford Justice where it is lawfully
demanded. Bartol. l. nullus number. 2. C. de Judeis and Coelicolis.

SECT. 4.
That the things which extraordinarily belong unto the Cognizance of the Civil
Law, are of three sorts, and concerning the first, which respects treaties
between Prince and Prince.

ANd thus much of the causes, which ordinarily do belong unto the Cognizance
of the Civil Law within this land. Now it follows, that I speak somewhat of
those things wherein the Civil Law deals incidently, and by authority of
the Prince, and is not the ordinary object of the Civil law, howsoever
otherwise they cannot be handsomely dealt in, but by such as have the skill of
the Civil Law.

Whereof there be three sorts, the first is matters of foreign treaty between
one Prince and another; the second is the ordering of martial causes, whether
they be Civil or Criminal in an Army; the last is the Judgments of Ensigns
and Arms, and the decisions for challenges of rights of Honor and
precedencie, where any of them is in controversy.

For the first, whereas all other Nations in compass round about us be
governed by the Civil Law, and treaties are to be decided by Law (both for
those things which are in question, and to be concluded by Law, and for those
things which are determined by consultation and agreed upon) who is thereto to
be chosen rather than a Civilian, to whom their law is known, as well as to
themselves: and if perhaps he understand not their language; yet he
understands that language wherein the laws themselves are written, and is
the fittest tongue for treatises between Princes and Princes, because it is a
common tongue to the learned of all the West part of the world, and thereby
every Prince shall retain his own Majesty in parlying, as it were, in his
own language, and not be forced to speak in an other Princes tongue, which,
no doubt, is a great disadvantage to him that shall treat; for that every
Nation has some proper Idiom, not so well discerned by the booke-speaker, as
perceived by the Natives of the country, where it is spoken, and wherein a
stranger may easily be deceived.

How much foreign Princes do esteem of the skill of a Civilian in these
matters, it may be understood thereby, that they never, for the most part send
any Embassage for the treaty of any league or matter of commerce, but that one
or more of them are Civilians. And if the care of these things be so great with
them, surely the estimation of the same ought not to be light with us: for by
what laws their leagues and negotiations use to be directed, by the same must
ours be ordered, so that for that point, one kind of learning must serve for
both; for that otherwise one Nation will not be convinced by the other what
their capitulations are.

Surely, such as over and besides their own experience, have the knowledge of
the Civil Law, have herein a double help above another man that wants the
same. First, their own understanding, which for the most part is of like
proportion as other folks is: Then the skill of the Laws themselves, which are
a quintessence of wit above other humane learning, and were either wholly
composed of the mature and deliberate resolutions of such Emperors as then
swayed the whole world, or were the doomes and judgments of such wise men, as
then managed the whole world, and the affairs thereof under them. But who,
when he sees a sword in it is scaberd, knows whether it will cut or not,
although the form thereof be a presumption, that it will: but, do but draw it
out of the scaberd, and try the blade thereof, and then shall you see the
sharpness of it: I make no application hereof, for that my meaning by my
words may be well enough known.

But in these matters, the wisdom of the State knows best what is to be done,
and I only remember what other Nations do, leaving the rest to their gravest
considerations, who by precedents of former times, and men of experience,
furnished with exoticke tongues, have carried this part of policy very well
and safely hitherto: but now to the or(...)g of Martial causes.

SECT. 5.
What are Martial causes, which are the second extraordinary matter belonging
to the Cognizance of the Civil Law with us.

Martial causes are either Civil or Criminal, whereof both are determinable
by the Civil law. A Civil Martial cause, is where either the Captain or the
Soldier requires some thing that is due, and withholden from him, as his
stipend, his apparel, which among the Romans was due twice a year, that is,
their Summer apparel from the first day of April to the first of September,
and their Winter from thence to April; his diet, which among the Romans was
two days hard biscuit, the third softer bread, one day wine, an other day
vinegar, one day bacon, and two days mutton; his privileges either in cases
of preferment, as to be removed from one degree to another, or in cases of
immunitie, as to be freed from all servile functions, If. de re militari and
C^eod. tit. l. 12. ff. de privilegio veteranorum: and de castrensi peculio and
C. eodemtit. l. 12. C. de erogatione militaris annonae and C. de vest. militari.
and sundry other like, which a diligent reader may gather out of the titles of
the Digest and Code of military affairs, and other like titles which
accompany them.

Soldiers faults are either proper to themselves, or common with others.

Those are common with others, which other men fall into, and are corrected
with like ordinary proceeding as other crimes of like nature are, as
manslaughter, theft, adultery, and such like.

Those are proper which do properly appertain to military discipline, and
are punished by some unu(...) or extraordinary punishment, as are these, not
to appear at Musters: to serve under him he ought not to serve: to vage or
wander long from the Tents, although he return of his own accord: to forsake
his Colors, or his Captain: to leave his standing: to fly over to the Enemy:
to betray the Host: to be disobedient to his Captain, Coronell, or Lieutenant,
to lose or sell his Armor, or to steal another man's: to be negligent in
forage, or providing of victual: to neglect his watch: to make a mutiny, to
fly first out of the field, or other like, which are delivered in the late
cited titles. Concerning this Arrian, who wrote the life of Alexander the
great, thus says; Every thing is counted an offense in a Soldier, which is
done contrary to the common discipline; as to be negligent, to be stubborn, to
be slothful.

The punishments wherewith Soldiers are corrected, are these, either corporal
punishment, or a pecuniarie mulct, or injunction of some service to be done, or
a motion or removing out of their places, and sending away with shame.

By capital punishment is understood for the most part death, or at the least
beating, unless happily it be pardoned, either for the unskilfulnesse of the
Soldier, or for the mutiny of the company, being thereto drawn by wine and
wantonness, or for the miseration or pity of the party offending.

All which a wise Judge moderateth according to the quality of the person, the
quantity of the offense, and the opportunity of the time.

SECT. 6.
That the third and last matter of extraordinary Cognizance in the Civil Law
here with us, concerns the bearing of Arms, and ranging of every man in his
proper place of honor: and first of Armory.

THe last extraordinary matter that the Civil Law Judge deals in, is the
bearing of Arms, and the ranging of every man into his room of honor,
according as his place requires: and here first of Arms. For skill in Armory,
although it be a thing now almost proper to the Heralds of Arms, who were in
old time called Feciales, or Caduceatores, because they were messengers of
war and peace; either to proclaim the one, or denounce the other: yet the
ground thereof they have from the Civil Law, so that thereby to this day they
may be directed in their skill, or controlled if they do amiss.

For besides, that there are many other places in the Law C. ut nemo privatus
praediis suis, vel alienis vela regia imponat, ut nemini liceat sine Jud.
author. signa imponere. etc. De statuis and imaginib. ut nemini liceat fignum
salvatoris, etc. De his qui potentiorum nomine titulos praediis suis affigunt.
and ibi doct. ff. dererum divisio. l. sanctum. C. de ingenuis and manumiss. l.
adrecognoscenda ff. de rerum divisione l. sanctum.
which touch Armory, as appears by the titles here quoted in the margent,
Barthol. himself makes a special tractate thereof, and divides the whole
matter of Arms into three ranks, according to the diverse sorts of men that
bare them: for some are Arms of some public dignity and office, as the Arms
of the Legate, or Proconsull, the Arms of Bishops, the Arms of the Lord
Admiral; other are Arms of special dignities, as Arms of Kings and Princes,
which no man is to bear or paint in his house or stuff, unless it be for to
show his duty or subjection therein.

The third sort is, of those which are private men's Arms, of whom part have
them by the grant of the Prince, or by authority of those, to whom the Prince
has given power to grant Arms to others, as has the Earl Marshall within
this Realm of England; others have taken them by their own authority, which
albeit in former times they might do, as also they might take such names as
every one did like of (for names and signs in the beginning were invented, for
to know and discern one man from an other) and as every man might change his
name, so might he change his sign, so that it were not done in fraud and
deceit: but after it was forbidden, both that any man should C. de mutatione
nominis l 1. ff. de Falsis, l. sal si nominis.
change his name, because it was not thought it could be done with any good
meaning, and that no man should bear Arms of his own authority; and
therefore Officers were appointed under Princes (as I have said) who should
give Arms to such as deserved well of the commonwealth, either in war or
peace: for albeit in the beginning Arms and Colors were proper to men of
war, to avoid confusion in the host, and to discern one company from an
other, yet when it came to be a matter of honor, it was challenged no less by
men of peace, than by men of war; for true indeed is that saying of Tully,
Parva sunt foris arma, nisi est consilium domi: and the Emperor speaking of
the benefit that Advocates, and such like bring to States L. Advocati C. de
Advocatis diversorum ^udicorum.
and Commonwealths, says thus, Advocates which break the doubtful fates of
causes, and with the strength of their defense sundry times, as well in public
causes as in private, raise up those that are fallen, and releeve those which
are wearied, do no less good unto mankind, than if by war and wounds they
saved their parents and country: for we (says he) do not count, that they
only do war for our Empire, which do labor with sword, shield, and target,
but also our Advocates, for indeed the Advocates or Patrons of causes do
war, who by confidence of their glorious voice do defend the hope, life, and
posterity of such as be in danger: thus says he; and thereupon comes that
distinction of Castrense peculium, Et quasi castrense peculium, signifying
thereby, that albeit Counselors to the state, Lawyers, and such like be not
actual warriers, yet they are representative warriers, and do no less serve
the Commonwealth than they. The Soldier rises betime in the morning, that he
may go forth to his exploit, the Advocate that he may provide for his Clients
cause; he wakes by the trumpet, the other by the cock; he orders the
battle, the other his Clients business; he takes care his tents be not
taken, the other that his Clients cause be not overthrown: so then either of
them is a warrier, the one abroad in the field, the other at home in the City.
Besides Barthol. treats in that place, what things are borne in Arms, either
natural, as beasts, birds, fishes, mountains, trees, flowers, sun, moon,
stars, or such like: or artificial, not taken from things existent, as
colors, simple and mixed, divided by halfes or quarters, or by lines, direct,
cross, overthwart, or such other; then how each of these is to be carried,
wherein Art must follow Nature, that every thing figured, be borne according to
the nature of that which it does figure, and not otherwise: and therefore as in
ensigns, flagges, or standards, the spear or shaft goes before, and the
streamer or colors follow after, so the face of every creature that is figured
or described in the banner or hatchment, must look unto the shaft or spear;
unless a man bear two creatures, one looking toward the other, for then this
observation has no place, for vain it is to conjecture where things are
certain, otherwise it is the nature of the face to go before, and the body to
follow after: and the like reason is of the parts of every creature which is
likewise borne in Armor, which are distinguished by before and behind, whose
site must be such, that the head look to the spear, otherwise would it seem
to go back like a monster: but if the forepart alone of any creature be borne
in a Scucheon, as often it happens that men give only a Lion, Bear, or Bulls
head for their Arms, then must not the head directly look unto the shaft, but
aside: further, every of these creatures be so described in the coat, as his
vigor and generositie be best set out, whether it be a fierce or savage beast,
or a mild and gentle creature. But for colors, his rule is, that the noblest
color be put in the first part of the field, howsoever the coat be divided,
quarter or pale. And of colors, the golden color is the chiefest, as that
which does figure the Sun, which is the fountain of light, which is most
acceptable to every man's eye. The next is Purple or Red, which does figure the
fire, that is the highest and noblest of the four Elements, and next the sun
it self in dignity. The third is Blew, of the Heralds called Azure, and
Ceruleus in Latin, which figureth the Air, which is a clear and transparent
body, and most capable of light, and comes in nobility next after the fire.
The fourth is White, which comes near to the Light, and therefore is more
noble than Black, that draws near to darkness, and therefore is the basest
of all Colors. And for mixed colors, as every one has more or less of White
or Black, so either they are nobler or baser in reputation or degree. And thus
much in general as concerning the knowledge of Arms.

SECT. 7.
Concerning the Places and Successions of Princes, and other honorable
Personages, and first of their Places.

NOw follows what the Civil Law holds, as concerning Princes, and other
honorable Persons, and their successions and places, which a grave Judge of
this Land has anciently acknowledged to belong unto the Civil Nedham 37. Hen.
6. fol. 21.
Law.

By the Civil Law, all power comes from God, as the Scripture teaches, and
among powers the two greatest are the Empire, and the Priesthood; for as God
has ordained the one to rule the outward man, and to bring all his actions
within the compass of reason, and so to establish commonwealths, and to order
the same: So also has he provided the other for the instruction of the inward
man, and the planting of Religion among men.

By the Empire, I understand, not only the Empire of Rome (which sometimes
bare rule over most part of the world, at the least ten mighty Kingdoms, which
now are grown into particular Empires and Monarchies themselves) but also
every several Kingdom, which acknowledges no other Emperor than his own
Sovereign; for howsoever they differ in name and title, yet is the office it
self all one: For every one of them is Gods immediate Vicar upon earth in
their own kingdoms, for matters appertaining unto Justice. Whereupon the
Civil Law gives them very honorable titles, sometimes tearming them Gods upon
earth, for the great authority they have over ff. de leg. 2. l. ff de legate. 2.
l. C. 4 tit. 1^. C. 1. tit. 3 l. 56. C. 1. tit. 1. l. 5.
other men under God; sometimes Ministers of God, for the service they do God
in their commonwealths; sometimes most holy, and most religious, for the care
they ought to have about Religion, and correcting of those things which are
done against the fear of God; for a King ought in all things to propound the
word of God before him for his C. 1. tit. 1 l 5.
rule, and to follow the doctrine of the Apostles; sometimes they are called
most mild, because a King in all the course of his life, but specially in
matters of punishment ought to imitate the mercy and favor of Almighty God.
C. 5. tit. 4 l. 23.


Although the Emperor or King be reckoned among his Nobility, because he
should not be puffed up with the glory L. fin. C. de ver. signif. c. de
dignitat. l. 8 lib. 12.
of his place, and conceive he were of a more excellent mould than the rest,
when indeed we are all of one, and the self same clay; yet he is both by the
ordinance of God and man (...), (as the Apostle terms him) among them, that 1
Petric. 2. ver. 13.
is, one who is supreme Sovereign above the rest, and whom they ought in all
things to obey, so it be not against the Law of God, and common Justice; for
himself is in steed of the whole Law, yea he is the Law it self, and the Abc.
signific. via ext* de penitentiis etc. C 6 t 23. l. 19. C. de testib. l. omnium.
only interpreter thereof, as in whose breast is the whole knowledge of the
same; which albeit the Doctors do hold with a qualification, as thereby
understanding, not only the Princes person, but also his Chancellours, both
which put together, make up a perfect state of a Prince: yet forasmuch as all
that benefit of wisdom and government that comes from them unto the
Commonwealth, is principally derived from the Prince, as from the head, who
has vouchsafed to make them, as it were, members of his body, and so by them
to derive the power of his government unto all; it may be rightly said, that in
the Princes breast, rests the fullness of all knowledge, for the well
ordering of his commonwealth; for what they see, they see for him, what they
hear, they hear for his use, what they understand, they understand to do him
service, and so consequently of the rest of the actions of the mind and body,
they obey the Prince as their Sovereign: so then as the Prince has the
primacie in the government of his commonwealth, and all those which govern
under him, govern by, and for him; so also has he the precedencie, and
protoclisie, or foresitting in all assemblies before the rest, and such other
as have precedencie or foresitting, have it by the Princes indulgencie.

Next unto the Prince is his Queen, who shines by the C. 7 tit. 37. l. 3. in
princip.
beams of her King, and has the like prerogative as himself has. After them
comes next in place the Kings Children, because children in a sort are
partakers of their Fathers dignity: but yet among children there is a
difference, that the male be preferred before the female, and among those which
are males, the eldest have the pre-eminence in going, sitting, speaking, and
other like matters of respect. After the Kings Children follow in the next
rank Dukes, after them Marquesses, then Earls, fourthly Vicounts, and last
Barons; all which have dignities either heritable, or granted by the bounty of
the Prince, whereupon their nobility is founded, and whereby they only and no
other are to be accounted Peers of the Land. Among these, for courtesy sake,
are reckoned such as descend of Noble Houses, every one according to his
degree, until the third generation: L. 1. c de dignitat. lib. 12.
and the daughters of these great Houses, so long as they marry to any that
are in degree of Peers, retain their fathers dignity, but if they marry
under the degree of Peers, then they lose their fathers place, and follow the
degree of their husband; which notwithstanding is in practice otherwise here
among us, but without any warrant of Law. The like is of the Widows of the
Peers, who L. Mulieres 13. C. de dignit. l. 12. c. de equestri dignitat. l.
unic. lib. 12.
while they live sole and unmarried, retain the nobility of their husbands;
but if they marry, then they follow the condition of their second husbands, be
it honorable or otherwise.

Next in place after Peers come Knights, whereof Cujacius Cujacius lib de
Feudis.
following the modern French Heraldrie, makes three sorts; one whereof he
calls Chevalliers, the other Bannerets, the third Bachilers, but sets
down no proper difference of the one from the other; and therefore I leave
that to be enquired of those, which shall be curious thereof. Among the
Romans, for ought that I have read, L. cumte. c. de Nuptiis.
there was but one order of them, and they were next in degree to the Senators
themselves, as with us they are to the Peers.

Between Knights and Doctors of the Law, has ever been question for
precedencie, since either of them has been in credit in Commonweals, as may
appear both by the comparison that Tully makes between Lucius Murena, a
Knight of Rome, and Publ. Sulpitius a Lawyer, either of them standing for the
Consulship, in his eloquent Oration made for Murena, and many disputes of
Bartol and Baldus, arguing the case to and fro, which although it be yet
disputable in foreign Countries, where the Civil Law is in credit; yet here
among us where all preferment is taken from it, and the Professors thereof are
shut up, as it were, into a narrow corner of their profession, it is without
controversy, and the prioritie thereof indubitable: but yet this Chassaneus de
gloria mundi lib. 9.
is the resolution of those which are learned in this point, that in such acts
as concern learning, a Doctor is to be preferred before a Knight, but in acts
that concern military knowledge, a Knight takes place before a Doctor: but in
other acts which are neither proper to the one, nor to the other, first are
preferred such Doctors as attend about the Prince; secondly such Knights as
wait upon the Prince; thirdly such Doctors as being not about the Prince, are
excellent in learning; fourthly come Knights without any place of preferment;
lastly Doctors of meaner gifts and place.

Although by the Civil Law there be no Gentlemen of title under Knights, but
all the rest went under the name of people, yet in other commonwealths there
are, and with us be, even in this rank, which have names of pre-eminence,
whereby they are in degree above the rest; as with the French there are l^s
Gentilhommes, and le Gens de ordinances, and with us are Squiers and Gentlemen,
all which give Ensigns or Coat-Armours, and thereby are distinguished from the
meaner people: in which respect Bartol calls them Noble, but yet of a weak
nobility, for that it has no further prerogative Bartol (...). de Insign.
in it, than that it makes them differ from the baser sort of people.

Of these two sorts of Gentlemen with us, the Squier has the priority, And so
it might have seemed by the English name. for though we now call this kind of
Gentleman an Esquier, yet our Ancestors called such a one S^yld-cnapa, a
th^eld-knave, that was the knave (or as we say now, the boy of servant) that
used to bear a Shield or other Armor after his Master in the wartes: and this
is answerable to the Latin Armiger, and to the original of the dignity;
whereas the word Esquier (which we now use) fio^ the French, properly notes an
other thing. L. 1. c. de dignitut. lib. 10. and 12.
who seems by the common name we give him in Latin, to have had his origin,
either for that he carried the Armor of the King, Duke, or other great Homer.
Iliad. Plin. lib. 35. natural. histor
personage, as we see not only in holy Scriptures Saul and Jonathan had their
Armour-bearers; but in Poets and other profane stories, Patroclus was Achilles
Armor-bearer, and Clitus great Alexanders: whereupom some write that (...),
which is he whom we call Armiger in Latin, is a footeman, that with a spear,
shield, or head piece, follows an armed Knight in battle, or rather as some
other suppose, it is the footman himself armed in the field: howsoever the
word be taken, this is sure, that these were men of good account in the old
time, as those which won themselves credit out of war, and so their
estimation remained in their posterity; and as those were in time before, so
are these which are in our days, as descending, for the most part, from their
worthy Ancestors.

There is no dubbing or creating of these by the Princes hand, or him to whom
the Prince has given authority, as it is in the creating of the Nobility,
and the making of Knights, but every one whom the Captain has vouchsafed that
service, is by the service it self a Squier; and that not only he which has
done the service in war, but also such which have done any equivalent service
in peace, as Lievtenants, and Sherifes of Shires, and Justices of Peace within
their County: for even in this, as in other Promotions has that distinction
of the Law place, of Castrensis peculii, and quasi castrensis, whereby service
of the Commonwealth at home, is levelled and made equal with that abroad.
Gentlemen have their beginning either of blood, as that they are borne of
worshipful parents, or that they have done some thing worthily in peace or
war, whereby they deserve to bear Arms, and to be accounted Gentlemen, for
he is a Gentleman who is commonly so taken and reputed.

And this is the last and lowest order of them to whom Law does allow any
challenge of precedencie.

SECT. 8.
Concerning the Succession of great Personages in their places of Honor.

NOw it follows, that I speak something also, how great personages one
succeed an other in their places of honor.

And first, to begin with the Empire it self, as the greatest earthly dignity
under God, albeit in the beginning it were raised up by no right, but by
usurpation, Julius Caesar changing the former government of the State, and
challenging to himself the whole managing of the same; yet after it came to an
orderly course, insomuch as he that had the present possession of it, disposed
it to his best liking by his last Will and Testament. So Julius himself
devised it to Octavius his sisters son: and albeit that devise took not
effect, by reason of the treason that was wrought against Julius own person,
so that Octavius was feign to recover it by an other right, even by the death
of Lepidus and Antonius his colleagues in office; yet that very Will of Julius
gave a pretense to Octavius, who after was called Augustus (because he did
increase the Empire with many worthy Victories) to stand for the inheritance of
the Empire; in consideration of which title the Senate and people of Rome more
easily submitted themselves unto his government. Augustus in like sort
bequeathed it to Tiberius, and Tiberius to Caius: and so it came from one to an
other, until some of them by cruelty and licentiousness of life, became so
odious to God and man, that the people rose against them, and bereft them of
that liberty, which they had prescribed in appointing of their Successors, and
somewhiles themselves, and somewhiles the Soldiers made choice of whom they
thought good, or by whom they thought best to be rewarded. And thus the right
of Succession unto the Empire, was tossed up and down many hundred years betwixt
Inheritance, Bequest, and Election, until at the last, it came unto that
established state, as now it is in, and settled Electours of the Empire, so
often as it happened to be void. Succession in Kingdoms, in most part of the
world, in former time has been, and at this day is by right of blood, (a few
only excepted, which are Elective, as the Kingdom of Poland is at this day)
and in Succession the eldest son takes place before the rest; and if there
be no heir male, then the eldest daughter succeeds in the kingdom, and her
issue: for Kingdoms (as also succession in other dignities) are impartible.
And yet France (to exclude Edward the third from the inheritance of the Crown
thereof, who descended of Isabel the sister of Charles the fair, and so was
next heir male unto the kingdom of France) alleged for themselves the Law
Salick, pretending none which claimed by the woman, albeit he were the next
heir male in blood, was to succeed, as long as there were of the male line
alive, how far soever they were off in degree from the last King deceased.
But this is but a mere device of the French, fathered upon some rotten Record
of that part of their Nation, called Salii; of whom otherwise they have nothing
memorable to speak of, as being the basest Nation among them all, of whom they
report their people to have bin compounded: but this devise served their turn
then, whether it were anciently invented, or newly coined. But howsoever they
oppose themselves against women's government, as Bodine their countryman
Bodin. lib. 6. de repub.
has of late stretched out the strength of his wit to devise reasons against
the government of that sex: certain it is, that the Law of God has allowed
it, as it appears in the example of Debora, who being a Prophetess, governed
Israel forty years, and by her direction got the Israelites a mighty
victory over Sisera the Captain of the host of Jabin: and we among other
Nations, have found by experience, gunaicocratie or women's government is
nothing so unfortunate, as Bodine would make us believe it is. For both in our
late Queen, and also in her sister, (except only the case of Religion, wherein
she followed the error of the time, and was carried away more with zeal than
knowledge, and thereby is more to be pitied than to be envied) what is in
their government, the wisest Man-Prince in the world would not desire to be in
his own Regiment? for what is either in their private carriages, (so you give
no ear to virulent and malicious tongues, who report surmises for substances,
and tales for truths) or in their public government, (so you lay not other
men's faults to their charges) that any man may justly blame? For that I may
pass over the rest of their Heroical virtues, fit for women of their State
(specially the late Queen, who was peerless among all Queens that ever went
before her, and unmatchable, as I verily do believe, by any that ever shall
succeed her) as their magnanimity whereby they subdued, not only their
domestical enemies, but vanquished even their foreign foes, were their
designements never so dangerous, not showing any token of discouragement,
either in the treasonable attempts of the one, or in the malicious complotments
of the other.

What an excellent work of hers was that, that then when all her neighbor
Kingdoms round about her were drunk with the cup of the fornication of the
whore of Babylon, she alone came out of Babylon, and so continued constant to
the end, mauger the threats of the red fiery Dragon, and the floods of water
he cast out of his mouth after her? How excellent did she show her self in
those two virtues which do chiefly preserve Princes States, that is, Mercy and
Judgment, the Records of her time do show, so that I may spare to remember
any by name, which happily would not be well taken.

And yet, truth it is, that men's government is more agreeable to Nature than
women's is, whom God in the beginning put in subjection under man, and who for
the most part are by nature weak in body, and thereby unable to put in
execution the great affairs of a Kingdom, and unsettled in Judgment, and so
hardly can determine that which is right, and settle themselves thereupon: yet
by the numeration of certain ill governing Queens, to conclude a generality
against all government of women, is but an ill kind of arguing; for even by the
like reason a man might conclude against Kings, of which sort, although there
has been many good, whom God has used as instruments to work great good
unto people in every Kingdom, yet more of them have been evil, as the
Stories of every country will show; and to abridge God of his power, that he
cannot as well govern by a woman as by a man, when it is his good pleasure so
to do, were great injury to God, and a great discredit to all woman kind: but
to return thither where I left.

In succession of Kings a question has been, where the King has had sons
both before he came to the Kingdom and after, which of them is to succeed,
he that was borne before the Kingdom, as having the prerogative of his
birthright, or he that was borne after, as being brought into the world under
a greater planet than the other, neither has there wanted reason or example
for each side to found themselves on: for Xerxes the son of Darius King of
Persia Herodot. lib. 4. Justin. lib. 11. Plutarchus in vita Artaxerxis.
being the eldest birth after his father was enthronized in the Kingdom,
carried away the Empire thereof from his brother Artemines or Artobazanes borne
before his father came to the royal possession thereof: so Arseces the son of
another Darius borne in the time of his fathers Empire carried away the garland
from his brother Cyrus borne before the Empire: so Jews Duke of Millan borne
after his father Guicciard. l. 1. Histor. Blondus Decad. 2. lib. 6. Mich.
Ritius l. 2 de regib. Hungar. Sigeb. in Croni^.
was Duke, was preferred to the Dukedom, before his brother Galliasius borne
before the Dukedom. But these examples notwithstanding, and the opinion of
sundry Doctors to the contrary, common use of succession in these latter days
has gone to the contrary, and that not without good reason: for that it is not
meet, that any that have right to any succession by the prerogative of their
birthright (such as all elder brethren have) should be despoiled thereof,
except there be some evident cause of incapacity to the contrary.

Besides, sundry contentions have risen in kingdoms between Bartol. l si viva
matre c de b^^is maternis primogeniti sil^^ non excludunt secundogenitum in
regno. ff. de liberis and posthumis l. in suis.
the issue of the eldest son of the King, dying before his father, and the
second brother surviving the father, who should reign after the father, the
Nephew challenging the same unto him, by the title of his fathers birthright,
and so by the way of representation; for the eldest son, even the father yet
living, bears the person of the father, how much then rather his father being
dead? Whereupon the Law calls as well the son Filiusfamilias, as the father
Paterfamilias, for that the son, even during the fathers life, is as it were
Lord of his fathers state: the other claiming as eldest son to his father at
the time of death; upon which title, in old time there grew a controversy
between Areus the son of Acrotatus, eldest son to Cleomines, King of
Lacedamon, Pausanias lib. 3 Histor.
and Cleomines second son to Cleomines, and uncle to the said Areus, but
after debate thereof, the Senate gave their sentence for Areus right, against
Cleomines: besides Eunomus King of Lacedaemon having two sons, Polydectes and
Lycurgus, Polydectes dying without children, Lycurgus Plutarch in vita Lycurg.
succeeded in the kingdom, but after that he understood Polydectes widow had a
child, he yielded the Crown to him: wherein he dealt far more religiously
than either did King John, who upon like pretense, not only put by Arthur
Plantaginet his eldest brothers son, from the succession of the kingdom, but
also, most unnaturally, took away his life from him; or King Richard the
third, who most barbarously, to come unto the kingdom, did not only slay his
two innocent Nephews, but also defamed his own mother, in publishing to the
world, that the late King his brother, was a bastard. Our Stories do not
obscurely note, that a controversy of like matter, had like to have grown
between Richard the second and John of Gaunt his uncle, and that he had
procured the counsel of sundry great learned men to this purpose, but that he
found the hearts of sundry Noblemen of the Land, (and specially the Citizens
of London) to be against him; whereupon he desisted from his purpose, and
acknowledged his Nephews right. Yet notwithstanding, when as Charles the
second King of Sicile Vicerius in vita Hen. 7.
departed this life, and left behind him a Nephew of Charles his eldest son,
surnamed Martellus, and his younger son Robert, and the matter came in
question which of them should succeed, Clement the fifth gave sentence for
Robert the younger son of Charles deceased, against the son of Martellus,
being Nephew to his Grandfather, and so caused the said Robert to be
proclaimed King of Sicile; which Clem. c. pastoralis de re judicata.
was done rather upon displeasure, that Pope Clement conceived against the
Emperor Frederick, than that there was just cause so to do. And yet Glanvill,
an old reverent Lawyer Glanvil l. 7. c. 3
of this Land, and Lord chief Justice under Henry the second, seems to make
this questionable here in England, who should be preferred, the Uncle or the
Nephew.

And thus much of succcession of Kings, wherein the eldest among Males has the
prerogative, and the like in Females, if there be no Male: for that a Kingdom
is a dignity undivisible, and can come but to one, be he Male or Female; for
that otherwise great governments would soon come to small Rules and
Territories.

And the like that is said of Kingdoms, is to be held of all Dignities under
Kingdoms, where the eldest son is to be preferred before all his other
brethren, and they successively one before an other, if there be no issue left
of them that go before; and the Male line is to be preferred before the
Feminine, and the Feminine before all the rest of the kindred, so it be not a
Masculine Feud, and the same intailed upon the heir Male.

And thus far, as concerning the matters wherein the Civil Law deals
directly or incidently within this Realm. Now it follows, to show how much
of all those Titles of the Canon Law, which have been before set down, are
here in practice among us.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
Concerning the use which the Canon Law has in this Realm: That some Titles
thereof are abolished only individually, and some others are altogether.

OF those Titles of the Canon Law, which before have been recited, some are
out of use here with us in the singular or Individuum, by reason of the gross
Idolatry they did contain in them; as the Title of the Authority and use of
the Pal, the Title of the Mass, the Title of Relics and the worship of
Saints, the Title of Monks and Regular Canons, the Title of the keeping of the
Eucharist and Cream, and such other of like quality: but yet are retained in
the general: for in stead of them, there are substituted in their places holy
worships, tending to the like end of godliness those other did pretend, but
void of those superstitious means the other thought to please God by; and so
in stead of the Mass, has come in the holy Communion; and in place of
worshipping of Saints, has succeeded a godly remembrance, and glorifying of
God in his Saints, and so of the rest, whereof there is any right use within
the Church.

Some other are out of use as well among the Civil as Criminal titles,
because the matter that is therein treated of, is known notoriously to belong
to the conusance of the Common Law at this day, as the Titles of Buying and
Selling, of Leasing, Letting, and taking to Farm, of Morgaging, and Pledging,
of Giving by deed of gift, of Detecting of Collusion and Cosenage, of Murder,
of Theft, and receiving of Thieves, and such like.

SECT. 2.
That the Titles lastly mentioned, did anciently belong unto the Court
Spiritual, and the reasons which moved the Author so to believe: The first
Reason.

ANd yet, I doubt not, but even these matters, as well Civil as Criminal, or
most of them, were anciently in practice, and allowed in Bishops Courts in this
Land, among Clerks, to the which I am induced by three Reasons: First, that I
find not only the foreign Authors of the Decretals, but also the domestical
Authors of the Legatines, being all most excellent wise men, as the Stories of
their several ages do report to have enacted these several constitutions, and
to have inserted them, not only in the body of the Canon Law, but also in the
body of the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Land; and that some wise men, sundry
years after their ages, do write and comment upon the same, as things
expedient and profitable for the use of the Church, and the government of the
Clergy in those days; neither of which, I do presume, they would have done,
if in those ages there had not been good use and free practice of them.

SECT. 3.
The second Reason.

SEcondly, that I find in the Code of Justinian, by sundry Laws, some of his
own making, some others of other Emperors before his time, even from the
days of Constantine the great, Bishops in their Episcopal audience had the
practice of these matters, as well Criminal as Civil; and to that end had
they their Officials or Chancellours, whom the Law calls Ecclesiecdici, or
Episcoporum Ecditi, that is, Church-Lawyers, or Bishops-Lawyers, men trained up
in the Civil and Canon Law of those ages, to direct them in matters of
Judgment, as well in Ecclesiastical Criminal^ matters, as Ecclesiastical
Civil matters.

And that these which now are Bishops Chancellours, are the very self same
persons in Office, that anciently exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under
Bishops, and were called Ecclesiecdici, it may appear by that which Papias, an
old ancient Historiographer cited by Gothofred, in his Annotations upon the
foresaid Law Omnem in the Code, and title de Episcopis and Clericis, and upon
the. Praeterea. writes of them, who says thus, That Ecclesiecdici or Ecdici
were those that were aiders and assisters to the Bishops, in their
Jurisdictions, not astrict or bound to one place, but every where through the
whole Diocese, supplying the absence of the Bishop, which is the very right
description of the Bishops Chancellours that now are; who for that they carry
the Bishops authority with them every where, for matters of Jurisdiction, and
that the B. and they make but one Consistory, are called the Bishops Vicars
general, both in respect their authority stretches it self throughout the
whole Diocese, and also to distinguish them from the Commissaries of Bishops,
whose authority is only in some certain place of the Diocese, and some
certain causes of the Jurisdiction, limited unto them by the Bishops, and
therefore are called by the Law, Judices or Officiales foranei, as if you would
say, Officiales astricti cuidam foro dioeceseos tantum. Gloss. in Clement. 2.
de Rescrip.


So that it is a very mere conceit, that a certain Gentleman, very learned
and eloquent of late has written, That Chancellours are men but of late
upstart in the world, and that the sloth of Bishops has brought in
Chancellours, whereas in very deed, Chancellours are equal, or near equal in
time to Bishops themselves, as both the Law it self, and Baldus l. aliquando
ff. de officio Proconsulis. Couar. li. 3. variarum resolut. c. 10. number. 4.
Shrozius lib. 1. de vicario Epis. q. 46. number. 2. 4. 12. and 13.
Stories do show: yea Chancellours are so necessary Officers to Bishops, that
every Bishop must of necessity have a Chancellor; and if any Bishop would
seem to be so complete within himself, as that he needed not a Chancellor,
yet may the Archbishop of the Province wherein he is, compel him to take a
Chancellor, or if he refuse so to do, put a Chancellor on him: for that the
Law does presume, it is a matter of more weight, than one man is able to
sustain to govern a whole Diocese by himself alone; and therefore howsoever
the nomination of the Chancellor be in the Bishop, yet his authority comes
from the Law, and therefore Hostiensis in sumusa de officio Vicarii numero 2.
in fine, nominationem ab Episc. potestatem vero a ^ure recipient.
he is no less accounted an Ordinary by the Law, than the Bishop is. But
truth it is, not the sloth of the Bishops, but the multitude and variety of
Ecclesiastical causes brought them in, which could not be defined by like
former precedents, but needed every one almost a new decision. And the reasons
why Princes in the beginning granted to Clergy men these causes and their
Consistories, (for from Princes were derived in the beginning all these
authorities, as also the Religion it self is settled and protected in kingdoms
by Princes, before there can be had a free passage thereof) were. First that
the Clergymen thereby might not be drawn from their prayer and exercise of
divine service, to follow matters of suits abroad: 2ly, that they were like to
have a more speedy and better dispatch, and more indifferency before a Judge of
their own learning, than before a Judge of an other profession; for this is
true, and ever has been, and I fear ever will be unto the end, that is said
in the Gloss, and is in common saw, Laici oppido semper infesti sunt Clericis:
Lastly, That Clerks suits and quarrels should not be divulged and spread abroad
among the Lay people, and that many times, to the great discredit of the whole
profession, specially in criminal matters, wherein Princes anciently so much
tendered the Clergy, that if any man among them had committed any thing worthy
death, or open shame, he was not first executed, or put to his public
disgrace, before he was degraded by the Bishop, and his Clergy, and so was
executed and put to shame, not as a Clerk, but as a Lay malefactor; which
regard toward Ecclesiastical men, it were well it were still retained, both
because the consideration thereof is reverent, and worthy the dignity of the
Ministry, whose office is most honorable, and also for that it is more
ancient than any Papisticall immunitie is.

SECT. 4.
The third and last Reason.

THe third reason that moves more that I should believe, that these Titles
sometimes were here in exercise among us in the Ecclesiastical Courts, is,
that I find Glanvill, Glanvill lib. 12. cap. 15 de Legibus Angliae.
who himself lived under Henry the second, and was Lord chief Justice of
England in his days sort to the Ecclesiastical Courts, the plea of Tenements,
where the suit is between two Clerks, or between a Clerk and a Lay man, and
the plea is, De libera eleemosina feodi Ecclesiastici, and non petitur inde
recognitio, whether the frank fee be Lay or Ecclesiastical: where also is
farther added, that if it be found Idem lib. 13. cap. 25.
by the verdict of legal and sufficient men, that it is of Ecclesiastical
fee, it shall not be after drawn to Lay fee, no though it be held of the
Church, by services thereunto due and accustomed: secondly, whereas land is
demanded in Idem lib. 7. cap. 18.
marriage by the husband, or the wife, or their heir, and the demand be
against the giver, or his heir, then it shall be at the choice of the
demander, whether he will sue for the same in the court Christian, or in the
secular Court: For says he, it pertains unto the Ecclesiastical Courts to
hold plea of dowries, which he calls Maritagia, if so be the plaintiff so
make choice of those Courts, for the mutual affiance that is there made
between the man, and the wife, for marriage to be had between them, and there
is a dowry promised unto the man by the woman's friends, neither shall this plea
be carried unto the temporal Courts, no though the lands be of Lay fee, so
that it be certain the suit is for a Dowry, but if the suit be against a
stranger, it is otherwise: Again, the Kings prohibition for bidding the
Clergy the dealing in many things which are of Lay fee, forbids them Anno 24.
Ed. 1.
no one thing that is of Ecclesiastical fee, and to show the Princes meaning
precisely therein, that it was not his intent by that Prohibition to restrain
the Ecclesiastical Judges for proceeding in matters of Ecclesiastical fee,
he sets down in very terms these words (Recognisances touching Lay fee) as
though he would hereby signify to all men, that he would not touch matters of
Ecclesiastical fee, which did then wholly and properly appertain to the
trial of the Christian Court, as has been before vouched out of Glanvill;
who for the place he then held, may be thought to have known the Laws of
England, as then they stood, and the right interpretation thereof, as well as
any man then, or now living. And yet because there were some things of Lay fee,
which the Clergy then had cognizance of, and as yet have in some measure; as
causes, and matters of money chattels, and debts, rising out of Testaments, or
Matrimony, because he would have whatsoever belonged to the Clergy to be
undoubted, excepteth them from those things which belong to the Crown and
dignity, and leaves them to the ordering of the Christian Courts; which is
nothing else but an affirmance of that which Glanvill and the rest of the
ancient English Lawyers, Bracton and Britton said before.

Add hereunto the provincial Constitution Aeterna de poenis, made in the
days of Henry the third, which plainly shows, that in those days all
personal suits between either Clerk and Clerk, or between Laymen
complaynants, and Clerks defendants (for ever the Plaintiff must follow the
Court of the Defendant, which to the Ecclesiastical men then was the
Ecclesiastical Court) were tried by the Spiritual Law, and not by the
Temporal Law: which practice for that it does accord with the judgment of
those ancient Lawyers that have been before cited, and with the Prohibition it
self, which there restrains only calling of Lay men to make recognisances
of matters of Lay see; it may be a great argument, that these things were of
the Ecclesiastical right in those days: from which I see not how the
Ecclesiastical Courts are fallen, for I see neither Law, nor Statute to the
contrary, unless perhaps they will say the Statute of the 25. of Henry 8. cap.
19. took the same away, as being hurtful to the Kings Prerogative royal, and
repugnant 25. H. 8. cap. 19.
to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm; which whether they be, or
be not taken away by the stroke of that Statute, I leave it to men of better
experience in these matters than my self to judge.

But yet this I find by experience to be true, That where there are two diverse
jurisdictions in one Commonwealth, unless they be carefully bounded by the
Prince, and an equal respect carried to both of them, so far as their
places, and the necessary use of them in the Commonwealth requires, as the
advancement of the one increases, so the practice of the other decreaseth,
specially if one have got the countenance of the State more than the other:
which is the only cause at this day of the overflowing of the one, and the
ebbing of the other, but it is in his Sacred Majesty to redress it, not by
taking any thing from that profession that is theirs, but restoring to this
profession, that which is their own: but hereof (...).

SECT. 5.
That some titles of the Canon Law are granted to be of absolute use with us,
and that of some other there is question made.

FOr the rest of the matters that belong to the trial of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, some are acknowledged to be absolutely in use, some other are
challenged to be but in a certain measure in use.

In absolute use are those which never had any opposition against them, which
almost are those alone which belong to the Bishops degree or order; for all
things which come within the compass of the Ecclesiastical Law, are either
belonging to the Bishops degree, or his jurisdiction: To his degree or order
belong the ordering of Ministers and Deacons, the confirmation of Children, the
dedication of Churches and Churchyards, and such like, none of which have been
challenged at any time to belong to any other Law. The second sort is of them
that belong to the Bishops jurisdiction, which is partly voluntary, partly
litigious: Voluntary is, when those with whom the dealing is, stand not
against it; but litigious it is, when it is oppugned by the one part or the
other; of this latter sort many things in sundry ages have been called in
question, but yet rescued and recovered again by the wise and grave Judges
themselves, who have found the challenge of them to be unjust. But what does
belong to either of them in private, or what causes do appertain to the whole
Jurisdiction in general, because they have been already particularly set
down by that famous man of worthy memory Doctor Cousin, in his Cousin in his
Apology part 1. c. 2.
learned Apology for certain proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts; I will
not make a new catalogue of them, but send the Reader for the knowledge thereof
unto his Book; but yet in my passage will I note, which of them have been
most chiefly oppugned, and as occasion shall fall out, speak of them.

PART. III.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
How the Jurisdiction which is of Civil and Ecclesiastical cognizance, is
impeached by the Common Law of this Land: and first of the impeachment thereof
by the Statute of Praemunire facias.

ANd thus much as concerning those parts of the Ecclesiastical Law, which are
here in use with us: Now it follows, to show whereby the exercise of that
Jurisdiction which is granted to be of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
cognizance, is defeated and impeached by the Common Law of this Land, which is
the third part of this Division.

The impeachment therefore is by one of these means, by Praemunire, by
Prohibition, by Injunction, by Supersedeas, by Indicavit, or Quare impedit: but
because the four last are nothing so frequent, nor so harmfull as the others,
and that this Book would grow into a huge volume, if I should prosecute them
all, I will only treat of the two first, and put over the rest unto some
better opportunity.

A Praemunire therefore is a writ awarded out of the Kings What is a Praemunire.
Bench, against one who has procured out any Bull, or like process of the Pope
from Rome, or elsewhere, for any Ecclesiastical place, or preferment within
this Realm; or does sue in any foreign Ecclesiastical Court, to defeat or
impeach any Judgment given in the Kings Court, whereby the body of the
offender is to be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure, his goods forfeited,
and his lands seized into the Kings hand, so long as the offender lives.

This writ was much in use, during the time the Bishop of Rome's authority was
in credit in this land, and very necessary it was it should be so, for being
then two like principal authorities acknowledged within this Land, the
Spiritual in the Pope, and the Temporal in the King; the Spiritual 25. Ed.
2. 27. Ed. 3 c. 1. 38 Ed. 3. c 1. and 2. 7. Rich. 2. c. 12. 13. Rich 2. c. 2.
2. H. 4 cap. 3.
grew on so fast on the Temporal, that it was to be feared (had not
Nevertheless even out of these Statutes, have our Professors of the Common
Law wrought many dangers to the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, threatening the
punishment contained in the Statute Ann. 27. Edw. 3. and 38. ejusdem, almost to
every thing that the Court Christian deals in, pretending all things dealt
with in those Courts, to be the disherison of the Crown (from the which, and
none other fountain, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is now derived) whereas
in truth Sir Thomas Smith says very rightly and charitably, that the uniting
of the Supremacy Ecclesiastical and Temporal in the King, utterly voideth
the use of all those Statutes: (Nam cessante ratione, cessat lex) and
whatsoever is now wrought or threatened against the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, is but in emulation of one Court to an other, and by
consequent, a derogation of that authority, from which all Jurisdiction is now
derived, and the maintenance whereof was by those Princes especially purposed.
D. Cowel in the Interpreter.
these Statutes been provided to restrain the Popes enterprises) the
spiritual Jurisdiction had devoured up the temporal, as the temporal now on
the contrary side has almost swallowed up the spiritual. But since the
foreign authority in spiritual matters is abolished, and either Jurisdiction
is agnised to be settled wholly, and only in the Prince of this land, sundry
wise men's opinion is, there can lie no Praemunire by those Statutes at this
day, against any man exercising any subordinate Jurisdiction under the King,
whether the same be in the Kings name, or in his name who has the same
immediately from the King: for that now all Jurisdiction, whether it be
Temporal or Ecclesiastical is the Kings, and such Ecclesiastical Laws as
now are in force, are called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Kings
Ecclesiastical Courts; for that the King cannot have in himself a
contrariety of Jurisdiction, fighting one against the other, as it was in the
case between himself and the Pope, although he may have diversity of
Jurisdiction within himself, which for order sake, and for avoiding of
confusion in government, he may restrain to certain several kinds of
causes, and inflict punishment upon those that shall go beyond the bounds or
limits that are prescribed them: but to take them as enemies, or underminers of
his state, he cannot; for the question here is not, who is head of the cause,
or Jurisdiction in controversy, but who is to hold plea thereof, or exercise
the Jurisdiction under that head, the Ecclesiastical or Temporal Judge.
Neither is that to move any man, that the Statutes made in former times against
such Provisors, which vexed the King and people of this land with such unjust
suits, do not only provide against such Process as came from Rome, but against
all others that came elsewhere, being like conditioned as they: for that it
was not the meaning of those Statutes, or any of them, thereby to tax the
Bishops Courts, or any Consistory within this land; for that none of them ever
used such malepert sauciness against the King, as to call the Judgments of
his Courts into question, although they went far in strayning upon those
things and causes, which were held to be of the Kings temporal cognizance, as
may appear by the Kings Prohibition thereon framed. And beside the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other prelates of this Land, in the greatest heat of
all this business, being then present in the Parliament with the rest of the
Nobility, disavowed the Popes insolency toward the King in this behalf; and
assured him they would and ought to stand with his Majesty against the Pope,
in these and all other cases touching his Crown and Regalitie, as they were
bound by their allegiance: so that they being not guilty of these enterprises
against the King, but in as great a measure troubled in their own jurisdiction
by the Pope, as the King himself was in the right of his Crown, as may
appear out of the course of the said Statutes; The word (Elsewhere) can in no
right sense be understood of them, or in their Consistories: although Et le
stat. est (in Curia Romana vel alibi) le quel (alibi) est a entender en la
Court l'Euesque issint que si ho^me soit sue la pur chose que appent al Commen
ley il aura Praemunire. Fitzherb. Not. Bre. Tit. Praemunire facias.
some of late time thinking all is good service to the Realm, that is done for
the advancement of the Common Law, and depressing of the Civil Law, have so
interpreted it, but without ground or warrant of the Statutes themselves, who
wholly make provision against foreign authority, and speak no word of
domestical proceedings. But the same word (Elsewhere) is to be meant and
conceived of the places of remove the Popes used in those days, being sometimes
at Rome in Italy, sometimes at Avignion in France, sometimes in other places, as
by the date of the Bulls, and other process of that age may be seen; which
several removes of his, gave occasion to the Parliament of inserting the word
(Elsewhere,) in the body of those Statutes, that thereby the Statutes providing
against Process dated at Rome, they might not be eluded by like Process
dated at Avignion, or any other place of the Popes aboade, and so the penalty
thereof toward the offender might become void, and be frustrated. Neither
did the Laws of this Land at any time whiles the Popes authority was in his
greatest pride within this Realm, ever impute a Praemunire to any Spiritual
Subject, dealing in any Temporal matter, by any ordinary power within the
Land, but restrained them by Prohibition only; as it is plain by the Kings
Prohibition, wherein are the greatest matters that ever the Clergy attempted
by ordinary, and domestical authority, and yet are refuted only by
Prohibition. But when as certain busie-headed fellows were not content to
press upon the Kings Regal jurisdiction at home, but would seek for means,
for preferment, for foreign authority, to control the Judgments given in the
Kings Courts by process from the Pope; then were Praemunires decreed, both to
punish those audacious enterprises of those factious Subjects, and also to
check the Popes insolency, that he should not venture hereafter to enterprise
such designments against the King and his people. But now, since the fear
thereof is past, by reason all intercourse is taken away between the Kings
good Subjects; and the Court of Rome, it is not to be thought the meaning of
good and merciful Princes of this Land is that the cause of these Statutes
being taken away, the effect thereof should remain; and that good and dutiful
Subjects stepping happily awry in the exercise of some part of their
jurisdiction, (but yet without prejudice of the Prince, or his Regal power)
shall be punished with like rigor of Law, as those which were molesters,
greevers, and disquieters of the whole estate. But yet notwithstanding the edge
of those Praemunires which were then framed, remain sharp and unblunted still
against Priests, Jesuits, and other like Runnagates, which being not content
with their own natural Princes government, seek to bring in again, that and
like foreign authority, which those Statutes made provision against; but
these things I leave to the reverend Judges of the Land, and others that are
skillful in that profession, only wishing that some which have most insight
into these matters, would add some light unto them, that men might not stumble
at them, and fall into the danger of them unawares: but, now to Prohibitions.

SECT. 2.
The impeachment thereof by Prohibition and what it is.

A Prohibition is a commandment sent out of some of the Kings higher Courts of
Records, where Prohibitions have been used to be granted in the Kings name,
sealed with the seal of that Court, and subscribed with the Test of the
chief Judge, or Justice of the Court, from whence the said Prohibition does
come, at the suggestion of the Plaintiff, pretending himself to be grieved by
some Ecclesiastical or marine Judge, in not admittance of some matter, or
doing some other thing against his right, in his or their judicial
proceedings, commanding the said Ecclesiastical or marine Judge to proceed no
further in that cause: and if they have sent out any censure Ecclesiastical or
Marine against the Plaintiff, they recall it, and loose him from the same,
under pain of the Kings high indignation, upon pretense that the same cause
does not belong to the Ecclesiastical or Marine Judge, but is of the temporal
cognizance, and does appertain to the Crown and dignity.

Of Prohibitions, some are Prohibitions of Law, some other are Prohibitions of
Fact.

Prohibitions of Law, are those which are set down by any Law or Statute of
this Land, whereby Ecclesiastical What are Prohibitions of Law.
Courts are interdicted to deal in the matters therein contained, such as are
all those things which are expressed in the Kings Prohibition; as are also
those which are mentioned by the second of Edward the sixth, where Judges
Ecclesiastical are forbid to hold plea of any matter contrary to the effect,
intent, or meaning of the Statute of W. 2. Capite 3. The Statute of Articuli
Cleri, Circumspecte agatis, Sylva Caedua, the treaties De Regia Prohibitione,
the Statute Anno 1. Edwardi 3. Capite 10. or ought else wherein the Kings Court
ought to have Jurisdiction.

Prohibitions of fact, are such which have no precise word, or letter of Law,
or Statute for them, as have the other, but What are Prohibitions of fact.
are raised up by argument out of the wit of the Devisor. These, for the most
part, are mere quirks and subtilties of law, and therefore ought to have no
more favor in any wise, honorable, or well ordered Consistory, than the
equity of the cause it self does deserve; for such manner of shifts (for the
most part) breed naught else but matter of vexation, and have no other
commendable end in them, though they pretend the right of the Kings Court, as
those other Prohibitions of the Law do: but the Kings right is not to be
supposed by imagination, but is to be made plain by demonstration, and so both
the Statute of the 18. of Edward the third, capite 5. is, where it is provided,
that no Prohibition shall go out, but where the King has the cognizance, and
of right ought to have; and also by the forenamed Statute of Edward the sixth,
which forbids that any Prohibition shall be granted out, but upon sight of the
libell, and other wary circumstances in the said Statute expressed: by which
it is to be intended the meaning of the Lawgivers was not, that every idle
suggestion of every Attorney should breed a Prohibition, but such only should
be granted, as the Judge in his wisdom should think worthy of that favor,
and if right and equity did deserve it: although (as I must needs confess)
the Statute is defective in this behalf, for to exact any such precise
examination of him in these cases, as it is also in other points, and is almost
the general imperfection of all Statutes, that are made upon Ecclesiastical
causes: but I fear me as emulation between the two Laws, in the beginning
brought in these multitudes of Prohibitions, either against or beside law, so
the gain they bring unto the Temporal Courts maintains them; which also
makes the Judges they cesse not costs and damages in cases of consultation,
(although the Statute precisely requires their assent and assignement therein)
because they would not deter other men from suing out of Prohibitions, and
pursuing of the same.

The Prohibitions of the law, as have been before showed, are neither many,
nor much repined at, because they contain a necessary distinction between
Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction, and imply the Kings right, and Subjects benefit:
but the Prohibitions of fact or of men, are both infinite and odious, for that
there is, well nigh, no matter either Civil or Ecclesiastical, be it never so
clear or absolute, but they clog and incumber it with some Prohibition; and
the matter they contain, is (for the most part) absurd and frivolous, as shall
first appear in marine causes, and after in Ecclesiastical matters.

SECT. 3.
Conoerning the common Lawyers action of Trover, and what is meant in the Law
by a Fiction, to show, how the Civil Jurisdiction is impeached in matters of
Admiraltie.

FOr Marine causes it is well known, that all such bargains and contracts, or
as it were contracts, as are made by any persons either in any foreign
country, or any haven or creek of the Sea, or any shore thereof, as far as
the greatest winter wave does run out, or upon any great river, to the first
bridge next to the Sea, for any merchandise, ship, tackle, or other negotiation
belonging to the Sea, or to any merchandise brought from beyond the Sea, is,
and ought to be of the admiral cognizance, and so evermore has been since
the Court of the Admiraltie was first erected: and yet the common Lawyers (to
defeat the Civil Law of the trial thereof) have devised sundry actions, and
among the rest, an action of Trover, whereby they feign, that a ship arrived in
Cheapfide, or some other like place within the City, and there the Plaintiff
and Defendant meeting together, bargained upon some merchandise, or other like
seafaring matter, by which fiction, they pretend the bargain now is to be
tried in the Common Law, and not by the Civil Law, as being done in the body
of a County, and not upon the maine Sea, or any other place subject to the
Admiral Jurisdiction.

But that this fiction, or any other like qualitied to this, should have any
such force, as to work any effect in Law, I will show, first by the definition
of a fiction, then by those things that are necessarily attendant thereon.

A fiction therefore is defined by Bartol (whom also the rest L^ si is qui pro
emptore. 3. ff. de usucapionib. and ibi Bartol.
of the Doctors do follow) to be an assumption of the Law upon an untruth, for
a truth, in a certain thing possible to be done, and yet not done: upon which
fiction the Doctors hold, there wait two things, the one is Equity, the other
Possibility. For First, unless there be cause why, that which is not, should
be fained to be, and that which is, should be accounted not to be, and that
which is done in one sort, or at one time, or in one place, should be imagined
to be done in an other sort, at an other time, and in an other place, there is
no reason a fiction should be admitted: for the Law allows no man to come to
extraordinary remedies, but where ordinary remedies fail: and therefore if
that which is in controversy may be obtained by any other means, than by a
fiction, a fiction is not to be afforded: but if ordinary means cannot be had,
then fictions may be entertained L. in causa. ff. de minorib.
to supply the defect of the ordinary means, that thereby, although the truth
be otherwise, yet the effect of the Law may be all one.

So then, the Law faineth an infant not yet borne, to be L. qui in utero and
penult. de statu hominis ff. L. 1.. fi filius ff. de suis et legit. l. 2 l. 3.
l. 4. C. eod. l. Gallus 29.. and been et. videndum ff. de liberis et posthumis.
cum filius Instit. de haered. an ante nato. L. veris est.. ult. ff pro socio.
L. action. publicatione ff. eod. L. absentem. ff. de verborum significat. L
lege Cornel. ff. de testamento.
borne for his benefit, for that happily without that fiction, the poor infant
should be remediless of his Filial Portion, Legacy, or other right in
conscience due unto him: so Nephews and Neeces succeed together with their
Uncles and Aunts in their Grandfathers and Grandmothers goods, for such portion
as should have come to their parents, if they had lived; for that the Law
presumes them to represent the person of their parents: so he that is dead, is
fained to be alive to many constructions in Law, specially if many of his
equals in age be alive, at the time that he is fained to be alive: so he that
is alive, and is in captivity, (for the upholding of his Will which he made in
liberty) is fained to be dead the hour before he became captive: so he that
is obstinate, and will not appear in Judgment, being lawfully called thereto,
is fained to be present, that neither himself should take benefit out of his
obstinacy, neither his adversary hurt by his absence and injury. Infinite
more examples might be brought of this sort, but it would be too long to run
through them all, and this shall suffice to have showed, that the Law approves
fictions, but where there is equity for it, and the Law it self otherwise
cannot have L Gallus fi ejus ff. de liberis and posthumis. l. si pater si cum.
ff. de adopt. Horat. de Art poetica.
her effect. And as the Law cannot proceed to a fiction without equity, so
neither can it feign any thing that is impossible, for Art evermore follows
Nature; and therefore if a man would feign disproportionable things, such as
the Painter did in Horace, who made Boares wallow in the waves of the Sea, and
Dolphins wander in the woods; these fictions in no sense can be admitted, for
that they are such, as neither Nature nor Reason can brook. In like sort, if a
man would feign one to live, who were dead two hundred years since, Bartol l
fi is qui pro emptore number. 21. 22. 23. and sequen tib.
so that it were not possible that he or any of his equals should live at that
age, this would not hold in Law, for that it is above the age that the Law does
presume any man may live by Nature; although the Law does presume such as dye
in war for defense of their country (for the better encouragement of those
that are alive, to venture themselves in like service for the commonwealth) to
live for ever; because their fame does flourish for ever: and upon like reason
the Law will not suffer any person to adopt an other for his child, who is
either elder or equal in age unto himself, or is not so far under his
years, as by course of Nature he might be his natural child indeed: so much
the Law detesteth impossibilities, that it will not suffer a man to feign that
which in common Sense and Nature might not be true indeed.

Now, if these things be true, as in all reason and show, by former precedents
they appear to be true, I would gladly see how actions of Trover, (whereby the
Common Lawyers translate unto themselves matters of Marine trial) if they be
squared to these Rules of Fictions, can be maintained: for first to speak of
equity, which the Law requires in these manner of proceedings, what equity
can it be to take away the trial of such business as belongs to one Court,
and to pull it to an other Court; specially, when as the Court from whence it
is drawn, is more fit for it, both in respect of the fullness of knowledge
that that Court has to deal in such business, and also of the competencie of
skill, that is in the Judges and Professors of those Courts, correspondent to
these causes, more than is in the Judges and Professors of the other Courts,
for the deciding and determining of these matters. For, albeit otherwise they
are very wise and sufficient men in the understanding of their own profession,
yet have they small skill or knowledge in matters pertaining to the Civil
profession: for that there is nothing written in their Books of these matters,
more than is to be gathered out of a few Statutes of former time, whose drift
was not to open any door unto them, to enter upon the admiral profession, but
to preserve the Kings Jurisdiction from the Admiral incroachment, as may by
the said Statutes appear; whereas contrarily, the Civil Law has sundry
titles included in the body thereof, concerning these kinds of causes;
whereupon the Interpreters of the Law have largely commented, and others have
made several Tractates thereof: So that, by all likelihood, these men are more
fit and better furnished to deal in this business, than any men of any other
profession, as having, besides the strength of their own wit, other men's
helps and labors to rely upon.

Besides, this business many times concerns not only our own contrymen,
but also strangers, who are parties to the suit, who are borne, and do live in
countries ordered by the Civil Law, whereby they may be presumed to have more
skill and better liking of that Law, than they can be thought to have of our
Laws, and our proceedings: and therefore it were no indifferency to call them
from the trial of that Law, which they, in some part know, and is the Law of
their country (as it is almost to all Christendom besides) to the trial of a
Law which they know in no part, and is mere foreign unto them; specially when
the Princes of this Land have anciently allowed the Civil Law to be a Common
Law, in these causes, as well to their own subjects, as it is to strangers.

Further, the avocating away of causes in this sort from one Jurisdiction to
another, specially when the cause has long depended in the Court from whence
it is called, insomuch as now it is ready for sentence, or rather is past
sentence, and stands at execution, cannot be but great injury to the subject
after so much labor lost, and money spent in waste, to begin his suit anew
again: which is like to Sysiphus punishment, who, when he has with all his
might, forced his stone up to the top of the hill, and so is (as himself
hopes) at an end of his labor; yet the stone rowles down again on him, and so
his second labor (his strength being spent with the toil of the first) is
more grievous than the former was: which being semblably true in a poor
Clyent, who has his cause in hearing, there can be no equity in this fiction,
whereby a cause so near ended, should again be put upon the Anvill, as though
it were still rough work and new to be begun.

And surely, as there is no equity in it, so there is no possibility such a
fiction should be maintained by Law; for that it has no ground of reason to
rest his feet on. For if this be granted, that such a fiction by Law may be
made, then one of these absurdities must needs follow, either that a ship
may arive in a place where no water is to carry it, or if that it arive
according to the fiction, either the people, their houses and their wealth
shall be all overwhelmed in the water, as the world was in Noah's Flood, and
Ducalions Deluge, and so no body there shall be left alive to make any bargain
or contract with the Mariners and Shipmen that arive there; or that the people
that dwell there shall walk upon the water, as people do on land, which Peter
himself was not able to do, but had suncke, if Christ had not reached his hand
unto him, and therefore far less possible for any other man to do. So that it
may be well said (these things standing as they do) no such fiction can hold,
and that no action can be framed upon it; for as there is no Obligation of
impossible things, so there is no Action of things that neither Nature nor
Reason will afford to be done: neither is it to the purpose that the
maintainers of these fictions do say, that in this case, the place where the
contract is made is not considerable, which I take to be far otherwise; for
that, when that themselves will convey a Marine cause from the Sea unto the
Land, they will lay it to be done in some special place of a Country, be
the place never so unproper for such an action: for that the foundation of
these actions, is the place where they were done, as namely that they were done
in the body of such a Country, or such a Country, and not upon the maine Sea,
or beneath the lowest bridge, that is upon any great river next the Sea. And
therefore in two emulous Jurisdictions, when they are so divided, as that one is
assigned the sea, the other the land, the place of the action can in no sort be
suppressed, and another supplied in the room thereof: Quod enim una via
prohibetur, alia via non est permittendum, and quod prohibitum est directo
prohibetur etiam per obliguum: for if this were granted, then matter enough
would be offered to one Jurisdiction to devour up the other, and the Law would
be easily eluded: which, to restrain either of these Jurisdictions to their
own place, and to provide that one in his greatness do not swell up against
the other, has set either of them their bounds and limits which they shall not
pass: which, as it is the good provision of the Law, so ought either
Jurisdiction in all obedience to submit it self thereunto, for that the
diminishing of either of them is a wrong to the Prince from whom they are
derived, who is no less Lord of the Sea, than he is King of the Land: and
therefore, in no sort, such liberty must be allowed to the one directly or
indirectly, as that it should be a spoil unto the other; which would easily
come to pass, if when as the Law allows not any man to sue a Marine matter
by the ordinary course of the Laws of this Land, yet a man will follow it by
an extraordinary. But where there is an uniformitie of Jurisdiction, as that it
is all by sea and all by land, there may a thing be fained to be done in one
place, that was done in another place, without any man's prejudice, for that in
this case the place is not traversable (so it be not in Criminal matters
where time and place is required, that the accuser do not wander from place to
place with the injury of the accuser) for howsoever the place and the action
is altered, yet the truth of the cause remains one and the self same still.
And so far as concerning actions of Trover in Admiral causes: Now it does
follow, that I should speak of like prejudices that grow to the same by
actions of Trespass, but those will I pass over, for that in so small a
Treatise as this is, I cannot go over all: and therefore will I only put the
Reader in mind, that there are more devises, rising out of the Common Law than
one, that infest the Admiralty. But now to Wills and Testaments wherein they are
impeached.

SECT. 4.
Concerning Wills and Testaments, wherein they are impeached.

FOr matters of Wills and Legacies, they are so proper to the trial of the
Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm, that the professors of the Common Law
themselves, do oftentimes confess and say, they have no more to do
therewith, than the Civilian has to do with the knowledge of the matters of
Franktenement: and yet even these matters of Testaments and Legacies, although
Prohibitions be not so frequent in them, as they are in the rest of
Ecclesiastical causes, yet they are not quite void of them, and that in some
points, wherein the very life and essence of a Will does stand.

For whereas the ancient Romans, knowing how subject matters of Wills are to
forgerie and corruption on the one side, and suppression and concealment on the
other side, to meet with all craft and subtilty whatsoever, which might seize
on them, did most carefully provide, that there should be seven witnesses, at
the least, present at the making of every Will and Testament, except it were in
time of some general plague or sickness, when so many witnesses could not
conveniently be had together, for fear of infection, or that it were in the
Country, where there are small multitude of people. And that those witnesses
should be particularly required to that purpose, with diverse other
observations and circumstances tending all to the safe and sure making thereof;
which the Ecclesiastical Law altered afterward in sundry points, for that many
true Wills were many times overthrown for want of those precise solemnities. It
therefore reduced the whole number of those seven witnesses, unto two only,
agreeably to the Law of God, and the Law of Nations, where that number of
witnesses is allowed, as competent to prove any matter, so that the same
witnesses be honest and credible persons, such whose faith is not doubted of.
The Common Lawyers, because themselves in sundry matters very dangerously many
times admit one witness, and give him full credit, and that in matters of
great weight and importance, (as though all should be squared to their rule,
and framed to their compass) if an Ecclesiastical Judge in the probate of a
Will, contrary to the rules of his own Law, will not admit the testimony of
one witness, they forthwith fling out a Prohibition against him, as though he
had done an offense against the Crown and dignity, in that he does not allow
those number of witnesses in the Probate of a Will, that the Common Laws of
this land allow almost in every matter.

For answer to which, if I should allege the precise form of the
Ecclesiastical Law, which to the essence of a Will requires this number of
two witnesses, or else holds it not for a Will (but in cases inter liberos,
and ad pios usus, where the only hand of the Father or Testator without
witnesses serves for a Will, so the same be known to be the Testators own
hand, or so proved by comparison) I would think to wise men I had said
sufficiently; but I will not rest hereupon, but will convince themselves, by
themselves: for, do they, I pray you, in their own proceedings, where a Law or
Statute requires more witnesses than one, content themselves with one witness
alone; yea, do they not in all cases where a certain number of witnesses are
appointed to prove a fact by Law or Statute, furnish the cause with so many
witnesses as the case desires, or else do they not account the proceeding
void? And will they think themselves so precisely bound to the keeping of the
letter of the Common Law, and will they not suffer the Civilian in like manner,
to cleave fast to the observation of the Civil Law, especially when it has
the consent of the Law of God, and the Law of Nations, and is his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Law of this Land, as well as the other is his Temporal Law of
the same?

I confess it may be true many times, which one man says, specially when
there concur therewith many great and violent presumptions, and the party
that reports it is of good credit; but dangerous it is to open this gap to
the malice of men, for even so, many things shall be obtruded to the Judge for
truth, which are stark lies; and many things shall be pretended to be gold
in show, which in proof and practice will be found to be no other thing, but
mere dross. And therefore well decreed the Emperor L^juris urandi.. Simili
modo. C. de Testibus.
Constantine, that no one man's testimony should be heard, though he were never
so great a man in Court.

But perhaps some man will say, If credit shall not be given oftentimes to one
man's testimony, much wickedness will pass away unpunished: For reply to
which I answer, It is better to let a bad man escape, than to punish a good; and
although it be true, if a man may excuse himself by denial, no man will be
found guilty; so also it is true on the other side, if it be enough to
condemnation to be charged by one man alone, without any other witnesses, no
man shall be innocent; and therefore the admittance of one witness in causes,
and the proceeding thereupon to judgment is very dangerous.

An other like bar to this they lay against Ecclesiastical proceedings in
matters of Testament; whereas an Ecclesiastical Judge proves a Will, wherein
are Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other like Hereditaments bequeathed,
challenging this also to be of the Crown and dignity, as though the
Ecclesiastical Judge thereby took upon him to decree which lands were
devisable by Will, and which not, or would by his probate add a strength unto
the Will, to make the devise good or bad, whereas on the contrary part, the
Ecclesiastical Judge by this act does only testify, that such a person made
such a Will, and that the same was proved before himself under his Test, for
his last Will and Testament: but for the validity of the Will it self, and the
Legacies and devises therein, whether they were of lands or tenements, or of
goods or chattels, the Probate it self works nothing, but leaves that to
the Law, Common or Ecclesiastical, according as the bequest belongs to
either of them, whether it be good and vailable in Law, or no: for it
oftentimes falls out, notwithstanding the Will be lawfully proved before the
Ordinary, yet the bequests are not good, either in respect of the person to
whom the bequests are made, or in respect of the thing that is not devisable in
all, or in part; as by the Common Law, lands in Capite cannot be devised, more
than for two parts, but in Socage the devise is good for all; and by the
Custom of the City of London, and some other places of the Land, a man can
bequeath no more than his deaths part, and if he do, his bequest is void for
the rest; but in other places of the land a man may bequeath all. By the Civil
Law a man can bequeath nothing to a Traitor, or an Heretic, or an unlawful
College, or Company (unless perhaps it be for the aliment, or maintenance of
them in extreme poverty, that they die not for hunger, which is the work of
charity) and if he do, the legacy thereof is void to all intents and
purposes. So then, the Probate of the Ordinary in matters of land, neither
helps, nor hinders the right of the devise it self, but is a declaration
only of the dead man's doom uttered before such and such witnesses: which
takes his strength not so much from the Probate, as from the Law, and is
testified only by the Probate, that the same was declared by the Testator, in
the presence of the witnesses therein named, to be his true and last Will. So
that no man herein is to be offended with the Ordinary, as presuming of a
matter not appertaining unto him, (for his testification in all Law and
conscience does belong unto him, to give allowance so far unto the defuncts
Will, as it is avouched before him to be his last act and deed in that behalf)
but rather they are in this case to thank the Ordinary, that he by that act of
his has preserved the memory of that, which otherwise perhaps would have been
lost and perished, to the great hurt of the Commonwealth, and others which
have private interest therein.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
Of the Care that Princes of this Realm have had for the due payment of Tithes
unto the Church, and the preserving of the cognizance thereof unto the
Ecclesiastical Courts of this Land, both before the Conquest and since.

OF all matters that appertain to the Ecclesiastical Courts, there is no one
thing that the Princes of this Land have made more careful provision for,
since there was any Church government in this Land, than that all manner of
Tithes due by the word of God should be fully and truly paid unto their
Parish Churches where they grew; and if they were denied, should be recovered
by the Law of the Church. The great piety and Princely care of our ancient
Kings before the Coquest, is worthily noted by the Author, and because it
argues the rare devotion of those times, we will consider it more perfectly.
About the seventh Centurie Ina King of the West Saxons made this Law: (...) be
(...) hpa (...) ne (...) he (...) be (...): that is, That the Church-sceat be
paid in at Martlemas, if any refuse to pay it, that his penalty be forty
shillings, and the payment of Church-sceat twelve times. That which the law
here calls Church-sceat, according to the variety of reading, has bin
diversely interpreted. Fleta, as if it were (...), reads Churchseed, and
therefore he says, it was Certa mensura bladi Tr^tics, etc. So the old Lawyer
in Lambert. fuit un certain de ble batu que chescun homme devoit en temps des
Britons and des Engles porter a lour Esglise le jour Seint Martin. Others read
(...), Churchescet; that is the Church shot, or Church due. Which way soever we
read the word, there will be no great injury done to the sense; yet because
other things besides Corn have gone under the name of Church-sceat (as the
Cocks and Hens at Christmas) therefore it seems that the last reading is
the best: here it must signify a quantity of Corn due to the Church, and to
be paid in at Martlemas: Why these dues and others were tendered at this Feast,
Hospinian thinks he has given a good reason, but see Gretser in his Book de
Festis upon S. Martins day.

In the ninth Centurie King AEthelstane made this Law: Ic (...) callum minum
(...) call mine (...) on (...) nama (...) mine (...) hi (...): that is, I
AEthelstane King, by the advice of Wulfhelme my Archbishop, and my other
Bishops, command all my Reves thorough all my Kingdom in the Lords name, and
of all Saints; and for my love that in the first place they pay the Tithe of my
own revenues, as well in living Cattle, as the yearly fruits: (...): that
is, And this to be done at the day of the beheading of S. John the Baptist. And
that the Subject might the more earnestly intend the observation of this Law,
the King adds a pious exhortation: (...) Jacob (...), Ic (...) mine (...)
mine (...) m^n (...) hi (...) eac (...) on (...) bocum (...) an (...) mid (...)
ecelic (...): that is, Furthermore, think we with our Our selves what Jacob
the High Father to the Lord said: I will give thee my Tithe and my
peace offering. And the Lord himself in the Gospel says, To all that have, it
shall be given, and they shall abound. We might also bethink Our selves of the
penalty which is written in this book, that if we will not pay our Tithes,
then the nine parts shall be taken away, and the tenth only shall be left us.
And Gods Lore puts us in mind, that for these earthly things eternal are
to be had, and everlasting for the transitory.

Thus the religious Prince goes on, and earnestly pursues the argument in the
Rhetoric of those times, seeming to intimate to his people, that though no
humane Law had interposed it self, yet the divine equity of this cause, might
be eminently enforced out of sacred Writ.

King Edmund in a Synod holden at London, at which was present (...), Oda and
Wulfstan Archbishops, and many other Bishops; made this Law for holy Church:
(...) aelcum (...) men be (...) he (...): that is, We command all Christian
men by their Christianity to pay Tithes, Church-sceat, and Almesfee, if any
refuse to do it let him be accursed.

Concerning the (...) mentioned in the Law, it was that Almes-money which was
called the Peterpence, for when Ina the West Saxon King went in pilgrimage to
Rome, he made it a Law to his Subjects, that every house should pay a yearly
penny to the Pope, and this was to be tendered at S. Peter's tide, as appears
by Edgars Law number. 4. (...), etc. See also the Laws of Cnute and Edward the
Confessor.

And whereas we find the curse of Excommunication here annexed by the Law to
this Sacrilege of with holding the Tenth, it is not without a parallel: for
amongst those solemn Execrations which by a Council held here at Oxford, were
to be openly pronounced four several times in every year, we find these
Church-robbers twice branded with Anath^ma. In the first Article thus: An they
ben accursed the rightys of holy Church, as in Londys ten^ts, rent,
possessions, maryces, lesours, pastors ways paths, wetingly, and vnyustyly,
or malycyously defoulen and withheld councelen huyden or to withold or to
avoyde procuren. In the 26. Article in this manner Also all they ben accursed
more and less which wyttingly, wylfully, or malycyously, and vnwysly for any
man has had vttirly the Seruauntis of God, that is to say, their Persons,
Vicars, Chapelyns, Parrochyalys whatsoever condycyon that they ben or fame the
thythes, prouentys, profytys, oblacyons of custume and consuetude used less or
more withheld or done to be withheld, or the said thythes or oblacyons
chaungen or turnen in to other use than it was provided in holy Church law.
But of this, see more Cap. 3. Sect. 2.

In the Laws of King Edgar, it was decreed in the first place, (...) man
(...): That Gods Church should have all her rights, and that every man should
pay his Tithes to the elder Minster (or Mother Church) where he hears the
Word. cap. 2 of Edgars Laws: See also the 3. and 4. Chapters.

In the Laws of King Cnute cap. 8. thus it is, (...) man (...) be (...) be
(...) eal (...) (...)man (...) him (...) man (...) man (...): That a man must
be careful rightly to pay Gods rights every year, to wit, the Plough-almes
15. nights after Easter, and the Tithe of young Cattle by Whitsontide, and the
fruits of the Earth by Alhalgentide. And if there be any that will not pay his
Tenth, so as we have said, that is, the tenth Acre according to the going of
his plough, then the Kings Reve and the Bishops, and his that owes the land,
together with the Mass Priest of the Minster may go and take away the tenth
part whether he will or no, and give it to the Minster whereunto it belongs;
The ninth part he may take to himself; As for the eight parts let them be
divided in two, and let half go to the Landlord, and half to the Bishop,
whether it be one of the Kings men, or a Thane.

Concerning the Plough-almes, for which the Saxon says (...), Lambard says
thus: Ego me legisse memini in vetustissimo quodam legum Ethelreds Regis
libello, impositum tunc temporis in singula aratra denarium unum, etc.


For first before the Conquest, King Aethelstane made a Law, that every man
should pay his Tithes to God, in manner as Jacob did, who made a vow to God, If
God would bring him back again to his Country, he would when he returned
home, pay Tithes to God, of all that God should give him: the like did King
Edgar, and King Edmund, commanding that those which wilfully refused to pay
their Tithes, should be excommunicated.

William the Conqueror (as Roger Hovenden reports) in the 4. Hovenden part.
2 cap De Decimis Ecclesiae.
year after his conquest, having gotten some time of rest from war, and
settling of rebellious spirits, who kicked at his government at home, entered
into a consideration of the well ordering of the Church and Commonwealth, by
wholesome Laws: and therefore by the advice of his Council, he su^moned all
the great Prelates and Potentates of this Land, with twelve other sufficient
men of every Shire, experienced in the Laws and customs of the Land, that he
might by them learn, by what Laws and customs the Land was governed, before
himself came to the Crown thereof; straightly charging and commanding them upon
his high displeasure, they should make true report to him thereof, without
adding any thing thereto, or taking any thing therefro: who beginning with the
Laws of holy Church, because by it, the King and his Throne are established,
among other Laws and liberties of the Church, recorded this for one, which I
will verbatim set down in Latin as it is penned by the Author.

De omni Annona decima garba est Deo reddita, and ideo reddenda: See for this
the laws of Edward the Confessor, number. 8. and 9. by whom this decree was
first made, and afterward ratified by the Conqueror.
Si quis gregem Equarum habuerit, pullum reddat decimum; qui unam tantum vel
duas habuerit, de singulis pullis singulos denarios praebeat. Similiter, qui
plures Vaccas habuerit, decimum vitulum, qui unam vel duas, de singulis vitulis
singulos denarios; and qui caseum fecerit, det decimum Deo, etsi non fecerit,
lac decima die. Similiter Agnum decimum, Vellus decimum, Butyrum decimum,
Porcellum decimum. De Apibus vero similiter, decimum commodi; quinetiam de
bosco, de prato, de aquis, de molendinis, parcis vivariis, piscariis,
virgultis, and hortis, and negotiationibus, and omnibus rebus quas deder^t
Dominus, decima pars ei reddenda est, qui novem parts simul cum decima
largitur. Et qui eam detinuerit, per justitiam Episcopi, and Regis (si necesse
fuerit) ad solutionem arguatur. Haec enim S. Augustinus pradicavit and docuit,
and haec concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus, and populo. Sed postea instinctu
Diboli multi ^am detinuerunt, and Sacerdotes negligentes non curabant inire
laborem ad perquirendas eas, eo quod sufficienter habebant vitae suae
necessaria. Multis enim locis medo sunt tres vel quatuor Eccles^ae, ubi tunc
temporis una tantum fuit, and sic caeperunt minui.

This Augustine, to whom the Conqueror here refers himself, was Augustine
the Monk, whom Gregory the great about the year of our Lord God 569. sent
here into England, to reestablish the Faith decayed by the Saxons; who set
down sundry ordinances for the Church, and framed it in uniformity of Prayer
and government to that, which then was used in the Church of Rome: but long
before Aug. time, as it may by our Stories appear, (even in the days of King
Lucius, who sent to Elutherius a Bishop of Rome, for Ethelward. lib. unico.
learned men to instruct him and his people in the Faith, which was about a
hundred and forty years after the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ) the
Faith of Christ was here preached in Britain, and fifteen Archbishops are by
our Stories reported, one to have succeeded Iocelin of Furnes in his Book of
British Bishops. Marianus Scotus.
an other in the Sea of London, before the irruption of the Saxons into this
Land: All which time it is not like the Churches of God that were in the Land,
were void of this provision for the Ministry, so that I assure my self the
payment of Tithes was far more ancient than the time of Augustine; albeit the
Conqueror cites there the authority of Austin, rather than any former
precedent of the Britons, both for that the doctrine of Austin was better
known unto the Saxons, among whose Ancestors Austin taught and governed as an
Archbishop, than any of the Fathers of the British Church, to whom the Saxons
were enemies, and their tongue altogether unknown unto them; and beside, for
that this doctrine of Austin, concerning Tithes, best suited with the general
custom that was then used thoroughout all Europe in paying thereof.

The next Prince after William the Conqueror that ordered any thing about
payment of Tithes, for ought that I have read to the contrary was Ed. 1. who at
the petition of the Clergy, established the Articles of the Clergy, which his
Son Edw. 2. confirmed by his Letters Patents under his great Seal, and by
consent of Parliament, at the petition of the Clergy in the IX. year of his
Reign.

In Edward the thirds time, Writs of Scire facias were granted An. 18. Ed. 3.
cap. 14.
out of the Chancerie, to warn Prelates and other Clerks, to answer for Dismes
there; but after the matter was well understood by the King, the parties were
dismissed from the Secular Judges, for such manner of pleas, saving to the King
his right, and such as his Ancestors had, and were wont to have of Reason.

During the Reign of Richard the second, Parsons of holy Church An 1. Rich 2.
cap. 14.
were drawn into secular Courts for their own Tithes, by the name of goods
taken away; And it was decreed by the King, that in such case the general
averment of the plaintiff should not be taken, without showing specially how
the same was his Lay-cattell.

By the Statute of the first of the same King cap. 14. it is acknowledged, that
the pursuing for Tithes of right does, and of old times was wont to pertain to
the Spiritual Court, and that the Judges of 15. Ed. 3.
holy Church only have the cognizance in these matters.

By the Statute of the 15. of Edw. the third, it is ordered, That Ministers of
holy Church, neither for money taken for the redemption of corporal penance,
nor for proof and account of Testaments, nor for travel taken about the same,
nor for solemnity of Marriage, nor for any other thing touching the
Jurisdiction of holy Church should be appeached, or arrested, or driven to
answer the Kings Justices, or other Ministers, and thereupon they should have
writs in 2. Henr. 4.
the Chancerie, to the Justices when they demanded them.

In the second year of Henry the fourth, the Religious of the order of the
Cystercians, that had purchased Bulls from the Pope to be discharged of the
payment of Tithes, were by act of Parliament reduced 5. H. 4 C. 11.
to that state that they were in before.

In the 5. year of the same King it was ordered, That all Farmers, and
Occupiers of any lands or possessions belonging to any Friars Aliens, should
pay all manner of Tithes due to Parsons and Vicars of holy Church, in whose
Parishes the same were, as the Law of holy Church required, notwithstanding the
same were seized into the Kings hand, or any Prohibition were made, or to be
made to the contrary.

About the 7. year of the same King, such religious persons as had purchased
Bulls from the Pope in the days of Richard the second, to be discharged of
Dismes pertaining to Parish Churches, Prebends, Hospitals, or Vicarages, not
put in execution, were forbid from that time forward, to put them in execution,
or to purchase any other in time to come.

After King Henry the eigth had dissolved the Monasteries, and other like
religious houses, and sold the Churches and Tithes thereto belonging to Lay
men, (who before that time were not capable of the same; insomuch as after the
dissolution, when the Purchasers demanded the same, they were denied to hold
plea thereof, by reason 27. Hen. 8. cap. 20.
of their incapacitie) a Statute was made in the 27. year of the same King,
whereby all Subjects of the Kings Dominions, were to pay their Tithes, and
other duties of holy Church, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and
ordinances of the Church of England, and after the laudable uses and customs
of the Parishes and places where they dwelt, or occupied lands, and the same to
be sued for before the Ordinary, or some other competent Judge of the place,
according to the course and process of the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts of
England: which Statute because it took little effect, by reason of the
obstinacy of the people in not yielding these duties to the Laity, who had
purchased them, and that the said Purchasers could neither by the order or
course of the Ecclesiastical Laws, sue for them in any Ecclesiastical Court
of this Land, neither was there found any remedy in the Common Law of this
Land, whereby they might be releeved against them that wrongfully detained the
same. Therefore in the 32. following an other Statute was made, wherein it was
32. Hen. 8. c. 7.
enacted, that all and singular persons of this Realm, and other of the Kings
Dominions, of what state, degree, or condition soever they were, should fully,
truly, and effectually divide, set out, yield, and pay all and singular their
Tithes and Offerings to the owners, proprietaties and possessors of Parsonages,
Vicarages, and other Ecclesiastical places according to the lawful customs
and usages of the Parish and places, where such Tithes or other duties rise and
grow due. And in case where any are wronged and greeved, being either an
Ecclesiastical or Lay person, for the wrongful deteining or withholding of
the said Tithes or Offerings, or any part or parcel thereof, the same to have
full power and authority to convent the same person or persons so deteining
the same, before the Ordinary or other competent Judge of the place, where
such wrong was done: and the same Ordinary or competent Judge to have power,
by virtue of the said Act, to hear, decide, and determine the same by
definitive sentence, according to the course and proceeding of the
Ecclesiastical Law, without reservation of any right to the Temporal Judge to
give remedy by any suit or action for the recovery of the same; saving in case
where an inheritance or freehold in the premises is claimed, and the person
claiming is disseised, deforced, and put from the possession of the same, in
which cases only, the Statute allows the Temporal Judge to take knowledge,
and that only for the regaining of the right and the possession of the
inheritance so lost.

After the decease of King Henry, King Edward his Son 2. Ed. 6. c. 13
tending in like sort the state of the Clergy, the benefit of his subjects,
and the practice of the Ecclesiastical Courts of this Land, made a Statute,
whereby he did not only ratify, confirm, and allow such Statutes as his
Father had formerly made, but did further order, that every of the Kings
subjects from thenceforth should justly and truly without fraud or deceit, set
out and pay all manner of prediall tithes in their proper kind, as they did
rise and happen, in such manner as had been paid within the forty years next
before the making of that act, or of right or custom ought to have been paid,
with certain forfeitures and penalties, as well against them which carried
away any prediall Tithes, before the tenth part thereof were justly divided
from the same, or otherwise agreed for with the owner thereof; as also against
those that did let or hinder the owner thereof, his deputy or servant, to
view, take, or carry away the same. Enacting further, that the party so
substracting or withdrawing any of the Tithes, obventions, profits,
commodities, or other duties aforesaid, might or should be convented or sued
in the Kings Ecclesiastical Court, by the party complainant, to the intent the
Kings Ecclesiastical Judge might then and there determine the same, according
to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And that it should not be lawful for the
Parson, Vicar, or any other owner or farmer thereof, contrary to the same act,
to convent, or sue any with-holder of Tithes, or any other like duties, before
any other Judge then Ecclesiastical, excepting only out of the said Statute
things contrary or repugnant to, or against the effect and meaning of the
Statute of Westminster the second, the fifth Chapter, the Statutes of Articuli
Cleri, Circumspecte agatis, Sylva Caedua, the treaties De Regia Prohibitione,
matters against the Statute of Anno primo Edwardi primi, Capite decimo, and
such other matters beside, wherein the Kings Court of right ought to have
Jurisdiction.

SECT. 2.
That the Statutes of the xxvii. and xxxii. of Henr. the 8. and the 2. of
Edward the vi. cap. 13. intended for the true payment of Tithe, and the
preservation of the trial thereof unto the Ecclesiastical Courts, are now
turned to the hinderance of them both.

NOtwithstanding all which good provision of ancient Kings before the Conquest,
and modern Kings since the Conquest, for the assuring of the suit of Tithes to
the Ecclesiastical Courts only, and the continual possession that the
Ecclesiastical Courts have had of the same, deduced from so ancient time, as
has been before showed, and so often obtained in contradictorie judgment, as
the consultations thereupon granted do testify: yet sundry men of this Land,
in sundry ages, have by wrenches and subtle devises (which are odious in Law,
and are by all godly and wise Judges by all possible means evermore to be
restrained) raised up matter out of the said Statutes themselves, contrary to
the true sense and meaning thereof, to draw the trial of most of those matters
away from the Ecclesiastical L. legata inutiliter. ff. de adimendas legatis.
l. 2. ante finem. C. de juretur. propter calumniam dando.
Courts. So that those Statutes which then were intended for the good of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, are now become the utter ruin and overthrow of the
same, contrary to the rule of the Law, and common reason, that things which
were purposed for one end, should work unto an other.

The first advantage they take against the Ecclesiastical Courts out of these
Statutes, is gathered out of the twenty seventh, and thirty second of Henry 8.
where it is ordered, that all the Kings Subjects shall pay their Tithes,
according 27. and 32. H. 8.
to the laudable uses and customs of their Parishes, and places where such
Tithes grow and become due: which, albeit is undoubtedly meant of
Ecclesiastical customs, triable at the Ecclesiastical Law, and so ever held
till now of late, that men think all too much that goes beside their own
net; yet there want not in these days, which go about with all might and
maine to draw away these things unto the Temporal Courts, as belonging to the
Temporal Crown and dignity: Wherein they do wrong, not only to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Courts, to spoil them of their ancient Jurisdiction, but also
do injury to the King himself, as though he had but one proper Jurisdiction
belonging to his Throne, and seat of Majesty, and that which were done by his
Ecclesiastical power, were done against his Crown and Dignity; whereas they
are equally united in him, and his Throne is no less stayed up by his
Ecclesiastical power, than it is upholden by his Temporal authority. And
therefore a mere Paradoxe is that, that they so constantly affirm, That
customs in payment of Tithes are matters of Temporal cognizance only, and
not of Spiritual cognition. For, as there be secular customs, such as are the
customs of Manors and Lordships, where the Lord has his Rent, his heriot,
his relief and service; and the tenant again does his homage and fealty,
according to the nature of his Tenure, which secular customs, the forenamed
Statute De Regia Prohibitione, forbids Ecclesiastical Judges to deal in:
So also there are Ecclesiastical customs, such as is the payment of Tithes,
and other Ecclesiastical duties, to which common Lawyers are not to put their
hands, but to abstain from them, as dedicated to the use and trial of the
spiritual Courts. Otherwise would neither the ancient Authors of the
Legatines, and Provincial constitutions of this Land (the eldest of which, are
equal with the days of Henry the third, and the youngest of them ends in
the reign of Henry the fifth) ever have Provincial. c. quoniam de decimis.
changed so many several customs of payment of Tithes, as then were within
the Land, and in stead of them, have brought in one uniforme payment of the
same, as is at this day used, save where either the negligence of the Parsons,
or the covetousness of the Parishioners has in some point changed the same.
Neither would these Statutes of Henry the eigth ever have ordered the people
should pay their Tithes after the laudable customs and usages of the Parishes
where they grew, if the usage and custom of the payment it self had not been
subject to the Ecclesiastical cognizance: for in vain shall a man sue for
that, the Law allows him no course to come by, if it be denied in the
speciallest L. Finals. ff. de officio ejus cut mandata est turisd. and l. 3.
ff. de penu legata.
point belonging to that suite: for this is undoubted Law: where ever there is
an authority or Jurisdiction granted, there are in like manner granted all
those things, without which that authority or Jurisdiction cannot be
perfected, or performed.

SECT. 3.
That customs of payment of tithes are triable only at the Ecclesiastical
courts.

ANd therefore it is without question, as Tithes, by the said Statutes, are
only recoverable by the Ecclesiastical Law, and not elsewhere; so also the
custom whereby they are paid, is only triable at the Ecclesiastical Law.
Otherwise this inconvenience will follow thereupon, which in all other Laws,
beside this of ours, is a great absurdity, Bartol. l. nulli C. de iudicijs.
Glos. c. significaverunt de iudicijs.
that the connexitie of the cause, which the Civilians call Continentiam
causarum, will be dismembered and disjoined, which by all good policy,
together with all her parts emergent or annexed, ought to be handled,
discussed, and determined before one and the self same Judge; one, I mean not
in number, but one in profession, for otherwise I should, by this assertion,
bar Appeals, which is not mine intent.

Which course, if it were held here in England, causes should not be drawn
peece-meale in such sort as Medea tore her brother limme-meale, and one part of
it carried to this Cicero pro Murena.
Court, another to that, like unto the rent lims of the child that were cast
here and there by Medea, thereby to hinder her father from pursuing her; but
all should be ended in one and the self same Court, which would be a great
ease to the subject, who now to his intolerable vexation, and excessive charges
is compelled to run from Court to Court, and to gather up as it were, one lim
of his cause here, and another there, and yet happily in the end cannot make a
whole and perfect body of it.

Beside, it is a mighty disorder in a Commonwealth, thus to jumble one
Jurisdiction with another, and the very confusion as well of the one Law as the
other; for as Kingdoms are preserved by knowing their bounds, and keeping
their limits, so also Jurisdictions are maintained and upheld by containing
themselves within the lists or banks of their authority.

Further, unles they will grant that there is an Ecclesiastical custom, as
there is a Secular Custom, and that the one is as well to be tried in the one
Court, as the other is in the other, they will make their own Doctrine in the
before rehearsed Prohibition void, where they will have it certain, that there
is a Secular Custom; and if there be a Secular Custom, then doubtless there
is also an Ecclesiastical or Spiritual custom: for the word Secular, is not
put in that Glo(...) Clem. unica in verbo aternaliter de summa t^^nit. and fide
catholica.
place absolutely, but relatively; and the nature of Relatives, is one to put
another, and one to remove another: but in the Secular customs they bar the
Civilian, therefore they grant him the spiritual, for of contrary things there
are contrary reasons, and contrary effects: and what that which is proposed,
does work in that which is propounded, L. Fin.. plus autem de legatis 3. and
^b^ Angel.
the same again that which is opposed does work in that which is opponed, by
which Rule, as Temporal Lawyers are to deal in Temporal Customs, and
spiritual men are not to intermeddle therein, so also Ecclesiastical Lawyers
are to deal in Ecclesiastical causes, and Temporal Lawyers are not to busy
themselves thereabout.

And that this was the intent of the King, when he first received the Church
into his protection, with all the privileges thereof, may appear hereby, that
having united both the Jurisdictions in his own person, he did not jumble them
both together, as now they are, but kept them distinct, one from the other; not
only in authorizing the Ecclesiastical Courts that were before, but also in
using the very words and phrases that the Jurisdictionaries Ecclesiastical did
use every where in their writings, even these words whereupon men now take hold
to frame Prohibitions, viz. (according to the laudable customs and usages of
the parish and places where such Tithes grow) which were the words of Innocent
the third, in the Decretals upon the title of Tithe, long before these Statutes
were made, or any other Statutes concerning the true payment of Tithes; and
Linwod in the same title of Tithes often uses the very self same words and
phrases that the other does: so that if these words made no Prohibition before
the Statute (as I think, it cannot well be showed to the contrary) neither
ought they to do it now since the Statute; for that they are spoken still in
the Church business, and not in a temporal matter: whose government, although
it be under one and the self same Prince, that the temporal state is, yet is
it distinct from the same, as ever it has been since there has been any
settled form of Church Government in any 1 Cor. 5.
commonwealth, as may appear both by the example of S. Paul, which never
goes to any temporal power to punish the incestuous person, although there
were sundry laws then both in Greek and Latin written of these matters, but
does it by the spiritual sword alone: and also by that, that in matters of
jarre for worldly causes between brother and brother, he forbids such as were
new Christians, to go to 1 Cor. 6.
law before Infidels, but advises them rather to appoint Judges among
themselves to decide such controversies: which albeit in those days was meant
as well of lay Christians, as of the Ministers of the Gospel, for that the
number of them then was small, and the causes of suit they had one against an
other were not many, and might easily be ended by one and the self same
consistory; yet when the number of the Christians increased, and the Church
got some rest from persecution, the Jurisdiction was again divided; and as
there were secular Courts appointed by Princes, wherein temporal men's causes
and lay businesses were heard, so there were also by the same authority
erected Ecclesiastical Courts and Bishops audiences, wherein either
Ecclesiastical men's causes alone, or such as they had against C. de Episcopali
audienta ^ertia.
Lay men, or Lay men against them were treated of, and determined.

So that this was no new devise of Henry the eigth, or Edward his Son, that
when they took upon them the supremacy over the Church, as they had before
over the commonwealth, they did not mishmash both the States together, and
made one confused heap of them both, but left them severed as they found them,
only affording either of them an equal proportion of protection; for that by
these two parts, the Kings Monarchy is complete, and himself is the head and
chief Governor of the whole and entire body of his Realm. For this was
exemplaried unto them in all former ages, since the Church and commonwealth
had any loving and kind cohabitation together, as has been before remembered.
And therefore do they wrong to the ashes of those Kings deceased, which by
subtle sense and strained interpretations, draw these Laws which they
intended for the benefit of the Church, and Church Government, to the overthrow
of the same, as though the Positive Laws of the Kingdom, could not stand, if
the Laws of the Church continued and stood up right.

SECT. 4.
That the limits and bounds of Parishes are of the Ecclesiastical cognizance
only.

Upon the same words of the same Statute, (if perhaps at any time there grow
any controversy about the limits or bounds of Parishes) they draw the same by
like importunity from the trial of the Ecclesiastical Law, unto the Common
Law, avouching the same also to be of the Temporal cognizance; and yet Linwod,
who lived in the days of Henry the fifth, making a Catalogue of the principal
matters that in his days belonged unto the Ecclesiastical Courts, reckons
the bounds of Parishes for one: And very like it is that it should so be, for
that Ecclesiastical men first in this Kingdom, made divisions of Parishes, as
by our own Chronicles it appears; and the first practice thereof within this
Realm, came from Honorius the fourth Registro Eccl. ^p^. Cant. Stew.
Archbishop of Canterbury after Augustine, who himself died in the year of our
Lord God 693. He that shall trace the Writers for that which concerns the
original of Parishes, may find some probable issue, if the course of
Antiquity run clear. Those that first gave example to others in this
matter, are conceived to be the ancient Roman Bishops; for it was recorded in
the Pontifical of Damasus (as some would have it) But in Anastasius
Bibliothecar, we find it, that when Peter had appointed and ordained Priests
etc. and Cletus had reduced them to a certain number, Pope Euarest assigned to
each of them his Parish, or as they then said, his Title: For so a Title is
understood by Onuphrius, and so in effect it may be taken, though otherwise
Paroecia is Accolatus ad sacram Aedem, Titulus autem Aedes ipsa. And it may
seem, that Titulus might be taken for Paroecia, because this has been taken
for that: For in the Councels we shall sometimes find a Parish put for a
Parish Church, which is the meaning of Titulus. See Baronius ad annum Christ.
112. where the learned Cardinal sets down at large what these Titles were,
and why they were so called. As for the time when these Parishes were assigned
by Euarist, it must be about the beginning of the 2 Centurie.

This done, and the number of new Converts increasing, Higinis placed several
Priests in singular Parishes, and the chief of those he called Cardinales
Presbyteros: and here we must believe, that the Romish Cardinals began, if at
least we will be guided by their Historians. In aftertimes Pope Denis
improoved these conveniences invented by his Ancestors, and set limits to
Parishes. And this was done about the year 260. If these things be
answerable, as they are generally received by the Romish Antiquaries, then it
may seem that other Nations made the like provision sooner or later, according
to their example. And this is the rather to be believed, because this Pope
Dionyse wrote an Epistle to Severus Bishop of Corduba, to observe this order in
his Diocese, and look what course himself took, that he should direct
other Bishops to do in like manner. What was elsewhere done does not so
nearly concern, but here at home the first division of Parishes is ascribed
to Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, as the Author here has cited out of the
Register, and it is approved by Cambden. Sedcavendum etc. says Marsil in his
Book de ^od. Eccles. cap. 12. But heed must be taken to the Equivocation of
the word Parish; for it has not always had one and the same acception.
Sometime when nothing is named but a Parish, the whole Diocese is understood,
and this notion of the word often occurres in the Councels and elsewhere.
According to this sense Barbatia spoke a wide word for the Pope, where he
says, that in respect of him, the whole world was but one Parish, tract. de
praestant. Cardinal. Otherwise, A Parish is taken for such a part of the
Diocese, which is assigned to some Priest, arbitrarily sent and maintained by
the Bishop; for it is to be noted, that such a Parish paid all dues to him,
and he to his Clergy, for the primitive community of living, because of
inconvenience ceasing in the Church, this custom was introduced, that all
Church dues should be at the Bishops disposing, so, that being geometrically
divided into four portions, he should have one part, and his Clergy an other,
the third to be disstributed to the poose and strangers, and the last part to
be reserved to the Parishioners for the repairing of Churches. And that this
was the use, especially of the Romish Church, plainly appears by the answer
of Gregory to our Austin, in Bid, lib. 1 cap. 27. The collection of these
dues was committed to the care of the Chorepiscopus, as appears by an Arabic
Canon of the first Council of Nice, which together with other Occumenicall
Councels, and those Canons which are called the Apostles, and some history of
the primitive times, out of Clement etc. we enjoy and esteem as a most
peculiar monument transported hither out of the Eastern world, and placed in
our public Library, by the bouatie of a worthy Benefactor Sir Thomas Roe. The
latter end of that Canon says thus, but for our great want of Arabic
Characters, it must be read in Hebrew -- (...) where the Canon provi-: (...)
death, that it should belong to the charge of the Chorepiscop^ to see, that in
every of their several Cities and Countrey-villages these dues should be
collected proportionably, as every place should be found able; and that these
dues so collected, should be every year brought to the Bishops place of
abode, that there they might be disposed of toward the maintenance of the
Bishop, the relief of the poor and strangers, and the encouragement of his
Clergy, that so there might be concord and unanimity between him and them,
etc. The Latin Translation of these Canons is set forth by Turrian and
Alphons. Pisan. and is to be found in the 1. Tome of the Councels set forth by
Binius. In the Translation, this Canon is the 54. but he that minds to see
it in the Arabic, must look for the 58. Some say, that these Canons are
supposititious; I only know that they may be so, not that they are: and
however it be dull to entertain any thing that shall be obtruded, yet the
rejection of ancient Authors and Councels should be warily concluded upon. Thus
much notwithstanding is recorded, that by reason of the Arian incendiaries, a
complete number of the Canons of this Council was so rarely found, that
Athanasius himself, who was present at the Synod, was forced to send into
these parts, to the Bishop of Rome that then was, to desire from him a perfect
copy, because in the Eastern world, few or none had escaped the fire of the
Arians. This we have out of those Epistles, which are supposed to have past
between Pope Mark and Athanasius concerning the burning of the decrees of
this first N^c^ne Council; and if these be true, the Canons here are the less
to be suspected: But against the credit of those Epistles, the Cardinals
Bellarmine and Baronius have consented, and it may well be thought they have
some cause, for that these Canons much avail their faction, and depend not a
little upon the authority of these Epistles; yet their reasons against these
Epistles are, for the most part, chronologicall; and because such as these are
subject to much hazard, therefore our confidence in believing may be
arbitrarie, and at our own disposing. But be these Canons how they will, yet a
most express monument of this Quadripartite division of Church dues, may be
noted out of an Arabic Canon of the Council of Antioch, Canon 25. I say, an
Arabic, not for curiosity, but because I find this matter more fully there
set down, for the Greek says thus, (...). That the Bishop shall have the
Church dues in his power, that he may dispose of them to every one that
needs, religiously and in the fear of God. But the Arabic Canon more
distinctly -- (...) That the Bishop shall have at his disposing the Church dues
and revenues, to the end, that he may divide and distribute them to his
Clergy, to the Parishioners (for the repairing of Churches) to the poor and
needy, and that he may take to himself what shall be necessary for his own
expense etc. This Quadripartite Division was used in most places, but most
principally in the Roman Church. For in some other the Bishop had the third
part. See Filesacus in his Book De Sacra Episcoporum Authoritate.

Concerning the original of a Parish in these two former Acceptions, it may be
acknowledged* to be a device of the ancient Roman Bishops, and to have been
derived from them to other Nations. But a Parish may be also taken for such a
part of the Diocese, which is limited to some residentiarie incumbent, allowed
by the Bishop, and maintained by the Church dues in his own right. And this
consideration of a Parish most of all agrees with those which we now have. And
it may very well be supposed, that these later Parishes have had their
beginning from the inconveniences of the former. And the designement and
limitation of these, how ever it might have special encouragement from the
devotion of lay men, yet the principal stroke was always given by the
Ecclesiastical, to whom it pertained to consecrate the Churches, and make them
baptisteriall. And that the dividing of Parishes should of right belong unto
Ecclesiastical men, it may be the more reasonable, because the first that ever
divided any Parishes were the Roman Bishops, and they did not only so, but
also gave direction to other Prelates in their several Provinces to do the
like, ospecially if that be true, which we have formerly cited out of that
Epistle of Pope Denis to the Spanish Bishop. However Alexander the third C.
A^aritia. De Prabend. and Dig. gave command to the Canons Regular of York
Diocese; that they should not presume to divide Parishes sine consensu
Archiepiscops. And some encouragement may he had from a decree made in a Synod
holden at Westminster, about the year 1147. which says, c. 4. Nullus Abbas,
nullus Prior, nullus omnioo Monachu^ aut. Clericus Ecclesiam, si^e decimam, seu
qualibet beneficia Ecclesiastica, de dono la^ct accipiet sine propri^ Episcopi
authoritate, and consensu: quod si prasumptum fuerit, irrita erit donatio
hujuscemodi. Chron. MS. Biblioth. Bodleian. And the like intimation is given in
an other Council, holden at the same place, in the year 1149. called by the
most Reverend: Father in. God William; then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
There it is said cap. 10. Vt nulla. persona-Ecclesias vel decimas sen qualibet
alia Ecclesiastica beneficia det vel accipeat sine consens^ and authoritate
Episcopi. If we apply these decrees to the matter in hand we may deduce some
thing answerable to that which is inquired. Besides, Lay men were not to meddle
with the ordering of Tythe-payment, and yet in this division of Parishes, a
principal respect was had to the consideration of Tithes, and therefore it
was, that Parishes were limited with such great care and curiosity. For Bartol
said, That if it were doubted concerning a house, in what Parish it should
stand, it must be conceived to be of that into which it opens, if it opened
several ways, a posterne gate was not respected, but it was judged to belong
unto that Parish into which it opened at the chief Gate. At what time this
last kind of Parishes began else where, we enquire not, when they began here
at home, we find not, unless we understand such as these in the Division of
Honorius: however they must be in use before the days of Edgar, as it seems
by the Sixon Laws of that time. See the Laws of Edgar, cap. 1.


although otherwise the thing it self be more ancient, and descends from the
counsel of Saint Paul, which he gave to Titus, to appoint Tit. cap. 1. v. 5.
Elders in every City: But that Cities and Countries again are divided into
several Parishes, it was the ordinance of Pope Dionysius, about the year 266.
and from him derived into this and other Realms; and the distinction thereof
was chiefly devised, that it might be known of what congregation every people
were, and that so they might be trained up in the School of godliness under
their own Pastor or Minister. But that now the division of Parishes does serve
to other politic uses, it comes not of the first institution thereof, which
was mere Ecclesiastical: but it grows out of a second cause, that is,
because being so fitly and aptly primarily divided by Ecclesiastical men as
they are; the Princes therefore did use the opportunity thereof for temporal
services, subdividing the same again into many Tythings or like smaller
divisions, for the more speedy service of the King, and better ordering of the
commonwealth. Which our ancient Fathers well knowing, never called the same in
question, acknowledging therein the good they had received from Ecclesiastical
men, by this partition of Countries into Parishes: but men of later age being
less thankful than they, and loath to seem beholding to Ecclesiastical
Courts for any matter of good order and disposition, have arrogated the same
wholly to the Temporal Courts; as though the Ecclesiastical Judge could not
as well discern what two or three honest men depose and say as concerning the
limits or bounds of a Parish, as twelve mean men of the country, who are upon
like depositions to give up their verdict. But for the limits of Bishoprics, I
acknowledge that they are Temporal, for that they were not primarily designed
out by Ecclesiastical men, and their direction, but were assigned to
Provinces, or Shires, first described and distinguished by Princes: but for
Parishes, neither reason nor antiquity concurres with them, that they should be
temporal, or that they should be usurped or challenged to be of the temporal
cognizance.

And so much for those Prohibitions, which they commonly frame out of the 27.
and 32. of Henry the eight, not that there are no more but these, but that
having a taste of these, there may be like Judgment made of the rest.

SECT. 5.
That the clause of treble Damages in the 13. chapter 2. Edward the sixth is to
be sued in the Ecclesiastical Courts only.

OUt of the Statute of the 2. of Edward the sixth cap. 13. they raise many
Prohibitions, the first whereof in order of the Statute, although the last in
practice, is the prohibition of treble damages, upon not dividing and setting
out of Tithes, or at the least, for the not compounding for them before they be
carried away: Which forfeiture they suggest, and thereupon bring a Prohibition,
and so draw the whole suit of Tithes into their Courts, contrary to the true
meaning of this statute, which would have those treble damages, in case of not
justly dividing and setting out, or not compounding for the Tithes before they
be carried away, be no less recoverable before an Ecclesiastical Judge
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law, than the forfeiture of double value
(by the letting and stopping of them to be carried away, whereby they are lost,
with the costs thereon growing) is remediable at the same Law: For albeit the
clause which is to redress this wrong, be put after that part of the Statute,
which concerns the stopping and letting of Tithes to be carried away, yet when
there is as great reason hatt it should stretch it self to the first branch of
the provision, as to the second, and the second branch hangs on the first by
a conjunction copulative, and there is no hetorogeny or disparitie in the
matter, whereby it may not be as well verified in the one branch, as in the
other, I see no reason why it should not equally respect them both, according
to the rule of the Law; Clausula in fine posita refertur ad C. 6. tit. 28. l. 1.
omnia praecedentia, maxim quando non resultaret intellectus contrarius juri,
as here it does not: for the intendment of of either branch of the Statute is,
to procure by their several forfeitures, a just and true payment of Tithes,
the recovery whereof, as the precise words of the Statute in one member
restrain unto the Ecclesiastical Law; so the Identitie of reason in the other
member does confirm it unto the same Law, for where there is the like reason
or equity, there ought to be the like disposition or order of I. Illud ff. ad
l. Aquiliam.
Law.

Beside if the principal cause it self be triable in the Ecclesiastical
Court, why should not those things which hang thereon be tried in the same
Court, for they are but as it were accessories to the principal, and so not
only follow the nature of the principal, but also belong to the Court of the
principal, and are determinable where the principal is, for otherwise happily
there might fall out contrary sentences of one and the self same thing, the
one condemning, the other absolving.

Further, in that Court wherein the course of Justice already is begun, the
cause may with less labor and easier expenses be ended, being for the most
part determinable by one sentence, than that a new process thereof should
begin before another Judge, who knows little or nothing of the principal
matter, and therefore cannot so easily decide the accessorie.

Lastly, those which take this course, first to surmise a forfeiture, then to
draw the original suit, whereupon the forfeiture grew into question, bring in
a proceeding far different from the common style of all well ordered Courts, in
all Nations, among whom the conusance of the cause, and trial thereof goes
before, and the forfeiture or execution thereof follows after: But in this
Hysteron proteron, the execution is in the forward, and the trial is in the
rereward: In which doing they deal much like as Cacus the Giant dealed with
Hercules Oxen, who, to the intent that Hercules should not find what way they
were gone, drew them backward by the tail into his Cave; but as that device
served not Cacus, but that Hercules had his Oxen again, so it is to be hoped,
the Reverend Judges of the Land, will not long suffer this subtlety to
prevail, but as it came in like a Fox, and reigned as a Wolf, so in the end
it shall dye and vanish away like a vain device, much like the destiny of
Boniface the eigth: for the reverend Judges are not only to minister justice
between man and man, so that every man may have his own, and none be
oppressed by an other, but also they are to carry an upright and indifferent
hand between Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction; yea though themselves be parties
to the matter in question, so that one Jurisdiction eat not up an other, as
the Locusts in Egypt devoured up all the green things of the land.

SECT. 6.
That the naming of Law or Statute in a Statute, does not make it to be of the
Temporal cognizance, if the matter thereof be Ecclesiastical.

ANother rendevous they make of the words of this Proviso (Law, statute,
privilege, prescription, or composition real) as though all which passes
under any of these terms must belong to the trial of the Common Law, and not
to the cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Law, and that forsooth, because these
words and terms are expressed in the Statute: which is much like unto that, as
one would needs have a house, to be Master Peacocks house, because he saw a
Peacock sit upon the top thereof: But it is not the naming of a thing in a Law
or Statute, that makes it to be of the Temporal cognizance, or otherwise: but
it is the nature or quality of the thing named, that rangeth it under the one
Law, or the other. So that if the matter ordered in the Law or Statute be
Temporal, the cognizance shall be Temporal; if Spiritual, then the case is
determinable in the Ecclesiastical Law: for this Proviso is not prohibitorie,
as the last Proviso of this Satute is, whereby Ecclesiastical Judges are
forbidden to hold plea of any thing that is in the said Proviso contained; but
it is rather directive, and shows where the Ecclesiastical Judge is to give
way to immunities, and to pronounce for them: so that for any thing is
contained in this Proviso to the contrary, the cognizance of these matters,
especially, Privilege, Prescription, and Composition, still remains at the
trial of the Ecclesiastical Law, as they did before this Proviso was made for
Deprascript. lib. 2. tit. 26. De Privileg. lib. 5. tit. 33.
Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, as may appear by the several
titles in the same Law hereon written.

And for the other words, [Law and Statute] therein mentioned: (when as the
King has two Capacities of government in him, the one Spiritual, the other
Temporal, and his high Court of Parliament, wherein Laws are made, does stand
as well of Spiritual men, as Temporal men, and so ought to stand in both
houses, if the ancient Book De modo tenendi Parliamenti be true and
authentical, which makes the upper House of three States, the Kings Majesty,
the Lords Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal; and the lower House in like sort
of three other, the Knights, the Procurators for the Clergy, and the
Burgesses; and his Majesty has within this Realm as well Ecclesiastical
Lawyers, as Temporal, which are no less able to judge and determine of
Ecclesiastical matters, then the Temporal Lawyers of temporal business) It
is not to be imagined, but as his sacred Majesty will have those Laws to be
held Temporal, and to have their constructions from Temporal Lawyers, which
are made and promulged upon Temporal rights and causes: So also his Highness
pleasure is, and ever has been of all his predecessors, Kings and Queens of
this Land, that such Laws and Statutes as are set out and published upon
Ecclesiastical things and matters, shall be taken and accounted
Ecclesiastical, and interpreted by Ecclesiastical Lawyers, although either of
them have interchangeably each others voice in them, to make them a Law.

And that the King does infuse life into either of the Laws, when as yet their
substance is unperfect, and they are as it were Embryons, is in temporal
matters, by his temporal authority, and in spiritual matters, by his
spiritual authority, for to that end he has his double dignity in that
place, as also the Ecclesiastical Prelates sustain two persons in that place,
the one as they are Barons, the other as they are Bishops: So that even the
orders of the House do evince, that there are two sorts of Laws in that place
unconfounded both in the head and the body, although for communion sake, and to
add more strength to each of them, the general allowance passes over them
all. And as they rest unconfounded in the creation of them, so ought they to be
likewise in the execution of them: and as the Temporal Law sorts to the
Temporal Lawyers, so the Spiritual Laws or Statutes should be allowed and
allotted unto the Spiritual Lawyers.

And as the nomination of these words Law or Statute in this precedent Proviso,
makes not the Law or Statute Temporal, but that it may remain wholly
Ecclesiastical, by reason of the Spiritual matters it does contain, and the
power of him that quickneth it, and powers life thereinto: so much less can
the inserting of these terms, Privileges, Prescriptions, or Composition
real, entitle the Common Law to the right thereof, or the Professors of the
said Law, to the interpretation thereof for that matters of these titles so
far as they concern Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, have been
evermore since there has been any Ecclesiastical Law in this Land (which
has been near as long as there has been any profession of Christianity
with us) of Ecclesiastical ordinance, neither ever were of the Temporal
cognizance, until now of late, that they transubstantiate every thing into
their own profession; as Midas turned or transubstantiated every thing that
he touched into gold.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1.
How it comes to pass, that when tithes were never clogged with custom,
prescription, or composition under the Law, they are clogged with the same
under the Gospel, and the causes thereof.

BUt here it will not be amiss to inquire, (since Tithes came in the
beginning of the primitive Church, within a little time after the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the subversion of the Jews policy, unto the Christian
Church and commonwealth, void of all these encumbrances, as shall appear
after by the testimony of sundry of the ancient Fathers, which were near the
Apostles time) how it comes to pass (since Tithes are no less the Lords
portion now, than they were then, and in the Patriarchs time before them) that
these greevances have come upon them more under the Gospel, than ever they did
under the Law: for then never any Lay man durst stretch out his hand unto
Malach. 3.
them, to diminish any part thereof, but he was charged with robbery by the
Lords own mouth; and in punishment thereof, the heavens were shut up for
giving rain unto the earth; and the Palmer-worme and Grasshopper were sent to
devour all the green things upon the earth. And for Ecclesiastical men, it is
not read any where in the Scripture, that ever they attempted to grant out any
privilege of Tithes to any person, other than to whom they were disposed by
the Law, or to make any composition thereof between the Lay Jew, and the Lords
Levites: every of the which have been, not only attempted against the Church
in Christianity, but executed with great greediness: so far worse has
been the state of the Ministry under the Gospel, than was the condition of
the Priests and Levites under the Law.

SECT. 2.
That the causes are two fold: First, The violent intrusion of Lay men; and
secondly, The overmuch curiosity of School men; and first of the first
cause, and therein concerning Charles Martels Infeudations, and the violent
prescriptions ensuing thereupon.

THe beginning whereof, although it be hard for me to find out, because there
is small memory thereof left in Stories; yet as far as I can by all
probabilities conjecture, this great alteration in Ecclesiastical matters,
came by two occasions: the one by the violence of the Laity, thrusting
themselves into these Ecclesiastical rights, contrary to the first institution
thereof; for when they were first received into the Christian world, they were
received and yielded to for the benefit of the Clergy only, as in former
time under the Law, they had been for the use of the Priests and ^evites
only: The other was, the too too much curiosity of Schoolmen, who being not
content with the simple entertainment of Tithes into the Church, as the ancient
Fathers of the primitive Church received them, would needs seek out how, and
in what right, and in what quantity this provision belongs unto the Church,
wherein they did by their overmuch subtilty, rather confound the truth, than
make that appear which they intended to do. By the first of these was brought
in that great Prescription, which is called the Prescription beyond the Lateran
Council, whereby Lay men held Tithes in fee, without paying any thing
therefore unto the Church; and out of that issued the rest of those petty
Prescriptions, which we now have, which are nothing else but imitations of the
first. By the second came in Privileges, Customs, and Compositions; or if
they came not in wholly by them, yet surely were they much strengthened by them;
but of either of these after in their places. But for that of all these
forenamed greevances in the Church, as far as my reading serves me,
Prescription is the eldest, and first rusht into the Church, and violated the
Liberties thereof; I will first begin thereby, and show upon what occasion it
first seized upon the Church, and prevailed against her, and then will I speak
of the rest in order.

It is out of question, that from the time of Origin, who lived within four
score years after the death of Saint John the Evangelist, as also did Cyprian,
who was his coequall in time, and so along by the ages of Chrysostom, Ambrose,
and Augustine, and some of the purer Popes, as Urban the second, Dionysius, and
Gregory the great, there was good use of Tithe in the Churches, where
Christian Religion was embraced, as may appear by every of their testimonies,
that God had not appointed it to be a provision only for such as served at
the Altar under the Law, but also was purposed by him from the beginning, to be
a maintenance for the Ministry under the Gospel: and therefore Origin in his
xi. Homily upon Numbers, speaking of Tithes, says thus, I hold it necessary
that this Law or precept be observed according to the letter: and upon the 22.
of Matthew, he thinks Christ's words uttered there as concerning Tithe, to be
a precept no less necessary for the use of Christians, than they had been
for the Jews: and therefore he accounts Tithe neither ceremonial, nor
Judicial, but moral and perpetual. Cyprian in his Lxvi. Epistle, advises
the Clergy of his time, since they had Tithes allotted unto them for their
maintenance, they should not absent themselves from Gods service. Chrysostom
upon the viij. of the Acts, uses this argument to persuade husbandmen to pay
their Tithes truly unto the Church, That it is good for them so to do, for
that there are continual prayers and intercessions made for them by the
Ministry. Jerome upon Timothy says, The precept of payment of Tithes, is
as well to be understood in the Christian people, as in the Jews. Read
Ambrose, in his Lent Sermon, and Augustine in his xliiij. Homily, and Gregory
in his xvj. Homily, and you shall find no less plain places for the
continuance of the payment of Tithes among the Christians, than the former
were. Add to these the practice of Dionysius himself, who by Jeromes account
flourished in the year 266. who not only divided out Parishes, drawing the
example thereof from Saint Paul, who first appointed Bishops in Cities, but
also assigned orderly to every Parish his Tithes. All which held in the
Christian commonwealth, in a decent and comely sort, until the irruption of
the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandals, upon the Christian world, who first invading
Italy under the Emperor Justinian, did for many years so harrow the whole
Country, and specially Lombardie, as that they left not almost a man of
excellent Religion any where unpersecuted, overturned Churches, burnt
Libraries, overthrew Schools of learning, and to be short, what wickedness
did they not? insomuch as Gregory the great, being otherwise a very good man,
and one that did rely himself upon the providence of Almighty God, verily
thought and taught that the end of all things was then come: but after those
fierce and barbarous people once set their face to go against France, (which
had been hitherto free from that Hospinian. de orig. Monach.
inundation) which happened in the days of King Theodorick, who lived about
the 650. year of the incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ; Concerning
Charles Martel we find in Story thus. That though he was a man of a rare
and warlike spirit, and vouchsafed great protection to the perilous times he
lived in, yet also we find, that he gave occasion to many miserable
inconveniences to follow, by suffering himself to be so notorious and unusual
an example of Sacrilege. For, when his great design against the Saracens
stood in agitation, he refused to put himself upon so desperate an attempt,
unless the Clergy would yield up their Tithes and maintenance for the time
being tow(...)s the expe(...) of the war. This condition the Clergy
(...)pted of, moved thereto by the exigencies of that age, and the fair
pretense of Martel, who promised, that at his safe return he would restore all
again, and that with ample interest, but that Charles never did this, these
days can testify to those. This fact of Martel, if it were so, was execrable,
and if it were not, yet the opinion of it has been so harshly entertained by
Tradition, that we find him confidently damned in the Legend. And this Story
of his damnation is fastened upon Euchere Bishop of Orleance, who is said to
have seen in a vision this Martel in hell torments: and that Euchere might
believe what he saw, an Angel instructs him to seek for Martel in his
Sepulcher, and so he did, but found him not, but he found the place all
black, and in stead of Charles, a direful Serpent. See the Annals of Orleance.
Concerning the damnation of Martel, we have nothing to say, what may be
thought of the vision shall hereafter be enquired. This is certain and
believed by all, that this Charles was a great oppressor of the Church. For to
let pass that of H^nemare Archbishop of Rhems, Gregory of Tholous, Sigebert
and others, it is observable, that this could not be omitted by Dupleix
himself, one of the greatest friends that ever Martel shall find in History.
For though this Author in one place spending his credit upon the admiration of
Charles, sets him in the same line with lulius Casar and great Alexander,
warranting him to be Sans doubt le plus grand homme que la France ait jamais
preduis, yet else where he could not deny, but that il a^oit banni aucuns
Euesques de leur seiges and mis en leur place des hommes lais, he had thrust
Bishops out of their Sees, and put lay men in their place; and to make up the
complement of this sacrilege, he spared not that Bishop of Rheims qu'il avoit
leve des fonts de Baptesme, as Fauchet has observed. To weigh down this grand
impiety Dupleix brings into the scale cent mill ames, a 100000 souls
converted to Christianity by the help of this Charles: but the conversion was
wrought by the Archbishop of Mentz, and if it were promoted by Martel it was
well; yet his Son Pipin thought this satisfaction too little, and therefore
volut estre inhun^e le ventre and la face contre terre pour l'expiation des
peches de son Pere, he would be interred with his face and belly downward, to
expiate his Fathers trans^ressions, as Dupleix also was contented to observe,
and it is to be found in the Antiquities of France.

Therefore Charles Martels Sacrilege in general must be granted. But it has
been also constantly received, that in particular this Charles defrauded the
Church of her Tithes, as has been said. But this passage of the Story has
found some opposition. One of the first that ever showed himself an adversary
to this opinion, was Stephen Pasquier, a man, whom though we forsake in this
particular, yet we may safely commend for his variety of learning otherwise,
an ample testimony whereof he has given in his Book De Recherches de la
France: saving that he cannot be pardoned for his ha^sh and ^^vious mind
toward the dignity and Jurisdiction of the Clergy, which discovers it
self in several passages of his third Book. In the same Book, Chapt. 35.
which is Des Dismes Infeodees, Concerning the Infeudation of Tithes, he
adventureth to overthrow the received opinion. The maine reason he urges (as
far as I conceive him) is, for that those who first and anciently wrote the
History of their Kings, or otherwise took notice of the acts of Charles, do
not accuse him of any such Infeudations. But to this I suppose some answer may
be conceived in this manner.

The principal Historiographer of whom we are to consider in this case, must
be Aimoine, who wrote the Story of the French Kings, and what was delivered
in his Chronicle concerning the times we aim at, for the most part, made up
the Books of those Writers that succeeded, for some certain centuries of
years. This Aimoine (Stephen says) makes no mention of that Act of Martel:
it is true, neither makes he mention of any Sacrilege at all, no not so much
as Stephen himself, and all Writers believe that Martel was guilty of: And I
should wonder if he had, for Aimoine lived in the time of Charles the great,
and what he wrote concerning him and his ancestors, he received from Autmare
Chaplain to the same Charles, and this is too near the time of Martel for a
true Historian. Indeed the lives of pious Princes may be written before their
deaths, and if there happen an unworthy passage, it is not corrected in their
Story, but their Conversation: But when a great King proves not good, his
first Historians must be worse, for no Subject may dare to write what such a
Sovereign could commit. And therefore if an ill Act occur, the Historian
must dissemble or defend it; for what e're be after thought of great men's
actions, yet when they are newly done, either they must not be mentioned, or if
they be, they must be magnified. Therefore Autmare, who depended upon Charles
the Great, must not tell such tales of his Grandfather. And for this cause it
is, that when Aimoine speaks of Martel, he styles him virum sagacissimum, and
virum egregium, adding moreover that his achievements were accomplished
Christo in omnibus praeside: See lib. 4. c. 57. where also relating his
victories, he compares the siege of Avignon to that of Jericho, as if Charles
had marched on like those great Commanders of Israel, and the walls of Avignon
had fallen down like those of Jericho at the very sound of Martels Trumpets.
Thus Aimoine observes the time he lives in. So Boniface Archbishop of Mentz in
Martels days, though perhaps he could have said more than he did, if that be
not enough which he has said, that this Charles was Ecclesiasticarum
pecun^arum inproprios usus commutator; yet that which he did say seems to
have been no otherwise publicly known than in an Epistle of his to
Ethelbald, one of our Mercian Kings, a fragment whereof is inserted into the
Story of this Ethelbald by William of Malmsebury; but in other Copies of this
Epistle, the clause which concerns Martel occurres not; for of late days, by
the great industry of Serarius, we come to see a volume of that Archbishops
Epistles, the nineteenth whereof is that which was directed to Ethelbald. But
there the passage of Martel cannot be found. And the truth must be, that if
Boniface have any such thing to say of Charles, he must send it far enough,
for it might not be told at home.

That which has been said may pass for a reason, why so great a crime of
Martel was not so publicly recorded till time could wear out the danger, and
the Historian could write the Act with as much confidence and security as
Martel did it. Therefore it is, that though the Writers began betimes to touch
at his impiety, yet they struck not at this master piece but by degrees.

Paulus AEmilius, a diligent Writer, and one that spent 30. years to compile
the French Story, seems even in those days to report this timorously, as if
it had been then too soon to give a just account of this Sacrilege. For when
he comes to Charles Martel he says, that there passed upon him a diverse
rumor. For some gave out Eum omnium Ducum Imperatorumque gloriam
transcendisse, that he had transcended the renounce of all Kings and Captains
that ever were before him. Others reported, that he only seemed to do so in
the eyes of ordinary men, and that he had decumarum sacrum ju^ militaribus
viris attribuisse, given over the divine right of Tithes to his military men.
But it is necessary for the Reader to observe, that the Authors of the first
report were, as Paul says, Summi viri great men, but those that related the
second were Sancti viri good men. And the first sort may, but the latter ought
to be believed But we shall find this matter more confidently related by the
French Historians, who spare not to set it down plainly and ingeniously,
though it concern their Story more than others that this Martel should be
blameless.

An ancient Chronicle of theirs Le Rozier Historial de France part. 2
concerning this passage says thus, Par le conseil des Euesques luy furent
donn^z les dismes de. Eglises pour gaiger ses cheualiers, qu'il promised render
and fair de plus grans bien a l'Eglise s'il viveit longuement. Fol. 21. he
says, That Charles did bestow the Church Tithes upon his Knights, and that he
promised to restore them again, and much more; but this must be s'il vivoit
longuement, if he lived long enough. How long Charles would have lived to do
this, I know not, but that he lived not so long as to see it done, we are sure
enough. The like is reported concerning this passage, by Nich. Giles, but
because this Author has been corrected and enlarged by Belleforest, we shall
use his words, and they are these, Pour fournir aux fraits and dispenses qu'il
convenoit fair pour lesdictes guerres que ledict Charles Martel avoit contre
les Sarazins ennemis de la Chrestiente ledict Charles Martel par le conseil des
Princes donna and bailla aucunes des dismes que tenoyent les Eglises a ses gens
d'armes moyennant qu'il promit que si Dieu l^y donnoie vie and grace de venir
au dessus des dictes Sarrazins il les restitueroit and plus grands biens y
donneroit, etc. see that which follows in the Author. The same is the
relation of Du Tillet, On feinct qu'il est damn en enfer pource qu'il print
quelque party des dismes pour aucunement satisfaire aux Nobles, etc. Thus also
Seigneur Du Haillan, Il donna les dismes, He gave the Tithes (to his Nobles)
and he promised to restore them again; but Du Haillan adds, Ce qu'il ne
peut toutefoisfa^e comme il avoit promis. To the same purpose Fauchet in his
Antiquites and Histoires Gauloises, Liver cinquiesme, chapitre 21. Leur ostant
une party des dismes pour advantager la Noblesse de son party: yet he says,
there were that would excuse this, disans que ce fut pour s(...)ayder en la
necessity des guerres qu'il eut contre les Sarrazins, This indeed may serve
to excuse him for taking the Tithes, but it yields no pretense for his not
restoring of them. And because it is below this sacrilege to admit of any
excuse, therefore Charles his great friend Dupleix ventures to defend it. This
Dupleix was a later writer than the rest, and one that hops to be accounted
a better, as it seems by the censure, which in his Preface he passes upon
those who wrote before him. But let us hear what he says in defense of
Martel: D'ailleurs ils furent encore plus offenses de ce qu' apres la journee
de Tours (so the French call this expedition of Charles) il recompensa la
Noblesse de party des dismes du Clerge a vec promise de restitution: de
laquelle de puts il ne tint compte. Mais en cela l'ingratitude and l'avarice du
Clerge est plus blasmable que l'entreprise de Charles. Car n' estoit il pas
raisonnable que ceux qui apres beaucoup de despence avoient expose si
genereusement lour vie pour la defense de l'Eglise fussent recompenses de
quelque petit portion du revenu d'icelle? etc. He grants the passage, But
(says he) in this the ingratitude and avarice of the Clergy is more to be
blamed, than the enterprise of Charles, for was it not good reason, that those
who beside their cost and charges, had so generously hazarded their lives for
the defense of the Church, should be rewarded with some small portion of the
revenue thereof? etc. We answer, that the design it self was truly
honorable, but for Charles to free the Church from a foreign Foe, and be a
Barbarian himself at home, makes his atchievment very improper, and utterly
darkens the reputation of so great a Conquest.

Thus we see, that it is generally believed by the French Writers of later
times, that their Martel distributed the Church Tithes to his men of war, and
that without restoration. And if it be asked, from what head these modern
Historiographers could deduce that passage, whereof the ancient had made no
mention; it may be replied, that though this were not publicly recorded by the
old Writers Aimoine and the rest, yet it might remain in the Notes of private
men, and being delivered from hand to hand, might be reserved for such a time
as could endure the relation.


Charles Martel the Father of Pipin, after King of France, being then great
master of the Kings house, would not (although otherwise he were a very
victorious man, and valiant Captain) oppose himself against them, unless the
under-clergie of France would be content to resign every man his Tithes into
his hands, that thereby he might reward the Soldiers, and support the charges
of the war then present: which the poor Clergy, in respect of the eminent
danger, and for that Charles Martel himself did solemnly vow and promise, that
they should be forborne no longer, than for the time of the war, and that
they should be restored unto them again at the end of the war, with a
further gratuitie for their good will, yielded most willingly thereunto,
specially the Bishops not contradicting it, leaving to themselves a small
portion of their living only, during the time of the danger, Whereupon Charles
Martel undertaking the enterprise, got a mighty great victory against the
enemies, insomuch that he slew in one battle 34500. of the Infidels: which
battle being happily achieved, and the danger of the war being past, the
poor Clergymen hoping to receive again their Tithes, according as it was
promised them by Charles Martel, they were put from the possession thereof, and
say or do what they could, their benefices were divided before their face, in
recompense of their service, to such of the Nobility as had done valiantly in
that action, and the same assured to them and theirs for ever in fee. And this
is the first violence that ever Tithes suffered in the Christian world, after
they left the Land of Jurie, and came to inhabit among the Christians; which
albeit was a nefarious act, and nothing answerable to the late mercy that God
had vouchsafed them in conquering of their enemies, yet there wanted not like
sacrilegious minds in all Christian Lands, which did imitate this wicked fact
of Martellus, insomuch as the example hereof passed over the Alps into Italy,
and mounted above the Pyrenaean Hills into Spain, and within a short time after
sailed over into England, in such sort, as that even to this day sundry
monuments thereof appear every where in the Land, where any title of immunitie
is challenged from payment of Tithes, reaching beyond the Laterau Council,
which But Steven Pasquier says, that the Centuriatours of Magdeburg refer
him to the 2. Tome of the Councels for a Synod holden under Carloman, where
amongst other Canons, this was one, Decimas occupatas a prophanu restituimus:
And if this be true he grants all, for then, says he, il n'yauroit pas
grande difficulte pour ceste opinion: But he adds moreover, that after
diligent search made both for the Synod and this Canon, he could find no such
thing in all the 4. Tomes of the Councels. In that he searched for this very
Canon and found it not, he deservedly lost his labor, for taking no more heed
what the Centuriators set down, for they referred him not to these words of
the Canon, but to this Council in other words; but he says, that he could
find no such Council, no not in all the 4. Tomes, but he must needs be
deceived, for this Synod is not only extant amongst those 4. Tomes, but also
in all the four editions of the Councels. The 2. Tome of the Councels, to
which he is referred by the Centuriatours, is the 2. of that Edition which was
set forth at Colen, in the year 1538. and in this Tome is found that Synod
under Carloman, though otherwise it must be looked for in the 3. Tome of the
Edition of Binius, Surius, and that of Venice. The 4. Tomes he speaks of, are
those of Binius, and there he says, he cannot find this Synod. But he
deceived himself in this manner. In the Edition at Colen, the Synod is said to
be held under some French Bishops, therefore the Centuriatours might call it
Synod^^ Francica, and so it was styled afterward in the Edition of Surius, and
that of Venice: But in the Edition of Biniu, this Council goes under the name
of Ratisbonense, or Augusta vindelicorum, and by this means Stephen Pasquter
reading nothing but the Titles, came away with a Non inventus est. Therefore
the Council is extant. As for the Canon, though it be not set down there in
the same words, and though it were not set down in the same sense (which is
the most that can be said) yet it is plainly expressed by Aventine, from whom
the Centuriatours have it, and there the Canon is Decimas, bona ecclesiastica
occupata a prophanis restituimus, lib. 3. page 216 Edit. Bas. 1580. If Aventine
were deceived, it needed not be for want of judgment, and it could not be for
want of care, for the pains he took to collect those Annals, were prodigious
and incomparable. Multa (says he in his Preface) tuls, fec^, sudavs, and alsi,
totam Boioariam perlustravs, omma Contubernia Sacerdotum penetravi, scrinia,
publicas Bibliothecas omnes curiosius perscrutatus sum, libellos, codicillos,
donaria, Commentarios, testes, Annals omnium gentium, diplomata, instrumenta,
publica and privata evolvi: Signa, sacra, lapides, trophaa, epigrammata
sepulchrorum, picturas, inscriptiones, titulos, templa, omnia denique
Antiquitatis monumenta exploravi, etc. and that after all this care, Aventine
should not find out the true copies, or not be able to distinguish them from
the false, it is altogether incredible.

Therefore notwithstanding what Steven has said, it may seem very reasonable
that we believe Charles Martel to be the Author of the forenamed Infadations,
and that this is not without probability, Steven himself confesses, where he
says: A la verite ceux qua on^ este de cest adu is ne sont denuez de bien
grand pretexte.

However if these Infeudations had not their original from Charles (as they
seem to have had) yet it is impossible they should begin where Steven has
appointed, as it is observed by a most learned Writer of our own. Cap. 6. of
his Hist. of tithes, page 112.


can descend from no other head, than from that fact of Charles Martel; neither
was there any redress thereof until the said Lateran Council,
beforementioned, which The great op^ which has bin always had of Steven
Pasquier's learning, we are most ready to acknowledge; but to abate any
prejudice that may arise from this, we have reserved to compare with him two
of his own Contrymen; the one is Filesacus, a most learned Divine of Paris;
the other is Gregory, a great Civilian of Tholous, either of these may be
thought equal to Steven in learning, but they are both different from him in
this opinion. Gregory of Tholous in his Syntag. Iuris, etc. lib. 2. cap. 25.
number. 7. page 50. Edit. Francofurt. 1611. where he beleevingly reports this
matter of Martel out of Gaguin and Aemilius; and having passed the Story, he
accepts also the vision of Euchere. His own judgment of both he delivers
in these terms: Quod in ulttonem tanta usurpationis videtur accidisse, and ob
sacrilegium Ecclesia illatum, cum nullus Princeps, Rex, vel Imperator has
decimas us^rpare, minusque aliis concedere Laicis possit, etc: So Gregory. To
the same purpose Filesacus in his Querela Ecclesia ^allican^, where, though he
gives us to understand, that there were Church-robbers before the days of
Martel, and that in this, Italy gave example to the French, yet in all the
Sacrilege, he gives Charles the pre-eminence. And concerning the matter of
Tithes thus he relates out of his old manuscript Chronicle, Carolus propter
assiduitatem bellicam decimas and quasdam alias res Ecclesiasticas Laicis
concessit, etc. and having considered both of the Story and the vision, he
gives this approbation, Scripsit hoc P. Aemilius, lib. 2. Hist. Franc.
priscorum credo nostiorum annal^^m fide. Purpuratis verbis, purpuratus Scriptor
Ecclesiasticae Historiae pro Martello contra A Emilium and si(...)les dixit.
you may imagine his mind, I think he means Baronius. Therefore see the
Cardinals unwarie opinion of Charles Martel at the year of Christ 741.

It remains to set down what we have to say concerning that vision of
Euchere, to whom it was showed, that Charles Martel was in hell.

It was strange indeed, that those inconceivable tortures of the damned could
be made fantastical, and that which cannot be feined should be seen in a
vision: yet we may not think these latter times so incapable of a wonder, as
not to admit of something that is strange, we need not go far back for a
prodigy; what think we of the Star in Cassiopea, which showed it self in
the year 1572. and the men are yet alive who saw it. An ordinary Star it
must not be, for the country Hinds had spied it first, and brought the news
to Tycho: a fixed Star it could not be, for such as those are above a
twelve-moneth standing: that it should be a Comet, it cannot be granted, at
leastwise not one of Aristotle's, for all those are placed below the Moon, but
this Meteore was sublimated above all pla^etarie Orbs, as it is evident by the
uncontrollable doctrine of the Parallaxe: Or if we could suppose a Comet that
were not sublunarie yet neither could this be such a one, for all these must be
raised out of terrestrial matter; but if the whole earth had spent it self
into one exhalation, it would have come far short of making up so vast a
body, as this Star must be, which exceeded those of the greatest magnitude,
notwithstanding that the Earth is exceeded by those of the least. So long as
this Strr^ appeared, no man could say, that the world wanted a wonder, and if
we admit such things in the Celestial bodies, why should we exclude the
inferior world. Indeed if we be told by the Metaphrast, that the Crow stood
and mourned over the dead Corpse of S. Vincent, or that S. Denis after his
ne(...) was cut off, should run away with his head in his hand, we make no
such haste to believe it, yet thus much faith we have, that the Blood of Saints
is so precious in the eyes of God, that a Mattyr indeed, seldom goes off
without a miracle. True it is, that matters of this nature were most frequent
in the primitive times, yet if we should admit nothing of this kind without
Christ or an Apostle, all Stories would be Legends, and almost every discourse
too strange to be true. But it seems very convenient for the satisfaction of
reasonable Creatures, that these things should be so, for if God did not
sometimes interrupt the common course, we should dote upon the ordinary
means, and begin to think, that Nature had no supreamer cause than it self.
If the Story of this vision should not be true (we will not say in every
circumstance for we have promised to doubt of the damnation of Charles, yet, I
say, if some thing like to this has not been) then what shall be thought of
all those ancient testimonies of grave and learned men who are engaged to make
this good. To let pass the rest, what shall we think of the Relation of
Fauchet, that a Chronologer should say, Que de son temps plusi urs gens
l'asseuroyent comme a yans este presens a la visitation de ladite sepulture and
les Evesques des Provinces, de Rheimes and Rouen assemblez en un parliament tenu
l'an huit (...)ns cinquante huit l'alleguerent pour exemple a Louyis' Roy de
Germany comme histoire veritable adjoustans que Charles estoit damn.

That we may know what Fauchet says, we must observe, that in the year 858.
the Bishops that then were of Rhemes and Roan were summoned to a Council by
Lewis the third, but fearing (for good causes) what the success might be,
they appeared not, nevertheless they wrote an Epistle to the Emperor, where,
amongst other matters, advising him to vindicate the Church, they peremptorily
alleged the damnation of Martel, and that when he was looked for in his grave
by Boniface and Fulrade, he could not be found, but that in stead of him, there
issued forth a fearful Dragon, leaving the place all black, as if it had been
burned. And that the Emperor might make no doubt, they enforce the credit of
the Story with this undeniable testimony. Nos autem illos v^d^mus (nempe
Bonifacium and Fulradum) qui ad nostram usque atatem duraverunt, and nobis viva
voce veraciter sunt testati qua audierunt and viderunt. The entire Epistle is
extant, and the preservation of it we owe to the learned Baronius, in whose
Annals we may find it Ad annum Christi 858. So much of it as concerned the
Story of Martel, was cited by Gratian 16. q. 1. post Can. 59. It is also
related by Martanus Scotus ad annum Christi 764. but not to be looked for in
the printed Copies, for we read it in a manuscript of our public Library,
which has much more of Marian to show, than ever yet came forth, for it
exceeds those that are printed by a third part, and (which is more to be
noted by us) it is constantly interposed with the Synchronismes of our own
Story. Yet it would be enquired, whether Marian be Author of all that he is
there entitled to, because at the year 1054. page 351. the manuscript says
thus, Eodem anno natus est Marianus Hibernensis probabilie Scottus, ca^us
studio and laborchee Chronicon pracellens est de diversis libris c^adunatum.

The French Historians, for the most part, disparage this vision for fear of
Martels damnation, yet Nichol Gilles in Belleforest relating the Story,
concludes it with a sober demurre, Ma^s cequ'il en est je ne scay ri^n cest a
Dien ale s^avoir: But, says he, what to think of this, I cannot tell, God he
knows.

But of Charles Martel thus far, this only may briefly and confidently be
added, That as he came improperly into the world, so he went unusually out; for
he was borne a Bastard, and died miserably.


notwithstanding came near five hundred years after: for this fact of
Martellus was done about the six hundredth and threescore year after the
Nativitie of our Savior Jesus Christ; but the Council that reformed it, and
was holden uuder Alexander the third, was not celebrated before the year of
the Incarnation 1189. neither was the reformation thereof at that time total,
nor suitable to the first institution of Tithe among Christians.

For neither could many wilful and refractarious persons be then brought to
obey the Canons of the Council, in restoring any part thereof again unto the
Church, although they were charged so to do under pain of Irreligious people
have always been so backward to do the Church this great right, that they
have oftentimes bin overtaken with the Curses both of God and Men. Several
anathemae's out of several Synods might be urged, but the most notable
proceeding against this Sacrilege may be found in the General sentence of
Execration, denounced four times every year. Something to this purpose was
said before Chap. 2. Sect. 1. out of an ancient Book which I have, where those
Church-robbers are branded with the More and the Less Curs.

It remains, that in this place we declare that matter more fully out of the
old English Festival, and out of the Articles of the General greater Curse,
found in S. Paul's Church at Canterbury, in the year 1562. according as it is
related by Thomas Becon, in the Relics of Rome. And first we will observe
what our Ancestors understood by these kinds of Execrations, and what was
their More and Less Curse. The Festival says, that Cursing is such a
vengeance-taking, that it departs a man from the bliss of Heaven, from
housel, shrift, and all the Sacraments of holy Church, and betaketh him to the
Devil, and to the pains of Hell without end: The Canterbury Book says thus:
Wherefore ye Shullen understand at the beginning, that this word Curse is thus
much to say, as departing from God and all good works. Of two manner of Cursing
holy Church tells, the one is cleped the Less Curse, the other is cleped the
More Curse: That we clepen the less Curse is of this strength that every man
and woman that falls therein, it departs him froe all the Sacraments that
been in holy Church, that they may none of hem receive til they be assoyled,
etc. The More Curse is much worse, and is of this strength, for to depart a man
froe God, and froe all holy Church, and also froe the company of all Christen
folk, never to be saved by the passion of Christ, ne to be helped by the
Sacraments that been done in holy Church, ne to have part with any Christen
man, etc.

Concerning those that debar the Church of any rights or dues whatsoever, the
Priest in the Festival pronounces thus: By the authority of God the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and his glorious Mother and maiden our Lady Saint Mary, and
the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and al Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and
Virgins and the halowes of God. I denounce and show for accursed al thoe that
franches of holy Church break, or distrouble, or been against the State of
holy Church, or thereto assent with deed or council. And also all thoe that
prive holy Church of any right, or make of holy Church any Layfee that is
hallowed or sanctified And all thoe that withold the rites of holy Church, that
is for to say, offerings, tithes, rents, or freedoms of holy Church let or
distrouble, or break, that is to say, if any man flee to the Church or
Churchyard, who so him outdraweth, and all thoe that thereto procure or assent.
And all thoe that purchasen letters of any Lordys Court, that process of right
may not be determined or ended. And the Canterbury book says: All thoe ben
accursed, that purchasen writtes, or letters of any lewd Court, or to let the
process of the Law of holy Church of causes that longen skilfully unto
Christen Court, the which should not be demed by none other Law, etc. And all
that malycyously birive^ holy Church of her right, or maken holy Church
Lay-fee, that is, hallowed and blessed. And also all thoe that for malice or
wrath of Person; Vicare, or Preiste, or of any other, or for wrongful
covetyse of himself withheld rightful Tithes and Offerings, rents or
mortuaryes from her own parish Church, and by way of coveryse fallelyche
again taking to God the worse, and to hem self the better, or else turn hem
into another use, than hem dweth, or done hem in other place after the rowne
will, so that they he not done to the same place that they should be, or let
by word or by deed any man or woman for to do her good will and her. devotion
to God, and to holy Church. For all christen men and women been hard bound
upon pain of deadly sin, not oneliche by the ordinance of man, but both in
the old Law and also in the new Law for to pay truitche to God and holy Church,
the tithe part of all manner of increase that they winnen truliche by the grace
of God, both with her travel and also with her crafts, whatsoe they be
truliche gotten. Also the tithe part of all manner fishes, and fowls, and
beasts both wild and tame. And all manner of fruits that grown out of the
earth. Also all that wittingly or wilfully tythen falsely, that is to say, that
geven not to God and holy Church the tenth part of every wynning leefully
wo^nen in merchandise, or in any other crafts withdrawn only that expense and
the costage that needfully must be made about the thing, whereof the winning is
getten, not tything the winning of one merchandise with the loss of another.
And all thoe that of the fruits of the earth, or of beast, or of any thing
that neweth in the year, geven not the tithe wholly withouten any costage. All
thoe that falsely tythen taken to God the worse, and holden the better to her
own profit, against the ordinance of Boniface sometime the Archbyshope of
Cantorbury, by the which ordinance throughout the Province of Cantorbury should
be one manner axing of tithes in this manner wise. Of all manner of fruits of
earbis, of gardens withouten any manner of cost abating: of hey where ever it
grows, in great medes or in small as often as it neweth: of neweing of all
manner of besteal, of calfe, or of lamb fro seven upward into the tenth: and
fro syx downward for everyche of hem an half penny: but if the Person or
Vicarye will abide till another year, and tell thilke that leeven, and take
the other beast that follows: of woole that is woxen, of fellis fro
purification of our Lady; of milk all the while that it dureth as well in
Winter as in Summer, but if they will do gree therefore to the Person, or to
the Vicary for the profit of holy Church. Of fishing, of (...)eing, of
veneson, o^ been, of all other good rightfully wonnen, that newen by the
year: of profit of mills and weris, of fishing noe cost abate but to the very
value shall the tithe be paid: of lesewys, communys, severelis, shall the tithe
trulyche be paid, after the number of the beeseis, or the days as it is most
profit to holy Church, all werkemen, and chapmen that wynnen on her crafts,
and on her merchandise shulen trulyche pay her lythe to God and to holy Church.
Also Carpenters, and Smithes, and Weeveris, and all other crafty men, and all
other hired men and wimen shulen Tythen of all they getten but if they wulle
give any certain thereof to holy Church at the Persons or Vicaryes will. Also
of fowls, of Calves, of Piggs, of Gees, of Hens, of fla^e, of Hemp, of
Corn and of all thing that neweth by the year. Also of shryding of Trees,
and of all manner of underwood woring or hewed. Also men of holy Church moune
curse by name hem that wolen not pay her Tithes as it is written in many places
of the law of holy Church.

At the repeating of these Articles, the Prelate stands in the Pulpit, in his
Albe, the Cross being lifted up, and the candles lighted. After the
Repetition, these or the like formal words of Execration are denounced. Ex
Authoritate Dei Patris Omnipotentis, beat^ Mariae Virginis, and omn^^m
Sanctorum, excommunicamus, and thematizamus and Diabolo commendamus omnes
supradictus malefactores. Excommunicati sunt, anathematizati, and Diabolo
commendati; Maledicts sunt in villis, in campis, in vus, in semitis, in
domibus, extradomes, and i^omnibas^at^is locu; stando, jacendo, surgendo,
ambulando, currendo, vigilando, dormiendo, comedendo, bibendo, and aliud opus
faciendo: Or as the Canterbury Book says: But through authority of our Lord
God Almightye, and our Lady S. Mary, and all Saints of Heaven, of all Angels, or
Archangers, Patriarchs, and Prophets, Evangelists; Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors and Virgins, also by the power of all holy Church, that our Lord
Jesus Christ gave to S. Peter, we denounce all thoe accursed that we have thus
received to you: and all thoe that maintain hem in her sins, or given hem
hereto either help or council so that they be departed from God and all
holy Church, and that they have noe of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, ne
of noe Sacraments that been in holy Church, he noe part of the prayers among
christen folk, but that they be accursed of God and of holy Church fro the
soole of their foot unto the crown of her head, sleaping and waking, sitting
and standing, and in all her words, and in all her works, and but if they have
grace of God for to amend hem here in this life, for to dwell in the pain of
hell for ever withouten end (Fiat, Fiat) Do to the book, Quench the Candle,
Ring the Bell: Amen. Amen.

This General Sentence was solemnly thundered out once in every Quarter, that
is (as my old Book says) the first Sunday of Advent at coming of our Lord
Ihesu Christ, the first Sunday of Leenten. The Sunday in the Feste of the
Trynyte, and the Sunday within the vtus (octavesweesay) of the blessed Vyrgyn
our Lady S. Mary.


damnation. Neither did all such as did then restore them, restore them to the
Churches from whence they were taken, which had been most agreeable to the
ordinance of the Church, set down by Dionysius, who first divided Parishes and
assigned unto them Tithes, as has been aforesaid; and also to the Scripture
it self, Deuteronomy. 18. from whence Dionysius took his light to divide Parishes
and dispose of Tithes as he did, by which it was not lawful for him that paid
his Tithes to pay them to what Priest or Levite Thus much we have set down
concerning the General Curse, not hoping to fright any man into devotion with
this (black Sentence) or to propose such distempered piety for an example, but
that it might be considered how horrible a crime it was in our Forefathers
account to rob the Church in the least particular. And indeed they conceived no
more hope of a man that died under this Damnosum Theta, than of him that dyed
in a mortal sin, nay much less; for the Canterbury Book says, that many
Clerks preuen at the day of dumme wuld our Lady Saint Mary, and Saint John
Baptist, and all Saints that been in heaven knele down at once before the
blessed face of Almightye God they shulen not in that time through the prayer
of them all deliver the Soul of man or woman that dies in deadly sin, etc.
And if the day of dumme shall be so heard to all thoe that dyen in any deadly
sin by all reason full myche harder shall it be at that time with all those
that be founden openly cursed of God and of holy Church, etc.

Thus we see what furies followed this Sacrilege in the opinion of our
Forefathers, who were so confident, that a Church-robber could not escape the
Judgment of God, that they delivered him over to Satan, or as they say, cursed
him with the More, and with the Less Curse, with Bell, Book, and Candle.

The Clergy of the present time gives better language than thus; what cause
they may have, I will not say: It may be accounted for wisdom, that their
injuries cannot be judged by their clamours, yet the Ages to come must not
say, that these things were done Nobis dormientibus. The experience of the
Emperors Charles the Great, and Lewis the Godly would be noted to this purpose
out of their Capitulars* Novimus (say they) multa Regna and Reges eorum
propterea cecidisse, quia Ecclesias spolia verunt, resque earum vastaverunt,
abstulerunt, alienaverunt, vel diripuerunt Episcopisque and Sacerdotibus, atque
(quod magis est) Ecclesus eorum abstulerunt and pugnantibus dederunt;
quapiopter nec fortes in bello nec in fide stabiles fuerunt, nec victores
extiterunt sed terga, multi vulneratt, (...) plures interfects, vexterunt,
regnaque, and regionem, and (quod pe^us est) regna coelesta perdiderunt, atque
proprus haereditatibus caruerunt and hactenus carent. So they in the 7. Book of
the Cap^^ul. c. 104. fol. 214. Edit. Paris. 1603. Whereas the Capitular
attributes those grand enormities, and their ill success to the Kings of that
time, it is not now to be so understood. Far be it ever from us to think
otherwise than divinely of these our most Religious Princes, by whose gracious
protection the Church has bin of late so miraculously blessed. As for others
among us, they may apply this to themselves as they shall be troubled with
cause and occasion. The great Impostor in his Alcoran, though he cozened all
the world besides, yet he would not defraud the Church. De Decimis sum, says
he, and inde secundum morem consuetum operare. Inscus te subtrahe semper. So
our Robert of Reading translateth: But he that reads Roberts Translation,
must not always think he reads he Alcoran. The Prophets own text is in
(...) Surato laaraph, (which in our manuscript Alcorans is the 8. c. and the
17. in Roberts Translation) (...): that is, Give command concerning Tithes, and
beware of Clownes: the word (...) may be otherwise understood; but if this
were not Mahumet's meaning, the matter is not great, for we have better
Prophets to preach this Doctrine.


him liked, but he must pay them to the Priest or Levite that dwelt in the
place where himself made his abode: but yet this liberty that was given them
by the Council, then gave cause unto the error that the Common Lawyers hold
at this day (not knowing the ancient proceedings of the Church in these cases)
that before the Lateran Council, it was lawful for every man to give his
Tithes to what Church he would, which was so far otherwise, as that before
this violence offered unto the Church, there was a flat Canon, more ancient
than the fact of Charles Leo 4. 13. 9. 1 c. Eccl.
Martellus, which did precisely forbid any man to pay, or a Bishop to give
leave to any man to pay his Tithes from the The Rites of Baptism in the
primitive times were performed in Rivers and Fountains, where the persons to
be baptized stood up and received that Sacrament; therefore it is, that the
Son of Azalkefat in the Arabic Gospels uses the word (...) Amada to
baptize; which word also bears the same sense in the Syriack, and is often
mentioned by Patriarch Severus in his (...) or Order of baptizing the Saints:
The reason in both Dialects is the same, for that the word Amada is by the
Syrians and Arabians, derived from the Hebrew Amad, which signifies to stand
up. This manner of baptizing the ancient Church entertained, from the example
of our Savior who baptized John in Jordan. And some say, that this was very
tolerable in those Eastern parts; but certain it is, that it was most
co^venient for that time, because their Converts were many, and men of years.
A reason also may be, for that those ages were otherwise unprovided of Fonts
and such conveniences which are now in use: and this has been a cause, why
this manner of baptizing was resumed in aftertimes, and other places, for our
venerable Bede tells us of some that were baptized here in England in the
River Swale, which runs through a part of Yorkshire, in the North Riding,
and he gives the same reason: Nondum enim Oratoria vel Baptisteria in ipso
exordio nascentis thy Ecclesia poterant adificari. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 14.

The days we now live in have no other remainder of this Rite of Baptizing in
Rivers and Fountains, than the very name; for hence it is, that we call our
vessels that contain the water of Baptism Fonts, or Fountains.

This custom of Baptizing in Rivers and Fountains being discontinued, Fonts
were erected in private houses; but the violent persecutions of those times
barred the Christians of that convenience, therefore their next recourse was to
woods and devious places, and there they accommodated themselves with such
Baptisterials as they could. In more peaceable ages they drew nearer, and made
bold to build their Fonts a little distance from the Church; afterward they
obtained, that they might be set in the Church Porch; and at last got them
into the Church. But they were not placed in every Church; for at the first
they were only found in Cities where the Bishop himself resided, and only in
the great Church of such a City; and though Service might be said in the
lesser Minsters and rural Churches, yet the right of Sepulture and Baptism
belonged to the Cathedral Church, unless it were in case of necessity: and
it was therefore called the Mother Church, because that as the people in their
Mothers womb were borne Men, so in the Fonts of Baptism, as in the Churches
womb, they were borne Christians. In succeeding ages, when it was found that
the Mother church was too far distant from some Villages, and so situated,
that in the Winter time the people could not repair thither, consideration was
had of this inconvenience, and the Bishop took occasion from hence to
transfer the right of Baptism and Sepulture to the Rural Churches, and
this, together with the right of Tithes, etc. made it a Parochial Church, of
that kind which we now have. But because also in many Parishes some Families
lived so remote from their Church, that they could not conveniently frequent
it, it was indulged to those, that they might build themselves either in or
near their mansion-places a private Oratorie, reserving for the most part, the
right of Baptism and Sepulture to the Parish Church, which, in respect of
these lesser Oratories, was to be accounted their Baptismall and Mother Church.
It was also provided, that these Families, notwithstanding their grant of a
private Oratorie, should upon high days repair to their chief Church, as it
seems by the Council held at Agatha Can. 21. Tom. 1. Si quis extra parochias
in quibus legitimus est, ordinariusque conventus, oratorium in agro habere
voluerit, reliquis festivitatibus ut ibi Missasteneat: (or as Grattan has it
in the Decree, Audiat) propter fatigationem familiae juxta ordinem permittimus.
Paschate vero, Natali Domini, Epipbania, Ascensione Domini, Pentecoste, and
Natali S. Iohannis Baptistae; (and si qui maxim dies in festivitatibus
haebeautur) nonnisi in Civitatibus aut Parochii^ean (or as Gratian has it)
audiant. Those private Oratories were afterward called Capellas Chapels, and
those that in them exercised the Ministerial function were called Capellans
Chaplains. But for the reason of the name, see Baronius upon the Roman
Martyrologue, at the 11. of June. Or if the Cardinal there satisfy not, see
what Cujacius has observed (out of Hesychius.) Ad 4. lib. Decretal. C.
Capellanus, De Secundis Nuptus.

By that which has bin said, it may appear in some sort, what was a
Baptismall Church. And it is agreeable to that which Linwood has noted upon
the Provincial Constitution: Baptisterium. in verb. Baptismal. Eccles. A
Baptismall Church (says he) is, Sive Cathedralis, sive Parochialis talis viz
quae habet populum, nam in Ecclesia collegiata vel conventuali qua non habet
populum non debet esse Baptisterium; Dicitur etiam Ecclesia Baptismalis
respectis Capellarum subjectarum, quarum plebis infantes in ea baptizantur, and
non in ipsis Capellis imn o ad ipsas Ecclesias Baptismales tanquam matrices pro
Baptismo recurritur, etc.

Concerning these Baptismall Churches, the Canon says, that there can be but
Vna in eadem terminatione cum suis Capellis: cap. Plures 16. q. 1. And that the
Tithes were of right to be paid to these Churches, it is evident by the Decree,
where Anastasius provideth, that no man under pain of Excommunication should,
Tenere, aut extra Ecclesiam Baptismalem dare decimas and oblationes Ecclesiae,
quas dare debet populus. C. Statuiums eod. tit. And Leo, Non tantum nebis, sed
etiam Majoribus nostris visum est decimas justo ordine plebibus tantum ubi
Sacrosancta Baptismata dantur, debere dari. C. De Decimis ibid. Yet
notwithstanding all the care that could be taken, the complaint was, Quidam
Laici vel in propriis, vel in beneficus suas habent Basilicas, and contempta
Episcopi dispositione, non ad Ecclesias ubi Baptismum, and pradicationem, and
manuum impositionem, and alia Christi Sacramenta acci piunt, decimas saas dant,
sed vel propriis basilicis, vel aliis Ecclesiis pro libitu suo tribuunt. C. In
Sacris ibid. What distinction of Churches our own Ancestors had, and how
near it comes to that which has been said, we may observe out of the
Decree made at Winchester, in the Reign of King Cnute; where it is provided,
that all those that any ways violate the peace of the Church, should receive a
proportionable penalty. Therefore, says the Decree number. 3. (...)can be (...)
be (...); Ne (...) ealle (...) na (...) habban (...) be (...) on (...) mid 120
(...) be (...) 60 (...) mid (...): First, let the breaking of the Church peace
be according to the deed it self and according to the dignity of the
Church. All Churches have not alike dignity in worldly worth, though they have
a holy Consecration alike, (...), or peace-breaking in the head Church, has
the same punishment, as that of breaking the Kings peace, and that is five
pounds by English Law. In an inferior Minster it is 120 shillings, and that
also is the Kings mulct: In lesser Churches where little Service is said, and
yet there is a burying place it is 60 shillings: In field-Churches where there
is no burying place, it is 30 shillings.

How Tithes were to be paid to these Churches, it may be understood by an other
Decree of the same Parliament, number. 11. (...) on (...) haebbe (...) on (...)
haebbe (...) on ne (...) he (...) aele (...) be aelcan (...) (or (...), as it
is in the Laws of Edgar, where this Decree also is set down, number. 3.) that
is, If a Thane have a Church, in his bocland, to which there belongs a
burying place, let him give the third part of his own Tything to that Church:
if he have a Church without a burying place, let him give of the nine parts to
his Priest that which he will, and let all Cyricsceat go to the elder Minster
out of all freehold.

For that which the Law calls Bocland, see Lambard in the Explication of
words, premised to his Archatonomia, where also he tells what a Thane is.


baptismall Church to an other: and that the contrary was yielded to in the
Lateran Council, was not that they held it lawful to enrich one Church in
this sort, with the impoverishment of an other, but the cause was the hardness
of men's hearts, who scarcely could be won by this favor to restore that little
again unto the Church, that their forefathers had in such abundance taken away
from it: and that the Fathers of the said Council did yield thereunto
(although it were an inconvenience thus to do) was, for that they did count,
although they did admit that it might be for the present, yet there might be
a better time found out after for the reformation thereof, and so sustained the
inconvenience for the present upon this reason; that the universal Church of
Christ is one body, and every particular Church a part of that body, and so it
less mattered to what particular Church they were restored, so that they were
restored at all: for that by the restitution to one they hoped in time they
might with more likelihood come unto the other; for those things wherein there
is an Identitie, or like representation of Nature and Condition, as is between
Church and Church, have an easier passage the one from the other, than those
that are of different nature and disposition, as a lay man and a Church.

SECT. 3.
That out of that violent Prescription, many other Prescriptions arose, but of
less moment.

OUt of the ruins of this violent and presumptious prescription, which have
now obtained strength of a Statute in the world have issued out sundry petty
Prescriptions, which also are confirmed by law and custom, as the other were;
as the Prescription wherein one Church prescribes Tithes against an other
Church, the Law punishing therein the negligence of the one and rewards the
vigilancie of the other: Prescriptions, wherein one Ecclesiastical body
corporate or politic, prescribes Tithes or other Ecclesiastical duties
against the Parson or Vicar of the Parish, and the Parson and Vicar again
against them: A Prescription whereby a Lay man, having no right to prescribe
Tithes (because he can in no right possess Tithes, Regul. sine possessione de
regulis juris in 6.
and prescription cannot proceed without possession) does notwithstanding by
pernancie, or giving some part of his ground or pension in money in lieu
thereof, prescribe a discharge thereof: A prescription wherein a Lay man does
prescribe the manner of Tything, which albeit by the Common Law is counted to
be good by paying a thing never so small in lieu thereof, yet neither by the
Canon Law, neither by the Law of God it self, could it ever be less than the
just tenth it self; so that the manner of Tything with them is not understood
in that sense, as the Common Lawyers do take it, by paying any thing
whatsoever in place of the just tenth; but their intendment hereby is, that no
country can be bound to an uniformitie of payment of Tithes to be used every
where: but every man is Linwod. Provin. quaniam verbo uniformis in Glo. de
decim.
to pay Tithes according to the manner of the Country where he dwells, that
is, that one pays his Tythe-corne, and binds up the same in sheaves, an other
leaves it scattered in the furrows, an other tithes it in Cocks or Pookes; and
this is it that they mean, that there cannot be an uniformitie of Tything
prescribed to every man, after which he is of necessity to set out his Tithe,
but that he may prescribe some other manner of Tything against the Parson or
Vicar: but against that uniformitie that the whole Tithe Eod verbo
consuetudines.
should not be paid, was never any prescription allowed among them, for they
evermore have been of this mind, contrary to that which the Schoolmen bold,
that Tithes are part of the Moral Law, and not of the udiciall or Ceremonial
Law; and that in the Precept of Tithes, there is a Cap. a nobis de Decimas in
Glos.
double consideration, one of the honor of God, whereby he retained tithes
unto himself, in sign of his universal Lordship over the whole world, which
is irremissable; the other of the profit or utilitie of man, in that it
concerns the provision of the Minister in all ages, which is undispensable.

SECT. 4.
That Ecclesiastical Judges admit pleas in discharge of tithes, and the manner
of tything, contrary to the conceit that is had of them.

ANd yet, notwithstanding all this, the Ecclesiastical Judge admits all
kinds of prescriptions before-named, and according to the proofs thereon
brought, gives sentence either to absolution or condemnation: albeit the
Reverent Judges of the Land, upon an erroneous report made in the eight year
of Edward the fourth, have a conceit to the contrary, viz. That no
Ecclesiastical Judge will admit any Plea in discharge of Tithe, or the manner
of Tything, as it is in their sense taken; and therefore they hold whatsoever
the Defendant does allege in his suite for a consultation, and namely that the
Ecclesiastical Judge did allow of the Plaintifes Plea and allegation, and did
admit him to the proofs thereon without denial, are idle speeches, and rather
words of course than of effect and substance. And therefore notwithstanding,
whatsoever is alleged by the Defendant, as concerning the Ecclesiastical
Judges well acceptance thereof, it is counted nothing material by the
Temporal Judges, for that they have a prejudicate opinion of the
Ecclesiastical Judge in these cases, and therefore howsoever the refusal be,
or be not, they grant out their Prohibition in these cases. And yet if the
Judges Ecclesiastical proceedings might be seen, and vouchsafed to be read
before them, it would be plain, there was no such cause of their hard opinion
against them; for every where they do allow such and like allegations. And if
perhaps one inferior Judge should make refusal as they pretend, yet could it
not be reformed by an other in an ordinary course of appeal, but that there
must needs be brought a Prohibition out of the Common Law to redress the same?
unless happily they can show, it is a general conspiracy in the
Ecclesiastical Judges, or a Maxim in their learning, that they will not or
cannot admit any Plea of discharge in this case, which they can never do. And
therefore, they are to be in treated to change their opinion in this point, and
not do the Ecclesiastical Judges that wrong, as to charge them with such an
imputation, whereof their whole practice is witness to the contrary: for it
is unworthy such men's gravitie as theirs is, who propound unto themselves the
inquiry of the truth in all matters, thus to be misconceived and masked in an
error, and that for so many years, and not to be willing to hear the
contrary, which is an obstinacy in policy no less obdurate, than the
Papists is in Religion, who see the truth and will not believe it. And so far
as concerning Prescriptions and the first cause and beginning thereof.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. 1.
Of Privileges and how they came in; and that by reason of the frequence of
Privileges, Statutes of Mortmaine came in.

NOw it follows, that I speak of Privileges, which are immunities granted
unto private men beside the Law.

Of these, some are very ancient, such as true zeal toward the Church bred,
and the just admiration of the holy men of God for their sanctimonie of life,
their great knowledge in the word of God, their great parience in persecution
for Christ and his Gospel, the vigilancie and care they had in their Office,
stirred up both in Prince and People. So Constantine the great, being ravished
with the love of Religion, and the good opinion he had of the Ministers of his
time, erected Churches, and endowed them with large possessions, and granted
them sundry immunities, whereby they might more securely intend to the
preaching of the word of God, and the winning of souls to the Christian
congregation, wherein they labored with all their might and power, God still
adding to the number of the Elect. Neither did he this alone in his own
person, but he also gave leave to all other of his Subjects that would do the
like: L. 1. c. de sacros. Ecclesus. S^ quis authent. de Ecclesia.
whereupon the Church was so enriched within a short time, that as Moses in the
building of the Arc, was feign to make a Proclamation, that no man should
bring in more toward the building thereof, the people bringing in continually
such great abundance of all things necessary toward the furnishing thereof,
as that there was enough and much to spare; So also Theodosius the thirteenth
Emperor after Constantine (although otherwise a most loving and favorable
Prince toward the Church) was feign to make a Law of Amortisation or
Mortmaine, to moderate the peoples bounty toward the Church; as did also many
wise Princes in other Nations upon like occasion, and in imitation of this Act
of Theodosius, many years after; and among the rest, diverse Princes of this
Land did the like, upon the dotage of the people toward the Religious Parsons,
and specially toward the four Orders of Priers that were then newly sprung up
in the world. But yet this Act of Theodosius was Mag^a Chart^ cap 56. W. 2. c.
3. 1. an. 13. Ed. 1
done with the great dislike of these blessed men Jerome and Ambrose, who lived
in those days; for that Jerome thus complayneth to Nepotian of that Law: I am
ashamed to say it, the Priests of Idols, Stage Players, Coach men, and common
Harlots, are made capable of Inheritance, and receive Legacies, only Ministers
of the Gospel, and Monks are barred Concerning this, see what Peckius says in
his Book De Amortizatione Bonorum. ca. 6.
by Law thus to do; and that not by Persecuters, but by Christian Princes;
neither do I complain of the Law, but I am sorry we have desorved to have
such a Law made against us: In like manner, and upon the same occasion does
Ambrose deplore the state of the Clergy in his 31. Epistle: We count it
(says he) no injury, in that it is a loss, we are not grieved that all
sorts of men are made capable of Wills, none excepted, how base, profane, or
lavish of his life or honesty soever he be, but I am sorry that the Clergy
men only of all sorts of people, are barred the benefit of the Law that is
common to all; who notwithstanding, only pray for all, and do the common
celebration of the Service for all: So far they.

Notwithstanding the ill opinion which in these days is not without cause
conceived of the ancient Albyes and Frteries, yet it must not be believed, but
that these Religious-houses in the old and true intent. were purposed only for
piety, and for such a practice thereof which the soul might freely enjoy,
while it was so set at liberty from the inquietude and avocations of the
over-active world. Therefore some of the most grave and learned Fathers of the
Church retired themselves to this divine and peaceful solitude, and the
profitable and profound writings which yet remain, sufficiently testify how
well the Monks of old could spend their times. What strict devotion and
unblameable carriage the ancient Princes of this Land have expected from their
holy men of this kind, may be understood by the Law made in the days of King
Cnute, Number. 6. (...) men (...) aelc (...) him (...) mynecena (...) on hell
(...) habbe he (...) he (...) that is: And we will, that every man of every
degree, do earnestly follow that Right which to him belongs, especially Gods
Ministers, the Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Votaries, Canons and Nuns, that they
take a right course, and live according to Rule, that they call to Christ night
and day, much and often; and that they do it earnestly for all Christen folk.
And we command and teach all Gods Ministers, especially Priests, that they
hearken to God, and love Chastity, that they may deliver themselves from Gods
ire, and from the tormenting flames that burn in hell. Full truly they wit,
that it is against the Right to meddle with women for lusts sake. And those that
will abstain from these things and cleanness hold, they shall have Gods
mercy, and in worldly worship, they shall have equal Right with a Noble man.

It seems also by an Arabic Canon of the first Nicene Council, what great
strictness and severitie of life was required of these holy Orders; for the
Canon says, that they might not carry about them -- (...) etc. (...) etc.
(...) etc. (...) a pair of knives, as if they were quarelling fellows going
out to fight and: (...) kill, etc. That they might not hang a purse at their
girdle, etc. And that they might not seal a letter with a golden or silver
Seal, etc. And moreover that they might not walk in the Streets or Allies,
but in a most grave and sober manner, etc. as it is set down in (...), the 80.
Canon of the forenamed Arabic Council, according to the Manuscript Copy.

The great estimation that was had of these holy Men, enforced such an
immoderate charity in devout minds, that they obtained most especial
Privileges and Exemptions, and no man thought any thing too good or too much
to bestow upon a Monastery. But two great inconveniences followed upon the
confluence of these large and ample endowments, one was the luxuriant demeanor
of these Religious Orders, degenerating from their old sanctimonie. This is
noted and provided against by the Novell of Nicephorus, about the year 963.
(...): that is, But now perceiving among the Monasteries and Religious Houses,
a notable disease, (for so I call their unsatiable desire) I find not which
way I may provide a cure for this malady, or how to punish their excess. For
what Fathers could persuade them, or from whence could they take occasion so
superfluously to abound, or (to say with holy David) to be so vainly mad?
Their care is every hour to purchase to themselves Lands without number,
sumptuous and stately Buildings, troops of Horses, droves of Oxen and Camels
and other Cattle innumerable; and bending all the solicitude of their minds
this way, they make a monastical life little different from that of the world,
which is encumbered with variety of anxious care. For these and the like
Reasons, the Novell forbids to build any more Monasteries, but this was
afterward repeald by the Junior Basil.

An other great inconvenience would have been, the impoverishing of secular
States by Amortization of Lands, which Princes foreseeing, set a bound to these
exorbitant Donations, restraining the excess of that Charity, by mature and
timely Decrees. In Spain the Laws of Mortmaine began under the Kings of
Aragon; in France, nihil usitatius, as one says: The like provision has been
made here at home for which see the Statute De Religiosis in the Great Charter,
which also has been confirmed by the succeeding Princes of this Land: Yet in
what cases Lands may be divised in Mortmaine, See the Writ Ad quod Damnum, in
the Natura Brevium.

Concerning the reason of the name, Polydore Virgil, speaking of the
Confirmation of the former Statute by Ed. the first, says thus, Et Legem hanc
ad Manum(...) vocarunt, quod res semel data Collegus Sacerdotum, non utique
rursus venderentur; velut mortuae, hoc est, usui aliorum mortalium in perpetuam
adempta essent. That which the Author says concerning this, is the reason of
Peckius, in his Book De Amortizatione bonorum, Cap. 2. But the notation of the
word is otherwise observed out of the Statute, by a great Lawyer: Lands (says
he) were said to come to Dead Hands to the Lords, for that by Alienation in
Mortmaine, they lost wholly their Escheats, and in effect their Knight service,
for the defense of the Realm, Wards, Marriages, Reliefes, and the like, and
therefore was called a Dead Hand, for that a dead hand yields no service. It
is the obsetvation of Sir Edward Cook, upon Judge Littleton's Tenures, under
the Title Fee-simple, upon the words [Car si homme purchase, etc.]

What everuse there might be of these Laws of Mortmaine in time past, certain
it is, the present needs them not; for in these days few men are so rash
handed, as to give too much to the Church: And that which was heretofore said
of those things that were given, that they were in a Dead Hand, may now more
justly be said of those that are taken away.


And yet whosoever looks into this constitution, whereby it was forbidden,
that any man should pass any Lands or other unmovable possession unto the
Church, without the Princes leave (for that thereby the things that are so
passed, come, as it were, into a dead hand, which holds surely fast that
which it once apprehends, neither easily parts with it, so that it cannot
without much difficulty be reduced and brought again to the commerce and common
use of men) shall find it was rather for the benefit of the Commonwealth,
than for the dislike of the Church, that it was so ordered.

For if that course had been holden on still, the greatest part of the
livelihood of the Commonwealth would in short time have come unto the Church,
and so Laymen should not have been able to have borne the public burdens
of the Commonwealth; which it concerns Secular Princes to be careful of, and
to foresee, that by overmuch bounty toward the Church, they impoverish not
their own state, and lose the right of Escheats, Primer seisin, and other
Privileges of the Crown in cases of forfeiture, and specially make bare their
Lay-subjects, upon whom a great service of the Commonwealth does lie. And yet
otherwise the beneficiallest state of this Realm unto the Prince is the
Clergy, as from whom the King has a continual revenue in Tenths, and is
deepest in Subsidy, and not the least in all other extraordinary charges,
according to the proportion of their place. And therefore, as the King is to
maintain the one, so he is also to cherish the other, and not to suffer their
state in any sort to be diminished, for that all other states are made for the
service of the Church, and the Church again for the benefit of them.

But this was none of those Privileges that I spoke of, for these are more
ancient than they, and granted out upon better devotion than the other: but
after this the zeal of Religion being almost extinguished in the Christian
World, (partly by the great uproares and tumults that were in every Country,
by the breaking in of one barbarous Nation or other upon them, who pulled down
Churches faster than ever they were built, and made havoc both of Priest and
people, that professed the name of Christ, partly by the heresies that rose
everywhere in the Church in those days, which distracted men's minds, and made
them waver in the constancy of their Religion) it was revived again upon this
Occasion.

SECT. 2.
Of the beginning of Cloystered Monks in the West Church of Christendom, and
that the Author thereof was one Benedict a Roman about the year 606.

ONe Benedict, who otherwise had been a man of action in the Commonwealth,
(that Benedict which was, as it were the Father of all those that professed a
Regular life, within the West Hospintan de origin Monachat^s.
part of Christendom; for before his time the Monks of the West Church,
served God freely abroad, without being shut up in a Cloister) he, I say,
finding himself wearied with the tumults and broils which happened under the
government of Justinian, and some years after by the incursion of those
barbarous Nations (before named) into Italy, retired himself into a desert and
solitary place, intending there to give himself wholly to the service of God:
where, when he had a while remained, he grew so famous by his Christian
exercises of fasting and prayer, and the good and wholesome exhortations that
he made to those who resorted unto him, that within a very little time after,
there was great confluence of people unto him, not only from diverse parts of
Italy, but even from sundry other parts of the World; so that within a short
time they grew into Fraternity underneath him, to whom he gave rules to live
by, to the imitation of that, which Saint Basil did in the East Church: to
which his Disciples submitted themselves with all alacrity, leading a life
far different from the common sort of men, denying unto themselves all those
ordinary delights that other men do commonly take, out of meat, drink,
apparel, marriage, Temporal preferment, and such other things which worldly
and carnal men seek for very greedily, humbling themselves only to God, and
the rule of their Master. Which thing bred such an admiration of him, and of
his Scholars, that not only many other Ordes sprang out from them within few
years; as the Praemonstratenses, Cluniacenses, Templarians, Hospitallers,
Cystertians, and the order of Saint John of Jerusalem, but even Popes, Princes,
and people were wholly carried away with the wonderment of them, insomuch as
every of them did as it were strive, who might show themselves most kind unto
them; whereupon Princes built them houses, every one in his Kingdom, as Clito
Ethelbald King of Mercia, built the Monastery of Crowland here in England, of
black Monks, under the rule of the said Benedict, in the year 716. Popes and
Princes granted them privileges, so far as it concerned either of their
particulars: the Clergy, Nobility and People, conferred goods and lands upon
them, every one according to his ability.

SECT. 3.
That the admiration which these Religious Men did breed of themselves in the
head of Princes and Popes, did procure appropriations of Parsonages, and
Immunities from Tithes. And that the over-conceit which men had of Prayer above
Preaching in the Church, was an adjuvant cause thereunto.

IN this zealous bounty of every degree toward these new sorts of men, there
are two undigested Privileges granted them, both of them so hurtful and
injurious to the Church of God, as never any was the like. The one was the
Annexation or Appropriation of presentative Benefices to these Religious
Houses: The other, the freeing of such Lands or Hereditaments, as they held in
sundry Parishes from the payment of Tithes to the Parsons and Vicars thereof;
to both of which the School-mens Divinity gave great advantage, as shall be
showed hereafter.

Either of these had their beginning of one root, that is to say, of this
false ground, that Preaching, which is the most true, and most natural food
of the Soul, in a Congregation that is come to the profession of Religion
already, and knows but only the Articles of the Christian Faith, the Lords
Prayer, the Ten Commandments, Linwood provin, eisdem, de offic. Archidiacont,
and cap. Igncrantia Sacerdotum, de officio Archipresbyters.
and other Principles and Rudiments of Christian Religion, is nothing so
necessary for the Salvation of a man's Soul, as Prayer is: Besides, that
Preaching oftentimes gives more cause of Schism, and dispute in Religion* than
it does of profiting and edifying the Soul: and therefore it was not permitted
by the Provincial Constitutions of this Realm, that Parsons or Vicars of
Churches, should expound or preach any other matter or doctrine, than the Lords
Prayer, the Ten Commandments, the two Precepts of the Gospel, that is, the
love of God, and the love of a man's Neighbor, the six works of Mercy, the
seven principal Virtues, the seven Sacraments, (for so many then the Romish
Church held) the seven deadly Sins, with their progeny; and this to be done
vulgarly and plainly, Absque cujustibet subtilitatis texturafautastica, (for
so they call learned and orderly Preaching;) whereas notwithstanding Prayer is
evermore profitable, every where necessary, and never dangerous: Furthermore,
Preaching only profits those that be present, and do bear it, and attend
upon it; but Prayer is availeable even to those that be far distant, yea
though they be in the remotest place of the world. By which, and other like
arguments, they translated away that maintenance that was provided for the home
Pastors, (who by Gods own institution, were to watch over their Souls) to
foreign and strange Guides, who never communicated to their necessity in any
heavenly comfort, but only took the milk of the flock, and fed themselves
withal. But by this pretense of theirs, ought not Preaching to have been
disgraced; for albeit Prayer be a necessary piece of Gods service, and so
necessary, that the Soul of man is, as it were, dead without it, yet is it not
But here it* will need, that the Reader use a sober judgment; for it cannot
but be thought unequal, that Prayer and Preaching should be so unwarily
placed in competition, as that Prayer should lose by the comparison. There may
be always need of Preaching, but then most of all, when the Auditorie is
unchristian. This reason prevailed for all places in the first times, but in
these last only for some, according to which it were unprofitable to go about
to convert the Indies no otherwise than by our Prayers. Yet even in those
primitive times, which had most cause to call for Preaching, we shall find that
this duty was of rarer exercise, and less solemnity than that of Prayer, as it
may abundantly be discovered out of the Liturgies of both the Charches. And it
is observeable, that where Preaching has been of the greatest account, it
has bin so much beholden to Prayer, that it was not only begun and ended, but
also discontinued by devotion: For we shall find the Reverend Fathers
Chrysostom and Basil of Seleucia at prayers in the middle of a Sermon: See the
one in his 39. Orat. the other in his 3. Hom. (...), etc. Moses the Son of
Maimon, that profound Doctor of the Jews, instituting a comparison betwixt
their Sacrifices, and the more substantial Services required, in stead of all
other, names that of Prayer and Invocation, and of these he says, that they
are -- etc. (...) nearer to (Gods) first intention, and that our way thereunto,
is bythem* and afterward he says that these are necessary -- (...) etc.
(...) at all times, in all places, and for every man. See his More Neuoch*
Helec. 3. C. 32. p. (...). And holy Antioch in his 106 Hom. which is (...),
says of Prayer ((...), that it is of a more sublime Condition than any other
virtue. And how our Lord himself stood affected to this, we may acknowledge by
that, where he calls the Church, his House of Prayer, not Preaching; which
took so well in the elder times, that all their Temples were known by the name
of (...), Oratories. Nay the Preacher himself, Prove. 15. is so confident of a
just man's Prayer, that he dares say, that God will even be obedient to it (for
so (...) is rendered by the Interpreter of the forenamed Antiochus.) However. It
may seem to be so, for when all the Preaching of Lot could prevail no
otherwise, than to bring vexation to his righteous Soul, the Prayers of
Abraham might have saved Sodom, if among so many thousands, there had been but
ten just men.

All this while we would not detract anything from Preaching, but considering
our selves to live under a State so maturely composed, and so thoroughly advised
and settled in the Faith, it will be expected, that we should so far moderate
our opinion of Preaching, as that our magnifying thereof, may no way tend to
the discredit or disadvantage of most necessary Prayer.


equal to the dignity of Preaching, which God has ordained to be the only
means to come to Salvation by: For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God; and without Faith it is impossible to be saved: for Faith is a
gift that purifies the heart, and makes a man's prayers acceptable to God; and
therefore neither of them ought so to take place, as that the one should
shoulder out the other, but they ought so to go hand in hand together, as that
one should help, assist, and countenance the other.

SECT. 4.
Whether Appropriations came first from Princes or Popes it is questionable.

BUt how these annexations of Benefices first came into the Church, whether by
the Princes authority, or the Popes license, it is very disputable, and there
are reasons on both sides for to show the same.

For whereas there are reported by Ingulphus Abbot of Crowland before mentioned
to have been eight Churches, beside the Patronage of some other, annexed and
appropriated to the said Abbey, by sundry Saxon Kings, it does not appear, by
ought I can find, whether they were done by the sovereign authority of the
Kings alone, to the imitation of that, that was done by Martellus, who made all
Christian Kings to sin in this point, or that it was done by any other
Ecclesiastical authority, for that there is nothing extant for the allowance
thereof, save the several Charters of those ancient Kings only: and that I
should be the rather induced to believe that it was done by those Kings
authority only, I am thereto persuaded, for that I find William the
Conqueror, immediately upon the great victory that he got over this Kingdom,
to have appropriated three Parish Churches to the Abbey of Battle, which he
built in memory of his Conquest. And whereas William his son had depopulated
and overthrown sundry Churches in the new Forest, Henry his brother by his
Letters Patents gave the Tithe thereof to the Cathedral Church of Sarum, and
annexed thereto twenty other Churches in one day; if the copy of that record
that I have seen, as concerning these appropriations, be true, yea the matter
was gone so far in those days, that even Noble persons and other meaner men,
would command Corodies and pensions to their Anno 1. Edw. 3. c. 10.
Chaplains, and other servants, out of Churches, and this could not be
redressed, until such time as there was made a Statute to reform it.

On the contrary side, that I should take it to be a devise of the Pope, I am
moved thereto, for that I find every of these orders of Religious men were
confirmed by one Pope or other; and as they confirmed them, so it is like they
made provision for them, and that most especially this way, and that chiefly
after the Laws of Amortisation were devised, Linwood c. licet bona memoria.
Gloss. in verb. asserunt non logari, de locato and conducto.
and put in ure by Princes: and thereupon it is that we find sundry sorts of
annexation made by Popes and Bishops under them, every one in their Diocese:
as some were made so far as concerned the Patronage only, and then had the
Monks therein presentatio^ only: some other were made pleno jure, and then
might the Monks both institute and destitute therein without the Bishop, and
turn all the profit thereof to their own use reserving only a portion to him
that should serve the Cure there: some other Churches did they grant simply to
them without any addition of full right, or otherwise: and then if the Church
were of their own foundation, they might choose, the Incumbent being once dead,
whether they would put any other therein, unles By occasion of that which the
Author here says, and that which he has hereafter said concerning the
Patrons pension from the Bishop, Chap. 5. Sect. 1. of this 3. Part. It shall be
here enquired, what Right and Title the Diocesan had to a new Church, or
Monastery, and how it stood in comparison of the Patron; and because this
Right seems originally to discover it self in the Founding, Erecting and
Endowment of a Church or Monastery, (by all or either of which the Law says a
Patron may be made, the Bishops consent always presupposed, as hereafter shall
appear) therefore in the first place it must be considered, how far forth
the Bishop was concerned in these, that it may the better be understood, how
truly he was qualified to the Right of Presentation. For that which concerns
Foundation and Erection. All that the Patron had free to himself in the first
place, was but his Thought, he might think where he would design the Ground,
or How he might Build the Church; and if he entertained his own Motion, he
might make it his purpose. But this was nothing without Execution; and to this
the Diocesan was to be required, as the most principal and most effectual
Agent; therefore it is said in the 4. Canon of the Council of Chalcedow, that
no man shall erect (...), a Monastery or a Church without the Bishops consent.
And Lambertine says, that this was so necessary, that if a Church were set up
in the Patrons ground without his consent, the Patron could not pull it down
without the Bishops consent; yet if the Patron built a Church upon his own
ground without the Bishops consent, the Bishop might pull it down without the
Patrons consent, and yet in this case the Patron might not do it without the
Bishops consent, etc. But to see further. For the Greek Church, their
Euchologue says, (...), etc. That the Materials being provided for the
foundation of the Church that shall be erected, the Bishop comes thither in
person, etc. and having put on his Formalities, the (...) and the (...), he
says certain Prayers (...), etc. (...), etc. This done (...), etc. (...). the
Bishop fumeth the Ground work with his incense circularwise, then the Singing
men say the (...) [a kind of Collect] for the Saint to whose name the Church
is dedicated, and some other Services as the Chaunter shall appoint. That which
follows in the Euchologue concerning the Cornerstone, which the Bishop
crosses, and lays for the Foundation, has been formerly observed, by
occasion of the Emperors Novell to this purpose.
perhaps the same Church had people belonging unto it, for then must they of
necessity still maintain a Curate there; and of this sort were their Granges,
and Priories, and those which at this day we call Donatives: but if it were of
another man's foundation, then was it otherwise. To this also I add, that the
Pope every where in his Decretals, arrogateth this right unto himself, as a
Prerogative of the Apostolic See, to grant these privileges to Religious
orders, to take and receive Benefices at Lay men's hands, by the mediation of
the Diocesan, whose office it was to be a mean between the Religious house
and the Incumbent, for in indifferent Where we speak of the B habit, we have
safely retained the words of the Euchologue, (...) and (...), for that we
find them confusedly and uncertainely rendered. The latter may import Humerale,
the former seems literally to be as much as Collare; but Gretser was very
angry with Iunius for translating it so, (in his Notes upon a fragment of
Curopalate) Quasi de Canibus sermo esset, as if (says the Jesuit) Master
Young had been talking of Dogs. But see what Gretser himself says to the
words (...) and (...) in his Comment, upon Codin. cap. 16.

To return to our Diocesan. The Right and Title to a Church, and that which
belongs thereunto, is more peculiarly acknowledged by the (...), or setting up
of the Cross, the performance whereof was in this manner: (...), etc. Euchol.
(...): i. Word being brought to the Patriarch concerning the Church that is to
be built, Letters are directed either to the Exarch, or to some of the Bishops
to request that the Church may be founded, consecrated, and entitled to the
Patriarchs (...): then commandment is given that a cross of wood be
provided, upon which the Patriarchs Secretaries must set down, upon the one
side The Patriarchs (...), consecrated in the name of such a Saint, in such a
City preserved by God, in such a Province, of proper will, by such or such the
most holy and O^cumenicall Patriarch. On the other side, During the Reign of
such and such our most Religious Princes, in such a Month, of such a year.
Then the Crucifixe must be sent to the place where the Church is to be erected,
and there [the Bishop] by whom it is conveyed says the forenamed Service,
which is used at the founding of a Church; and when he makes the
Consecration, the Cross must be set up behind the holy Altar, there being
prepared for it some lofty structure, fitted with a concavity (to receive it)
either of Stone, Iron, or Brass as it may be seen in the great Church. By the
great Church, understand that of S. Sophia in Constantinople. Thus the
Euchologue, for the Greek Church. The like to this (for as much as concerns
the substance) is observed in the Latin, but the Ceremonies there, are more
tedious and elaborate. The Reader that has so much time and patience shall
find this true in their Pontisicall.

By the setting up of the (...), the right of the new Church was conveyed to
the Patriarch, or Bishop as by an especial title: so that now, for the most
part, things were altogether disposed by, but nothing at all without the
Bishops jurisdiction. And we always add, The Bishop, for though the
Patriarch be especially named in the Euchologue, and it be also a controversy
between them concerning this Title, as it is taught by Balsamon upon the 31.
of the Apostles Canons, yet that the Bishop, if not only, yet also had this
right, it is evident by the Emperors Novell. And concerning the conveyance of
this Right by the (...), see what is set down by the Patriarch of
Constantinople in the case of John Bishop of Lepanto; and for this see the Ius
Graeco-Romanum. Tom. 1. Lib. 3. Sent. Synod. 1. p. 232. 233. etc. Edit.
Francofurt. Ann. 1596. See also that of Manuel, de jur. Patronat. p. 242. And
that the Patriarch or Bishop should challenge this jurisdiction over the new
Church it seems most reasonable. For what did the Lay Patron do more than a
man of Israel, who brought a Lamb to the door of the Tabernacle, but the
Priest made it an Offering and an Atonement? The Patron indeed perhaps might
choose the place, but till the Prelate came and sanctified the ground, it might
as well be a Den of Thieves as a house of Prayer. The Patron might bring the
stones, but the Bishop laid the foundation; or if the workman put the
materials together, and made up a house, the B. made that a Church; till then,
nothing was but the breathles body of a Temple, the soul being yet to come
from a diviner influence of the Diocesan. Therefore it was, that the privilege
of a new Church followed not the building but the consecration of it, as the
Condition is worthily observed by the devout and learned K. Alured in his Laws
C. 5. which is Be (...) of the privileges of Churches. The King says, that if
a man pursued by his enemy fly to the Temple (...) nan man (...). no man may
take him away for the space of a seven Night. (...) he (...), etc. if he be
able to live for hunger etc. Other and great immunities the King there
grants to the Church: but the Law had this caution (...) (This) freedom we
give to every (such) Church as shall be hallowed by the Bishop.

We have seen upon what just and valuable considerations the Diocesan might
challenge, a Right and Title to the New Church by foundation and erection. In
the pursuit hereof we hope to set down manifest encouragements to argue the
use and exercise thereof, in the endowment and filling of a Church or
Monastery. Therefore if we look backwards we shall find it a Custom well
nigh from all Antiqutie, that the goods and revenues of Churches have been
always acknowledged to belong of Right to the Bishops disposing. Some
authority for this may be had out of those Canons which are called the
Apostles; Canon 37. (...). Let the B. have in his power all the goods of the
Church, and let him dispose of them as in the sight of God. So the 40. Canon
(...) etc. Where also the reason is given (...). For if the precious souls of
men are committed to his care, how much more ought he to be entrusted with
the Church revenues. For the authority of these Canons, it may now be thought
too late, and to little purpose to speak: and yet I have always marvelled who
that should be, that durst be so bold, as to fasten so many forged precepts
upon the Apostles; and much more, that whosoever he were, he could be so
fortunate in his fraud, as not to be discovered rather in the next Age, than in
those later times, which saw the former at a distance, and may be thought to
know but a little of that which was then done. True it is, that some of these
Canons may seem to argue, neither the Spirit, nor Style of that Age, in which
they pretend to have been brought forth: and yet of others we are bound to
think more soberly. To say no more, we will only set down that of the
Arabicke Paraphrast, who at the end of his translation of these Canons, in
stead of that which the Greek says [(...), these things we have delivered unto
you concerning the Canons, O ye Bishops] says thus. (...) that is, O ye
Family of the faithful attend: (...) unto our words and precepts, for that
they come from the holy Spirit of the living Lord our Care. But however it be
resolved against these Canons, yet that which we have said is also set down by
the Synod at Antioch Can. 24 and 25. where Note (says Balsamon upon the 25.
Canon) (...), that the Administration of those things which appertain to the
Church, belongs to Ecclesiastical men. Read also to the same purpose the 7.
and 8. Canons of the Council held at Gangra, (...), etc. And (...), etc. where
a Curse is past upon all those that presume to give or receive the Church
fruits, otherwise than by the Bishops dispensation, or theirs who by the Bishop
shall be appointed thereunto. And Steven Bishop of Rome in the second Centurie,
says, L^cis quoque quamvis religiosi sint nulla tamen de Ecclesiasticis
Facultatibus disponend^, (so we read, rather than Respondend^) legitur unquam
ti^buta facultas, that it cannot appear, that ever any power was granted to
Laymen, though Religious Lay, to dispose of Ecclesiastical goods. It is the
Bishops observation in his second Epistle, and long after him it was repeated
in the Council at Lateran, under Innocent the 3. Chap. 44. In the year 589.
it was set down in the Toletan Council, Can. 9. that Churches cum suis Rebus
should ad Episcopos pertinere. And Cyr^^ of Alexandria in his Epistle to
Domnus, says, that the Diocesan for the time being, may (...), that is (says
Balsamon) (...), that he may confidently and securely be entrusted with the
Church Revenues. And because the Bishop had this power over the goods which
were conferred upon the Church, it seems to be a Reason why he was sometimes
present at the last Will and Testament of Benefactors in this kind; for this
appears by the Will which Ber^ricke made, a Kentish Gentleman of Mepham,
related by Lambert out of the Antiquities of that place (...) on (...) by (...)
into (...); And I give (says the Testator) the 10. hides at Streiton, to the
Minster at Walkenstede, And the Land at Falcham after ^ythwares days to S.
Andrews for AElfrics Soul, their Lord and his Elders, so their will was, etc.
And this is said to be done, on (...), etc. and (...) on (...); i. Witness
Eadg^ue the Lady, and Odo the Archbishop, etc. and AEifsie the Priest of
Croyden.

From this Right which the Diocesan had in the dispensation of Ecclesiastical
goods, it proceeds that he was also especially concerned in the Endowment of
a Church or Monastery. For a Monastery, the 17 Can. of the 7. Synod says
thus, O (...). lu^. Graec. Romans in Epit. S. Can. (...). etc. But see for the
Canon ^s Balsamon and Zonaras have it, and what they say: Be it a Monastery,
or otherwise a Church or Oratorie, Balsamon says (...). The Founder shall be
forced to bring a competencie according as the Diocesan shall approve. And how
much the Bishop was considered in this matter, it appears by the 32. Canon of
the 4. Council at Toledo; held under Honorius in the year 633. No verint
tamen conditores Basilicarum in rebus quas itsdem Ecclesiis conferunt, nullam
se potestatem habere, sed ^uxta Canonum instituta sicut Ecclesiam it a and
dotem ejus ad ordinationem Episcopi pertinere. Where it is said, that the
Founder must know that he shall have nothing to do, neither with the Church,
nor that which he bestows upon it, but both shall belong to the Bishops
dispensation. And this is also cited by Gratian in the Decree 10. q. 1. cap.
Noverint.

In the Bracaran Council, held in the year 672. Can. 5. it is set down, that
the Bishop may ^efuse to consecrate any Church till he be made sure of a
convenable Dotation. Mem^nerit (says the Canon to the Bishop) ut non prius
dedicet Ecclesiam nisi anteadotem Basilica and obsequium ipsius per donationem
Chartula confirmatum accipia^, nam non levis est ^sta temeritas etc. And before
this as much was said in the 3. Toletan Council of the year 589. Can. 19.
which also was reported in 888. in a Council holden at Mentz, C. 4. Multi
contra Canonum constituta, sic Ecclesias quas adificaverunt postulant
consecrart, ut dotem quam e^dem Ecclesia contulerunt censeant ad Episcopi
ordinationem non pertinere. Quod factum and in praeteritum displicet, and in
futurum prohibetu^: sed and omnia secundum constitutionem antiquam ad Episcopi
ordinationem and potestatem pertineant. And in the Council at Cabilon of the
year 658. Can. 14. whereas the complaint was, Quod Oratoria pervillas ^am
longo tempore constructa, and facultates ibidem collata ipsi quorum villae sunt
Episcopis contradicant: The satisfaction was, Hoc convenit emendar^ ita ut
duntaxat in potestate sunt Episcopi. Also the Canon Nullus Abbas etc. of the
Council at Westminster related before in the matter of Parishes is much to
this purpose. There we cite it out of a M^. Bibloth, Bod. which is a
continuation of Marianus Scotus. We find it also in the Continuation to
Florent. Wigorn. by occasion whereof, looking better into our Manuscript
Marian, we find, that it agrees, for the most part with this Florence of
Worcester. But further to argue this dispensative Power in the Diocesan, he
that is willing to observe, may find several passages both of late and elder
times, among the Records of Sarum, a sight whereof I had by the great favor of
my worthy Friend, M. Edward Thorneburgh, one of the Canons Resident of that
Church.

We have seen how far the Diocesan was concerned in the Erection and
Endowment of a Church or Monastery, it remains, that we now consider him,
in that which appertains to the Filling. For a Monastery, certain it is
that none could be admitted, but by the Bishops authority. This was determined
in several Synods, we note only the forenamed Council held at Nice, because
there also the reason of this is set down, let the Reader see the 14. Canon in
the Latin Translation, set forth by Turrian; for those that are not so
satisfied, we shall shortly provide the Arabic Text, if we be not otherwise
prevented by those that are better able, or forced to forbear for want of
Characters, As the Bishop was to be looked after, by those that would come into
a Religious House, so also by those that would go out, So it seems by the
Law of Alfred: (...) Nunnan (...): If any lead a Nanne out of a Monastery
without the Kings leave or the Bishops, he shall pay 120 Shillings.

In the filling of Appropriations, which were made over to the Religious
Houses, the Law says that the Bishop had this power: That he could bind the
Proprietaries to set out for the Vicar Incumbent, such a Convenable Portion of
the Incomes, as the Bishop in his judgment should be pleased to allot. See
Alexand. 3. to the * Bishop of Worcester. De Prab. and dig. C. De Monach.

And there be, that are well enough persuaded that the B. even now also ought
in this Right to be acknowledged, and the ground is, for that it may be likely
to stand without injury to the Statute of Dissolution For it seems by the
27. of H. 8. c. 28. that these Lands are to be holden in as large and ample
manner, as the Proprietaries did then hold them, or ought to have done. And an
other Clause of the same Statute, Saves to every Person and Persons, and
bodies politic, etc. other than Abbots, etc. all such right, title interest,
etc. as they or any of them has, ought, or might have had, etc. But the
consideration of this, I restore to him from whom I had it. The late learned
Civilian in the Poor Vicars Plea, where the Reader who desires more of it,
may be further satisfied.

Now it is to be observed, how far forth the Patron was to depend upon the
Bishop, for the filling of any other Church or Oratorie. Most proper to this
purpose is the Emperors Novell, which was decreed little less then eleven
hundred years past, about the latter end of the 5 Centurie: (...). that is, If
any man shall erect an Oratorie, and his desire be to present a Clerk
thereunto, by himself or his heirs: if they furnish the Clerk with a
Competencie, and nominate (to the Bishop) such as are worthy, they may be
ordained: But if those who are intimated by them, be rejected by the Canons, as
unworthy of the Ministry, then let it be the care of the most Reverent
Diocesan of the place, to present such as in his discretion he shall conceive
better of. That we may the more certainly know, what the Emperors mind is, it
must be considered out of Panormitan, what is the meaning and original of the
Patrons Right, which by the Canon is called Ius Patronatus, and by the Common
Law Advouson. The Abbot out of the Law says, that this is Ius honorificum,
onerosum and utile alicus competens in Ecclesia, pro eo quod Diocesani consensu
Ecclesiam fundavit, construxit, veldotavit, ipse, vel is a quo causam habuit.
Abb. in Rubric. He therefore that founded a Church, (that is, fundum dedit,
gave a piece of ground) De Ier. Pat. C. Nobu. He also that built a Church upon
it 16. q. 7. c. Monasterium. Or lastly, he that endowed the Church built. C.
Piae Mentesibid. was thenceforth qualified with this Right of Patronage. But
all this while it is especially to be noted, that all this was done Consensu
Dioesan^, which seems to have been so requisite by that of Clement. C.
Nobis. De Iur. Patron. Si quis Ecclesiam cum assensu Dioecesan^ construxit, ex
eo lus Patronatus acquirit, that if Ex eo should be referred to assensu,
nothing makes a Patron but the Will of the Diocesan. And it is to be
understood, that when a man dispendeth of his temporal estate toward the
Founding, Erecting, or Endowing of a Church, whatsoever shall be so conferred,
after consecration, is actually delivered up, and made over to God himself:
therefore it must needs be, that from henceforth these things. cannot properly
belong either to the Bishop or the Patron: for the Emperor says, Quod Divini
juris est, id nullius est in bonis. Instit. de Rerum Divisione.. Nullius.


rate, that neither of them should press too much the one upon the other: and
therefore in the beginning, the usual rate that they set down between the
beneficed man, and the Religious person was the one half of the Benefice; for
that it was not thought that the Pope would charge a Church above that rate.
But after by the covetousness of Monks and Friars themselves, and the
remissness of Bishops who had the managing of this business under the
Apostolic See, the Incumbents part came to so small a portion, that Urban the
fifth, by Othobon his Legate here in England, in the year of Salvation 1262.
was feign to make a Legantine, whereby he forbad all Bishops of this Land to
appropriate any more Churches, to any Monastery, or other religious houses,
but in cases only, where the persons, or places to whom they were appropriated
were so poor, as that otherwise they were not able to sustain themselves; or
that the cause were so just, that it might be taken rather to be a work of
charity, than any inforcement against Law: and that beside with this provis^;
as that if the new proprietaries within six months next after, should not set
out a competent portion for the Minister, of the fruits of the Benefice,
themselves should assign out a sufficience thereout, according to the
quantity thereof: Which constitution, because it took not the effect that was
hoped, there were two Statutes Only the dispensation of those things must be
referred to Men: And to that purpose, who of all men could be more fit then the
Bishop? It seems therefore, that the right of Presentation may be originally
in the Diocesan, and we shall find it has been so, by a certain passage,
recorded in the life of Bishop Vlrick, where the Author faith, That when any
would build a Church in his Territory, the Bishop freely consented both to the
Erection and Consecration: Si confestim ille consecrata Ecclesia legitimam
dotem in terr^s and mancip(...)s in manum ejus celsitudinis dare non differret,
etc. which is answerable to what was before said concerning the dowry of a
Church. It follows in the Author, Consecrationeque per act a doteque
contradita comprobato illic Pr^sbytero altaris Procurationem commendarit, and
Ecclesia Advocationem firmiter legitimo hareds panno imposito commendavit: that
the Consecration being ended, and the Endowment delivered up, the care of the
Altar was committed to the Priest allowed, and the Advouson firmly conveyed
to the lawful heir, by the putting on of a Robe. Author vita Vdalrici, C. 7.
p. 52. edit. August. Vindel. 1595.

It is now time to consider how far forth the Bishop departed with this Right
to the Lay Patron, and for what causes. We have said, that the Bishops Right
was not to the things themselves, which being once appropriated to God, could
be only his, but to the dispensation of them, according to which it was
necessary, that the Bishop should dispose of the presentation, and fill the
places with such Inbumbents, as might enjoy them in Gods Right, and execute
their function answerably to the Founders good purpose. This Act of the Bishops
being (as by them it was accounted) more a matter of Care than Power, was
usually understood by the moderate expressions of Nominare, Pr^sent (...)e, or
Commendare, still saving the Right to God, and to themselves only such a
conscientious disposition thereof, as might redound to his greater glory: This
power the Bishops transferred to the Lay Patron, yet so as it should be
necessary for the Patron to have recourse to the Bishop, that he might
qualify his Clerk for the Rectorie by ordination, and that it should be
lawful for the Bishop to divest the Patron of this Right according as he
should be moved by such causes as were found to be of a considerable
importance: so it seems by the Law where the Patrons Right is said to be such
a power in qua eos Ecclesia huc usque susti(...)t. De jur. Patron. C. Quoniam.
The reason that moved the Diocesan to let the Patron share with him in this
prerogative, was for the Patrons encouragement, for so it must be conceived of
this right, that it was an honorable privilege; and therefore the Abbot in his
definition did well to call it jus honorificum. This reason, in respect of the
Patron, took place, because of the great need which then was of those, which
were able, and would be willing to erect or endow a Church, for as much as all
places at their beginnings were ever unfurnisht, for we shall find in some
that they had no Churches at all, but instead of a Church they were content to
say prayers under a Cross in the open field: and this is reported of our own
Ancestors in the Peregrination of Wilibald. Sic mos est Saxonica gentis (...)d
in (...)ullis nobilium bonorumque hominu^ prad^^s, non Ecclesiam, sed sanct a
Crucis signum Dowino dicatum cum magno honor almum in alto erectum ad commodam
diurna orationis sedulit atem solent havere: Hod^peric. Hierosolym. Wilibald.
Ext at ad Canisium. Tom. 4. Antiq. Lect. part. 2 page 486 Edit. Ingolst. 1603.
In other places there might perhaps be Churches, but sometimes they were no
better than those which are spoken of by Asser B, of Shireburne in the life of
K. Alured, Churches, of so poor and mean a structure, that when the Candles
were set before the Relics they were oftentimes blown out by the wind which
got in, not only per ostia Ecclesiarum, but also per frequente; parietum
rimulas, as the Author there has said, in so much that the ingenious Prince was
put to the practice of his dexterity, and by occasion of this Lanternam ex
lignis and bo vinis cornobus pulcherime construere imperavit: by an apt
composure of th^^ horns in wood, he taught us the mystery of making a
Lantherne.


made, the one by Richard the second, the other by his successor These
exigencies were the causes which moved the Bishops to give all encouragement to
the Patron, and admit him into the honorable imploymnet of Filling the
Churches, but so as upon occasion given, he might resume this right to
himself, which upon the the abuse thereof has accordingly followed.

That the Laity could never yet abide the Clergy, is noted in the Law for an
old saying. De immunit. Eccl. C. Clericis. lib 6. and Basil the Emperor in the
8. Synod could say of the Lay people of his time: Adeo multos malitia in
insaniam accendit, etc. ut quod pedes sint minime cogitantes legem ponere
velint oculi^: that malignitie had so set on fire the madness of some, that
forgetting themselves to be the feet, they would needs teach their eyes to
see. But we are more happy, and need not make this our own complaint, being no
otherwise troubled, than with a very learned and most religious Laity. But how
the Lay Patrons heretofore behaved themselves in the matter in hand we shall
see. (Though I mention only the Lay, yet I excuse not the Clergy Patrons
otherwise than thus, that they were but few, and not so likely to wrong the
Church in regard of their proper interest.)

The Patrons abused their liberty many ways: if we consult with the several
Councels which have provided against this we shall find them sometimes
presenting illiterate and unworthy men, Priests of the lowest of the people:
men that can think so meanly of the Ministry, as to make suit to come into
the Priests office for a piece of bread. 1. Sam. 2. This is noted in the
Council at Colen. An. 1536. where they are said to present their own sons
and kindred citra ullum delectum aut discrimen scientia morum ac atatis. There
also it is complained that there were some, qui admotis, nomen tantu^
relinquunt: that promoted the Incumbent only to a bare name, reserving the
revenue to themselves, ausuquodam sacrilego, as they are there censured by the
Council: and some were so exorbitant in this kind that they would present
their young boys and children, as if by the same law of Nature, they could
beget Priests and men. Council. Palent. Constable. 14.

This is little better then that of Mi^ha, the man of mount Ephraim; qui ipse
sibi fec^^ sacrificulu^: though this might be well endured that the Son
should make the Priest, when the Mother and the Founder had made the Gods. But
this was done too, when there was no King in Israel and every man did that
which was right in his own eyes. (...) otherwise so abominable an act could
never have passed as the son of Gersom has observed upon the place.

The Council of Salizburgh, under Martin the 5. tells us of certain Patrons
that used to compound with the Incumbent for a Moyerie of the profits, and this
in the German Council under Conrade is styled vulnus cancrosum et simontacum.
And see to this purpose the Council of Worms in 886. and Vt Presbyters Others
not contented with a part of the obventions made the bargain to have half: for
in the second Bracaran Council. C. 6 we find some that built their Churches,
non prode v(...) fides, sed pro quastus cupiditate: not for devotion, but
filthy lucre; that they might share alike with the Incumbent in the offerings
of the Church.

Sometimes it fell out, that the same Church had several Patrons, and these in
the vacancie, for the most part, disagreed about the Presentee, and this was a
great inconvenience, for in the interim during their discord the Bishop was to
take away the Relics and seal up the Church. Some Patrons for their
Presentations expected to be gratified with gifts and largesses and the like:
and against this it was provided in the Nanneten Council. C. 16. And the
Council at Arles under Charles the great expressly forbids the Lay Patron,
munera exigere a Prasbyt. propter commendationem Ecclesia. See also the
Capitul. Addit. 3. C. 63. and 30 of the Council of Mentz. And it was the
complaint of the Palentine Council, that the Patrons Sons and nephews were
wont to exact great dinners of the Rectors, as if they would feed upon the
Incumbent, and eat out their presentation. And of these things (say the
Fathers of that Synod) Relatione cert^ didicimus: we are credibly informed.
Conso. Pal. a. 13^^ Constit. 14. We find also that the Patron, sometimes for his
own profit in the vacancy, would reserve the Presentation during his pleasure.
Therefore it was decreed, by the law of Laps, that all Patrons should present
after a certain time set down: where we are to note, that the Canons allowed
the Clergy Patron 6. Months liberty, and the Lay Patron but 4. And though
this would not be received by the Common Law, yet what needed the Student to
tell the Doctor that he saw no reason why a Clerk should have more respect
than a Layman, but rather the contrary. C 31. whereas it is one of the
greatest punishments that a Church man can have to be degraded from his
Ministry, and turned into a layman. But to go on, Some there were among the
Patrons that had so little conscience, as to present their Clerk for his money:
this is sharply reprehended in the Council at Tours. c. 15. An. 813. where
also it is said to be vitium late diffusum: a corruption spread far and wide.
Some others there were so wretchlesse as to rob the Church, after the Rectors
decease, of her dowry: rebus mobilibus, and interdum immobilibus: as it is
noted of them in the Council at Silizburgh, where it is called detestabilis
corruptela. C. Nonnulli etc. And C. Ad extirpand. It seems also by the
Council at Meaulx. that the Priests were sometimes employed by their Patrons,
secular^ negotiatione, and villicatione turpi, in secular negotiations and the
meaner offices of husbandry. The Priests indeed are called Pastors by the
great Shepherd of Israel, but this must not be mistaken, for when it is said
that the Minister must attend his flock, the meaning is not that he should
keep sheep. These and many more were the Patrons enormities into which he
that lists further to enquire shall be sooner weary of finding than of
seeking them. We have reserved for the last place that which of all other is
most horrible. 'Twas enough to debase the Incumbent, and despoyle the Church
but horrerdum est dicere, says the 3. Lateran Council C. 45. quod in necem
Pralatorum prorumpere non formidant: it is a horror to report it, that nothing
would content the Patrons but the life and blood of the Prelates, etc.

Upon the rising of these insufferable exorbitances, the Bishops called for
their right again, but the redress was not made all at once, nor so soon in
one place as another, to which variety diligent heed must be given in reading
the Counsels to this purpose. The most notable reformation was attempted in
the 3. Lateran Council, where the authority, and consent of the Bishop is
strongly reinforced. Nos enim, cum La^ci non possunt nisi^us quod habent in
al^^s transfer, hujusmodi concessiones viribus carere decernimus, and penitus
^rritas esse, etc. So Lucius in the Canon of the Printed Coppie: but in MS.
Bibl. Bod they are the words of Alexand. the 3, to the Abbots, Priors, etc. and
the whole Clergy of ^orke Diocese. This decree was accepted and ratified here
at home, as appears by the Synod holden in the year 1200. where every man is
expressly forbidden extenore Concil^^ Lateranensis, Decimas velalia
Ecclesiastica beneficia sine Episcopali authoritate de manu Laici accipere:
according to the tenor of the Lateran Council, to receive any Tithes or
Ecclesiastical livings from a Lay-mans hand, otherwise than by Episcopal
authority.


Henry the fourth, both for the convenable indowment of the Vicar, there to do
divine service, and inform the people, and to keep hospitality among them.

Albeit most of these Appropriations were principally in Monks and Friars, and
such other Religious persons, yet were not Bishops Sees, and Cathedral
Churches altogether free from them, as I have before showed in the Cathedral
Church of Salisburie, to whom Henry the first appropriated near twenty
Churches in one day: and the Sea of Winchester, which has had two benefices
aunciently annexed to the Bishops table, the Parsonage of Eastmeane, and the
Parsonage of Hambleden. Neither do I doubt, but the like was done in other
Bishops Sees, and other Cathedral Churches, if I had as good instruction to
report of them, as I have had information to speak of these.

And so far as concering the first effect of Privileges, whereby sundry fat
Benefices have been injuriously drawn from their own Churches, and
unnaturally appropriated to Monkeries and Frieries, and other secular, and
religious places; which as I have said, has bin partly the act of Lay men, and
partly of Ecclesiastical men.

SECT. 5.
Exemptions from Tithes brought in by Pope Paschal, favor toward all sorts of
religious men, and how they have been restrained by Pope Adrian.

NOw follows the second effect hereof: and that is, the exemption of these
Religious men's possessions from payment of Tithes, C. Ex part tua. glos. in
verb. laborum de Decim.
which is a privilege of the Pope alone: for Monks anciently paid Tithes of
their land, before these privileges, as other Laymen did. But Pascalis the
second, casting a more favorable aspect toward Monks, and other Religious
men, than any of his Predecessors before time had done, did order together
with the Council of Ments, That neither Monks, nor other Religions persons,
or any other that lived in common, should pay Tithes of their own labors:
Which immunitie in process Eod. in dicta glos.
of time, Pope Adrian recalled, so far as it concerned the rest of the
Religious persons, and limited it only to the Cystertians, Hosptallers,
Templers, and those which were of the order of S. John's in Jerusalem, leaving
only to the rest freedom from paying Tithes of lands newly broken up, and
labored with their own hands, and of their garden, and of their cattle. In
which state the matter stood until Innocent the thirds days, who although he
were in no other point of better mould than the rest of the Popes were; yet was
he in this more pitiful toward poor Incumbents of Parish Churches, than any
of his predecessors had bin; who seeing hereby the inconveniences of beggary
and ignorance that grew upon sundry of the Parochian Priests, by means of
these Privileges, ordered in the second Lateran Council, holden in the year
of grace 1120. that for such lands as any of the said four Privileged C.
nuper Abbates, de decimis.
orders, should acquire, and get after the said general Council, they should
pay Tithes, or compound for them as other men did, yea though they labored
them with their own hands, or manured them at their own charges. Which
consideration also moved Henry 4. King of this Realm, to provide by Statute,
first, that such of the order of Cystertians, An. 2. H 4. c. 4.
as had purchased Bulls to be discharged of Tithes should be reduced into that
state, as they were before: Then, that no person Religious or Secular, by
color of any Bulls, containing any privileges, to be discharged An. 7. H. 4.
ca. 6.
of Dismes pertaining to any Parish Church, nor put in execution, should put
the same in execution or should purchase the like in time to come. Whereby it is
very probable, that few of those lands which are 31. Hen. 8. c. 13.
now challenged to be free of Tithes by the Statute of the 31. of Hen. 8. are
free of Tithes in deed: for that they are no otherwise freed by that Statute,
than that they were first freed in the Religious men's hands; so that if they
were never freed in their hands, they remain still charged with Tithes. But
between this interruption of not paying of Tithes, wrought by Innocent, in the
second Lateran Council, and the dissolution of Monasteries, effected by Henry
the viij are three hundred and thirty years, and between the foresaid
Statute, made in the seventh year of Henry the fourth, and the subversion of
the Monasteries, brought to pass by Henry the eight, as has been before
remembered, are one hundred and thirty years. In which long distance of time
the one from the other, it is not to be doubted, but many of those Religious
Houses were built and endowed, which by no possible means could be partakers
of those privileges which were abolished before the time of their erection:
neither was there any reviving or renewing of these privileges by any Pope of
Rome, or Prince in this Realm, after they were thus first repealed by the Pope
and Prince aforesaid, for ought that I have read, or heard to the contrary.

So that if this matter were well understood, and the ages and orders of those
Religious persons, from whom the claim is made, were rightly conceived, it
would give great light unto the Judges, to discern what lands were exempted
from the payment of Tithes, and what not: for now many are pretended to be
exempted from Tithes, which never were of any of those four Orders, and if
they were, yet were they not before the time of the interruption, but since.

SECT. 6.
That real compositions for Tithes, are the devise of Ecclesiastical Lawyers,
and are to be tried by the Ecclesinsticall Courts.

ANd so far as concerning the second effect of these Privileges. Now it
follows that I speak a word or two of Compositions, which are agreements
between persons litigant, whereby either party may know their own ^ight, and
not strive again about doubtful matters. As good Laws have grown out of ill
manners, so Compositions have risen out of quarrels, caused by privileges, and
other like exemption for matter of Tithe: whereof, although there be no
special Treatise in the Law, as there is of the rest, yet they are so often
mentioned by the Decretals themselves, as that it is not to be doubted, but
that they are part of the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as the rest are, and
that they are the devise of the Ecclesiastical Lawyers, and not the conceit of
the Common Lawyers, the form and style of them does well show, which savoureth
wholly the manner and phrase of writing of the Ecclesiastical men, and has no
touch of the Common Law at all. And if the devise be the Ecclesiastical men's,
as all Bishops Registers every where do show, which are full of these
compositions, why should not also the trial be theirs, that every cause might
have his ending, where it has his beginning? Eorum eni^m est legem
interpretari, quorum est condere.

SECT. 7.
That the curiosity of Schoolmen, in their distinctions upon Tithes, have
helped forward Appropriations and Exemptions from Tithes. The Opinion examined,
as concerning the Quotitie of Tithes, whether it be Moral, Ceremonial, or
Judicial.

ANd these are those greevances of the Church, which I said the School-mens
curiosity in their distinctions, either invented, or gave strength unto them
after they were invented; but invent them all, I think, they did not, for that
these Acts of Appropriations of benefices were somewhat more ancient than the
Schoolmen themselves are t(...) but the rest of the Privileges, they either
came into the world with them, or ensued anon afterthem, so that I may well
say, they much strengthened this iniquity. For when that every man understood
by their Doctrine the quotitie of Tithes, or the (...) part thereof was not
precisely by Gods Law (since the light of the Gospel sprang out as the day
light unto the Christians, who before sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death) but that it was by the institution of the Church only: then began they
freely to spoil the Church of her due Tithes, and to give away that to one
Church, that was due to an other. And the reason that persuades the Schoolmen
to this, was, that after much ado, dividing the whole Law of Moses into three
parts, the Moral, the Judicial, and the Ceremonial; they did conclude, that
there were three parts likewise in the Tithe, the one Moral, which was a
necessary maintenance for the Minister, and therefore was natural and
perpetual: the other Judicial, which was the number of ten, fit, as they
taught, for that people only, and therefore was positive and remotive: the
last Ceremonial, and that was the mystery contained in this Quotitie, or
number of Ten, which being but a shadow only, was abolished with the Law it
self: whereby they did infer the precise number of Ten being taken away, by
reason of the Ceremony it self, a competencie now only does remain for the
Minister out of the Tithes: which opinion has been well confuted of late, by
a very learned man, as his Treatise thereof does well show; but I fear with
less success, than the truth of the cause does deserve, for this is a point
that touches many men's private benefit, and therefore shall have no more
favor than it needs must.

But the devise whereon the Schoolmen did build this Thom. in quodlibet part.
3. art. 6. q. 6.
Ceremony is this, that as all Digits under ten are unperfect, and do tend to
ten as to their perfectness; so all men, save Christ alone, are unperfect, and
have need of Christ's righteousness to make them perfect: Which Abraham well
knowing, paid Tithes to Melchisedech, who was the figure of Christ, as therein
acknowledging, that himself and all mankind, who were represented by the
other nine Digits were unperfect by reason of Original Sin dwelling in them,
and therefore had need to be perfected by Christ, Idem part. 22. q. 87. art. 1.
who was figured by the tenth number.

All which that we may grant to be true between Christ and all mankind, as it
is true indeed, and that ten is the perfection of the other numbers under ten,
for that all the rest of the Digits, when they come to ten, return back again
to ten, and are multiplied by the coupling of themselves with ten: yet, where
is this proportion between Christ and ten in the Scripture, that should make
this Ceremony? which if it cannot be found any where, nor any consent of the
primitive Church showed for it, as I think it cannot be, then may it with as
good authority be rejected as it is received. For albeit Thomas Aquinas
himself was termed a Seraphicall Doctor, that is, such a one as had a sense
in the understanding of the holy Scripture above all others of his age, and
that he did much profit the study of Divinity, with his witty distinctions:
yet is not his authority such, that it must prevail in cases of Divinity,
without the authority of the Scripture, and the consent of the ancient Fathers
of the primitive Church, interpreting this piece of Scripture in that sense as
he does, which would make a sweet harmony if it might be had.

And therefore as to my poor sense, better said a learned man of our time to
this point, writing upon the Sabbath day Iunius in 2. c. 3. Geneseo^.
in the second of Genesis, which may be also proportionably understood of the
tenth, for that they, were both before the Law in their very number, and were
but repeated by Moses under the Law, because they had been approved by God
before the Law in the self same numbers: and that which he says of the
Sabbath is this, that albeit it has a Ceremonial designation of the day, that
is, that it does figure unto us our perpetual rest, which we shall have in
heaven, after that there is a new heaven and a new earth, yet there is therein
two parts, the one natural, the other positive, as that God should have a
seventh day of worship, this is Natural, and therefore does remain, because
it is perpetual: but that this seventh day of the Lords worship should be the
seventh after the Creation of the world, this was positive, and therefore was
changed by the Apostles and blessed men of the primitive Church, into the
seventh day after the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ: which, as it is
verified by him in the Sabbath, so may it be in like sort vouched by like
reason in the tenth, wherein also by like semblance there are two parts, the
one natural, the other positive. The natural is this: that God our of all the
fruits of the earth, the increase of cattle that are worthy of him, and fit
for man's use, should have a tenth, both in the acknowledgement of his
universal government over us, and also for the provision of his ministers, and
therefore this remains: and in that sense immediately after the disolution of
the Jews policy, the good Christians of the Primitive Church, as soon as they
could get any outward form of a Church, and peace from persecution received it
in the very quotitie, as a thing no less belonging to their Ministers, than it
did appertain to the Priests, and Levites of the Law: But that the Lord
annexed these Tithes by Moses to the Priest and Levites for their maintenance,
during the time of the dispensing of the mysteries under the Law, this is
positive, and therefore changed by the good Christians in the Primitive Church,
from the Jews Ecclesiastiques to the Christian Ecclesiastiques.

Neither can it be thought that this number came from the Judicial part of the
Law, as a fit proportion to maintain one Tribe, out of the revenues of the
other eleven Tribes: for that this number, or quotitie was revealed to be Gods
long before the Law, and before there were any such division of Tribes among
the people of Israel; which then were not, but were parted afterward by Moses
into families according to the number of the twelve sons of Jacob. And
therefore it is not to be presumed, that the Law which came long after,
imprinted a form upon that, which was so long in being before there was any
Law or Ceremony. But as the Apostles, or prime Christians, when as they did
first change the day of the Sabbath by divine inspiration, or otherwise, from
the day of the Creation, to the day of the Resurrection, durst not substitute
any other day into the place of the first day, than a seventh; for that the
Lord had revealed his pleasure in many places of the Scripture as concerning
that number, for his day of worship, so that no other day could be appointed
for his day of worship than a seventh: So neither durst the good Christians of
the Primitive Church (moved no doubt with no other instinct then the other
were, when they translated this provision of Tithes for their ministry from
the Jewish Church unto their own Church) change the number of ten into another
number besides, more or less: For that God had no less manifested his will in
sundry parts of the Scripture, as concerning this number, to be a number for
the maintenance of his ministry, than he had declared his pleasure as
concerning that other number to be a day for his honor, challenging it every
where in the Scripture, in the very quotitie for his own right, and counting
it robbery if it were at any time withheld from him. And therefore it may be
well thought, the Schoolmen herein did great wrong to the Church, who by their
quaint distinctions brought this certainty into an uncertaintie, which is no
where to be found in the Scripture. Which I am more bold to speak, for that I
see some have trod this path before me, and showed by good demonstration, that
the turning of this quotitie into a competencie is a thing nothing warrantable
by the word of God, but that the quotitie ought still to stand as a perpetual
right due to God and his Church. But hereof hitherto.

CHAP. V.
SECT. 1.
That a Bishop being Lord of a manor, and prime Founder of a Benefice, could
not in the first erection thereof by his own capacity, retain any Tithes in
his hand, and pass the same after in Lay fee to his Tenant, and so give cause
to his Tenants of prescriptions against the Parson.

ANd so having passed over this whole proviso of Law, Statute, Privilege,
Prescription, and Composition, I might well leave the turning of this stone any
more, but that yet there remains one Prohibition of prescription to be
handled, which in my fancy is worse then all therest, for that it draws away
from the Parochian Church her maintenance, and transferreth it upon Lay: and
that which is worse, it makes Bishops to be instruments hereof, who are to be
patrons and defenders of Churches, and not pillars or powlers of the same. And
yet the authors thereof do embrace it, and kiss it as a golden birth, or as if
that Juno her self had been present at the Nativitie thereof. And the devise
is this.

A Bishop being owner of a Manor yet not divided into Tenancies, nor having any
Parsonage erected upon it, ordains the one, and divides out the other: here
the Bishop being seized in the whole Manor before the said division, because
he is a Clergy man, is supposed to be in possession as well of the Tithes, as
of the Manor it self, and therefore after creating a Parsonage, and dividing
out his Tenancies, may retain and keep to himself, and his said Tenants, so
much of the said Manor discharged of Tithes as him lists, and assign over
the rest for the maintenance of the Minister, and that his Tenants after may
challenge exemption from Tithe, as the Bishop did, for that they were exempted
by his capacity while they were in his own hand.

Neither of which is so by Law; for insomuch as a Bishop is an owner of a
Manor, and is a prime founder of a Benefice, he has no more right to the
Tithe thereof than a mere Lay Patron has, who for his zeal to the Church,
and to encourage others to be like affected to Gods Religion as himself is,
may have some small pension assigned him and his for ever by the Bishop out of
the same benefice, in acknowledgement of the erecting, founding, or ondowing
thereof: but for any portion of Tithes to him or his, he could never retain
any, nor can to this day, neither yet can the Bishop himself, unless perhaps
he will be like to Ananias and Saphira, which held part of the price of their
ground from the Lord, and were worthily punished for the Actorun(...)
same. And as they cannot detain it themselves, being spiritual men, so much
less can they pass it over to any Lay man, for that Lay people neither by
Gods Law, neither by Canons and Decrees of the Church, were ever capable of Ca*
quamvis de decimis. and the Abnum. 5.
them: yea, it was so far off, that ever any Bishops durst infeoffe any Lay
man in Tithe; that whosoever did it, was to be deposed and excommunicated
until such time as he restored the same to the Church again. And to say the
truth, Ca* tua nobis de decimis.
Tithes were never at any time in Bishops as in Fee, but in very few cases, as
where the Bishop had a Parish himself, distinct from other Parishes, for
sundry Bishops in sundry places had so, and then the Tithes of the Parish did
belong unto them, in such sort, as they do now belong unto the Incumbents
thereof: Or, if the Tithe were not within any Parish, for then in like sort it
did belong unto the Bishop of the Diocese, in whose Territory it was; albeit,
now within this Realm it belongs unto the King: or where the Parishes were
undistinguished, for then were they the Bishops, not to convert to his own
use, but to divide among the Ministers and Clerks, which labored in the
Diocese, under him, in Preaching, Teaching, Ministering of the Sacraments, and
executing of other Ecclesiastical functions, every one according to his
desert: Or that it were the fourth part of the Tithe, for then did it belong to
the Bishop in Law, toward his own relief, and the repairing of the Parish
Church where they grew, and not to confer or bestow the same, as him thought
best; which notwithstanding now also is grown out of use, and nothing left
unto the Bishop from the Churches of his Diocese, beside his Procurations, and
Synodals, to be paid by the Incumbents in the time of his Visitation. Beside
which cases, it cannot be found, that ever any Bishop had to do with Tithes,
much less to alyen, dispose, and transfer the same as him listed, and to
whom him listed.

SECT. 2.
That Bishops endowments in the beginning stood not in Tithes, but in finable
Lands.

FOr it is very certain, Bishops endowments themselves, in the beginning of
the Primitive Church, stood not in Tithes, but in good Temporal and finable
Lands, which gracious Princes, and other good benefactors of former Ages
bestowed upon them, as it does appear out of the C^de sacrosanct. Eccl. and de
Epist and Cler(...) titul.
first book of the Code; where sundry Laws of Constantine the great, and
other gracious Emperors, even to the time of Justinian himself are recorded,
both for the conferring of Lands upon the Church, and those such as should
neither be barren, neither charged with Statute, or other debts of the
Exchequer, as also for the conserving and safe keeping of such Lands as were
in such sort conferred, Authent. multo magis C. de sacro sanct. Eccles.
and bestowed upon them: and it is manifest also out of our own stories, both
in the Britans time, during whose Reign there are reported to have been
fifteen Iocelin of Furnis in his book of British Bishops. S^ow fol 37.
Archbishops in the Sea of London, well endowed with possessions, and if they
were Archbishops, then must it necessarily also follow there were Bishops, for
that these are respective one to the other. The like is written of the Saxons
Reign, under whom the Sea of Canterbury, Hen. Huntington lib. 3.
the Sea of London, the Sea of Rochester, and the Sea of York (for these four
were first set up again after the Saxons first received the faith at the
Preaching of Augustine, Melitus, and Justus Paulinus) are namely reported to
have been enriched with large Dominions, Charta regis Ethelberts, and charta
W^ll. prim^. Stow fol ^7.
and possessions, given to every of them for their maintenance. And what
course has been held with Bishoprics erected since the Conquest, the
ruinated state of them, and others do show, amongst whose ancient livelihood
is not to be found any indowment by Tithes, but such as of late have come unto
their hands, and that for the most part, by change of their good finable Lands
for impropriate parsonages. And therefore much to blame are some of our time,
who (when as their predecessors in former ages never admitted of any
impropriate parsonage into their possessions, but only in such cases as have
been before remembered) for the name and place of a Bishop will be content to
make Glaucus Homer. Iliad.
change with Diomede, that is, give their golden Armor for the others brazen
Armor: or do like as Roboam Regum 1. c. 14.
did, who in stead of golden shields, that his father Solomon did hang up in
the Temple, put in their places shields of brass: for the change is no better,
and so well know they that procure the same, otherwise would they never so
instantly desire it.

SECT. 3.
That the turning of Bishops indowments into tenthes, or Tithes for impropriate
Parsonages is unsuitable to the first institution, and very dangerous.

ANd therefore an unsuitable devise was that, and contrary to the course of
former Ages, which was procured in the first year of the late blessed Queen,
(not, as I think, by her own seeking, for she (good Lady) did in this as
she was directed, but upon some other policy) that it should be lawful for
her to take away so much fineable Land, from any of the Bishops as her pleased,
and to give them back again in lieu thereof Tenthes, or Parsonages
impropriate, which has patcht them up again but with unsuitable pieces to
their coat; whereby they are both brought into obloquie, as though they
detained the due provision of the Parochian Church from it, and are set in a
way ready to be overthrown if every bird have his own feather again.

And therefore those good Emperors are most worthy Authent de no^ alienand. aut
permut and. roh. Eccles. etc. si (...)
of commendations, that when they had any occasions to make change of Lands
with the Church, would still allow them the like in value or better: for a
small gain it is unto a Prince for a few thousands of increase of temporary
benefices unto his Exchaqner, to draw a perpetual loss upon a Church, or
Bishopric: for so dear ought the Spiritual state to be unto a Prince (upon
whom God has bestowed so many Kingdoms, and other things of price as he has
done, and put such an infinite number of people in subjection under his feet)
that he would not in any case be hard with God, but think every greatest
liberty toward God and the Church to be the best.

For certain it is the Empire and Church do not much Dic. si minus Authent. ut
supra.
differ the one from the other: for as the Empire does govern the outward man,
and frames him by outward policy to be a good and loyal subject to the
state: So also the Church frames the inward man by the word of God, and
causes him not only to be a dutiful subject unto his Prince, but also to be
an acceptable servant unto his Maker: So that there must be had as well an
awful care of those things that are consecrated to God, as there is a heedfull
regard had of those things that belong unto the good of the Common state: for
the Church was not made of God for the Commonwealth, but the Commonwealth for
the Church. And therefore most gracious has been the Anno primo Jacob. Regis.
cap. 3.
consideration of our dear Sovereign, who to stop all importunate suits made
to Bishops, for the granting away of any of their revenues to himself, or any
other, and to meet with the too too easy facility of many Bishops, in
yielding unto such suits; of his Christian, and Princely piety and care, has
made a Law, whereby to protect the Churches possessions from alienation, or
diminution, that they may remain, and continue, according to the true intent
of their foundation, to their successors for ever, to the uses and purposes
therein limited.

SECT. 4.
That is had been a worthy work in the first Reformers of Religion, if they
had returned to every Parish their own Parsonage; and the dislike that God may
seem to have conceived of that.

BUt here is occasion offered by the example of our gracious King, to wish that
such as were authors to the King, for the dissolving of Monasteries, and other
houses of Religion, had been likewise Councellers to him for the restoring of
all appropriated Parsonages of Tithes, which were, as it were, in captivity
under those houses of Reliligion unto their proper parishes from whence they
were taken. Which had been a memorable work, and easy to have been
persuaded, the King having so many great mountains of temporalties and Seas of
goods, and chatels come unto his hand: so that these spiritualities would have
seemed matter of small account unto him in comparison of those other great
riches and possessions, that came unto him. Which if it had been done, how
blessed a state and Church had this been, when every congregation should have
had a sufficient provision to maintain a learned Preacher among them: for so
was it by the first institution, and so continued, till violence, and
superstition changed it. But I fear those men which began this worthy work,
had not such a sincere mind toward Almighty God in this reformation, as they
ought to have had, but that they sought therein their own advancement, more
than they did the glory of God; which I doubt me, lest God has remembered, in
some of their posterity, which being left in great state, have either so
vanished away, as that their place is scarce to be found, or else do so
continue, as that their posterity ever since has been as it were in a
minority, so that they are as though they were not, great in place, but small
in reputation: yea the three fairest branches, or boughs that ever were in the
world, issuing out of that tree, under whose shadow all these things were done,
are quite gone, and live by no other posterity, but by their own worthy fame
and glorious acts, which they did in their life time; which also now being
gone, do follow them, and so shall do unto the worlds end, for they were all
three memorable Worthies in their place. So dangerous a thing it is, to mix
our own ambition, or any other carnal consideration with Gods glory. But, God
be thanked, such is the careful consideration of our most gracious Governor,
that now is, in this behalf, that it may be hoped, that God will remember him,
and his posterity in goodness, according to all that good that he has done
for the Church, that he and his posterity after him, may sit upon his Seat so
long as the Sun and Moon endures: for certainly, his godly and gracious
comportment, has been such hitherto, as that he may be verily thought to be
a man according unto the heart of God, as David was. But now to the loss that
comes to the Church by these Impropriations.

Whilst the Parochian Churches stood in their essentialities, that is, while
they did enjoy the natural endowments due unto their place, that is all manner
of Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, growing and arising within the
compass of their Parish, due by the word of God, they preached unto their
Congregation, they prayed for them, they ministered unto them the Sacraments,
they kept hospitality among their Parishioners, and believed the poor, so
far as their portion would reach unto; which was a comely thing to behold,
acceptable to God, comfortable to their Parishioners, and convenable to their
calling but after the same were appropriated to Religious houses, these good
courses were much disguised: for albeit those Religious men, to whom these
Parochian Churches were annexed, did much pray for those congregations, as they
pretended, from whom they had the fat of the Benefices, yet they preached ^i^^
to them. kept small hospitality among them, or did any other spiritual work
belonging to any Pastoral charge; yet notwithstanding the whole institution,
for which benefices in the beginning were erected, was not altogether extinct
in them, but there was some outward shape or form of the first ordinance left
them, so far forth, as that they made continual prayers and intercessions to
God for them: but when it came once into the Laities hands, there was not so
much as a foot-step left of the first institution, for they neither preach unto
the people, pray for them, nor keep any hospitality among them, but spend all
the whole revenues of the Church, upon their private uses, which many times are
unfit for such Spiritual provision to be spent in: so that for the benefit
of the Church, the return of them might be well wished, albeit in so far as
they are perplexed and intricated by the Laws of this Land, with private men's
states, it would be hard to be performed; for the changing of them would be
much like, as if a man should move one stone in a vaulted work, such as the
stony roofes of many Cathedral Churches and Colleges are, where the taking
of one stone away is the jeopardie of the whole building: But yet let those to
whom this does appertain, consider whether in this it were better to please
God, than man.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1.
That Tithes are a Parochian right, and how Parishes in the Christian world,
came first to be instituted.

BUt now to return thither where I left: as every good Bishop, or any of his
Clergy, did win any Conntrie-village, which the Latins call Pagus, to the
Faith; so they erected up a Church there, and appointed a Pastor or Minister
over them, to inform them in the Law of God, and to minister the Sacraments
unto them: and set out for his maintenance the Tithe of that Page, or Village,
Hospinian De origin Monochatus.
to which he was assigned Pastor: which they did in Tithes, rather than in any
other provision, both because it was the Lords inheritance in all ages, and
appointed by him for the maintenance of such as served in his Tabernacle,
during the dispensation of the mysteries of the Law, and now was returned
again into Gods hand by the expiration of the demise of them, made unto the
Levites, during the said time of dispensation; and also because the people
would be more easily induced to part with one part out of every ten, of all the
fruits of their grounds, and labors of their hands, unto the Minister, than
if there had been any other regular imposition laid upon them: for certain it
is, Villages and Pages came more hardly and more lately unto the Faith, than
great Towns and Cities did; and thereupon grew that name of opposition, which
was between Christians that dwelt in Cities, and the Infidels that dwelt in
Pages, that the one were called Pagans, the other were called Christians,
taking their names upon the difference of the places where they dwelt. But from
these Pages, (as I have said) came first the use and practice of Tithes in the
Christian world, insomuch as after when any Law was made, as concerning Tithes,
they held them evermore for a Parochian right only, and in no sort at the
disposition of C. Cum contingat de D(...) verb. de ^ure (...)n gloss.
the Bishop, but in such cases as before is rehearsed; insomuch, that if a
Bishop challenged any Church in his Diocese, he challenged it not in respect
of any fee simple he had in it, but in regard of the Spiritual Jurisdiction
he had over it. And therefore the Authors of this opinion were Ab. ca. nuper de
Decim. and cap. deputati de ludiciis number. 16.
far out of the way, when as they thought the Bishop had like right in the
Tithes of a Church of his Patronage, to give and bestow them as he lists, as
he has in his demeanes, and other his Temporal Lands, either to lease them
out, or divide them into Tenancies, as him best likes.

Neither is that case clear or without question, whereby they pretend a Bishop
being seized in a Manor, may prescribe the Tithes of the demeanes thereof, by
an immemoriall prescription for him and his Tenants, and Farmers for years,
and Tenants at will, to be exonerated, acquitted, and privileged from all
Tithes growing thereupon: which if it be against an other person than himself,
may hap to be true, although perhaps also that be questionable, for that it is
not long since Lay People were capable of that right; neither could themselves
by Law of the Church at any time grant such Spiritual Rights as these are, to
a Layman, either in Feudum, or Emphiteusim, without danger of Excommunication,
Ab. cap. ad hoc De Decimis numer. 4.
or deposition of their own place, as has been before showed. But if
himself, or his predecessors were Parsons there, either in the right of their
Bishopric, as has been of late before remembered, or that the Benefice was
annexed unto their See, for the provision of their Table, as many Bishoprics
had some one or more Benefices appropriate unto them to this purpose, then
could they not prescribe the Tithes in such sort as is pretended: For, albeit
no prescription proceeds without possession, yet no man can prescribe against
himself, although he be in possession; for that evermore there must be two
persons in a prescription, the one which does prescribe, the other against whom
it is prescribed; and therefore in these cases it is never said, they hold
their Tithes by prescription, but in the right of their Church, or Parsonage.
In either of which cases, if they were Lords of the Manor, and Parsons of the
Parsonage together, it is not to be thought they would so respect the good of
their Farmer, as that they would either hurt their Church, or prejudice their
own Table, for their Farmers sake: which they must do, if they suffer a
Prescription to run against the Church, or themselves to exempt the demeanes
of the Manor from payment of Tithes, which were due both to the Church, and
themselves: For they were men, that both knew in their conscience, how much
they were bound unto the Church in this behalf: and they were not ignorant
what prejudice they should do unto themselves, if by prescription they should
yield to exempt so necessaire a provision for the maintenance of their
Hospitality, as the Tithes of the demeanes of a whole Manor, and their
tenancies are: for no small part of their commendation stood in those days in
their hospitality, and therefore it is not to be presumed, that they would
easily cut off any provision that was fit for the same. Besides, if by either
of these two ways, the Bishop was Parson of the place, then did the fruits of
the Benefice, during every Vacation of the Bishopric, not come to the King,
(as they now do, whereby the Parsonage and Manor are both consolidated into
one, for that they are now both holden to be Temporalties) but the Parsonages
came to the Archbishops of the Province, as a spirituality granted to his See
by privilege, during the vacancie of the Sees of such Bishops as were in his
Province, as may appear by the Lord Archbishops Ex Registro Arch^ep^scopi Cant.
Records of Canterbury; so that it cannot be thought any prescription could
run in these times, being so often interrupted by vacancies as they were.
Which being well considered, the conclusion is very doubtful, whether ever any
prescription ran in this case, neither would it easily be believed by those
that know the course of Antiquity, but that there has a judgment passed in
this part; and therefore will I stay my self here, and prosecute this point no
further.

SECT. 2.
That Tithes of Minerals are due.

I Intended to say nothing in this Treatise of the Tithes of Minerals, and
other subterraneous bodies, because I know by Law, they are holden by the like
right, as the Tithes of those things are, which grow in the upper face of the
earth; but yet because I see there is a question made of them, by some that
will make every thing controversable, that is due unto the Church, I will
satisfy also their curiosity: And therefore, for Metals, and other substances
which are dug out of the bowels of the Earth, and therefore are called
Fossilia: this is certain, that what God works here in the superficies of
the Earth, for those things that spring out of the earth, by the heat of the
Sun, the temperature of the Air, and the influence of the Celestial Bodies;
the same he effects below in the depth of the Earth, for the generation of
Metals, and other subterraneous bodies, by the heat and cold of the Earth,
that is included in the bowels Erastustract at. de ortu Metallorum.
thereof: For by the heat, he raises up vapors and exhalations in the matrix
thereof, as the matter of those subterraneous bodies: but by the cold, he
dries, thickneth, hardneth, and indurateth the same into a Metal, or
Mineral, whereby he gives, as it were, a form unto it. And as the
disposition of every exhalation so compacted and drawn together is finer or
grosser, hotter or colder, so is the Metal or Mineral, or other
subterraneous body, more noble or more base: yea, sometimes by reason of this
diversity of exhalations and vapors, drawn together at one time, are diverse
conditions of Metals there confounded together, whereof some are noble, as
Gold, Silver, and Copper; some other are of less estimate, as Tin, Lead, and
such like. Neither do these grow only in the beginning, but they renew again
when they are dug up, (as Trees and Plants in the upper face of the Earth
do rise out of the roots and stemmes of those trees which have been cut
down) if the place of their new generation be prepared accordingly: For
whereas the place of their generation is far below in the Earth, Nature, of a
certain modesty in her self, will not yield to the generation of these
subterraneous bodies, but in secret places, far remote from the sight of the
Sun, and the privity of other Meteoricall bodies, which are under the
firmament. And by that means it happens, that these Mineral bodies are rarely
known and perceived to renew again; for that being once exposed to the light
of the Sun, they are seldom or never closed up again, by reason of the
greatness of the gulf that is made in opening of them. But yet the nature of
them is such, that if their bed were thereto prepared accordingly, ff. Soluto
Matrimonio, l. fructus eos.. 13. plin. lib. 36. c. 15. and 18. de naturali Hist.
they would conceive a new: Which is a thing so notorious in Quarries of stone,
which are less abashed at the sight of the Sun, and the presence of other
Meteoricall bodies in their generation, that the Law it self, and other good
Authors have set it down for an undoubted experience, that being dug up,
they do renew again, by the nature and disposition of the mould wherein they
are ingendered: Strabo lib. (...)
For some Earths do as naturally yield stones, and other minerals out of them,
as others bring forth Corn, Hay, and other fruits: which if it be true in
those bodies which are in the upper crust of the Earth, why not also in those
bodies which are found and framed below in the Matrix thereof? And if these
bodies do both engender and renew, which are conceived so far below in the
Navell of the Earth, why is not Tithe due of them, as well as it is of other
fruits that are in the summitie or height of the earth? Whether is it, that
Gods hand less labors in the procreation of these subterraneous bodies,
than it does in the ripening and quickening of that fruit, that springs out of
the upper face of the Earth? But that is far otherwise, for here in these
upper fruits, one planteth, an other waters, and God only gives the
increase: But in the other Mineral bodies, God alone does all, for he only is
the planter, he is the waterer, and he gives the increase alone. Or is it that
God has less delight to be honored with these hid treasures of the earth,
than he has to be worshipped with the labor of the plow, or the increase of
the cattle of the field? But, that this is not so, it is plain by the
glorious Temple that Solomon made, which had not only Cedar trees for 2. Chron.
cap. 2.
the roof thereof, and Algummin wood for the ornaments thereof, but also had
quarrie stone for the walls thereof, and gold of Paruaim for the beautifying of
it, and for the overlaying of it within. And of all other kind of Metals,
Gold is first remembered in the Scripture, immediately after the Genes. 2. verse.
11 and 12.
creation of the world, so that God himself may soeme to have a special
regard of this Metal above the rest, for that this alone above all the rest,
by purifying is not diminished. Or is it, that God loves his Ministers less
than other men, so that he would have the Laity to have all the precious
things of the earth, and his Ministers to have no part of any other thing, but
that which is vulgar and common? But how unlike that is, who sees not, when he
sees that God has committed unto them, the inestimable treasures of his word;
in comparison where of, both these upper fruits of the earth, and those hid
treasures below, are mere dross and corruption? and therefore it is not like,
when he has committed unto them those great matters, he would deny unto them
these smaller blessings. Or is it, that there has been paid Tithes of the
upper fruit of the earth already, and therefore cannot Tithe be twice demanded
of one ground Ca. ex part de Decimis, and ibi Ab. 18.
in one year, according to a new overruled doctrine? But that opinion is both
contrary to Law many hundred years obtained in the Church without
contradiction, whereby it is ordained, that as often as the earth fructifieth
in one year, so often shall Tithes in the same year be paid of it: and also
it is contrary to Divinity and reason, that it should be otherwise. For when
as God has given thee more Harvest or more Vintages in one year, is it not
both godly and reasonable, as God has increased his blessings toward thee, so
thou also should rise in thank fullness toward him? For, where every one
has received more grace or more favor, there ought he to be more thankful,
lest God for lack of this correspondencie in thankfulness, bring thy nine
parts, for thine ingratitude toward him, to a tenth only. For certainly so
he is able to do, by sending deluge and drought upon the earth, by bringing
barrenness upon it, by destroying that which is sprung out of the earth
already, by storm and tempest, by the Grasshopper and the Caterpiller: for all
this has he threatened to all those that are unthankful this way, neither is
the Lords hand more shortened now than it was then. Whereas notwithstanding to
the contrary, he has promised great kindness unto such as shall pay their
Tithes truly and cheerfully, as that he will open the windows of heaven, and
power out his blessings without measure upon them. Hilarem enim datorem amat
Deus. Besides this, the earth that brings out metals in the matrix of the
earth, is not that that brings out corn and grass in the top of the earth:
for that earth that is the mother of metals, being pressed down far into the
bowels of the earth, can yield no sustenance to those fruits that grow so many
fathoms above it, to which it conferres nothing save that it does support and
bear up that other earth, which nourishes the plants and fruits of the upper
earth, whose sustenance is not fetched deep out of the earth, but is sucked out
of that earth which is with in one cubit, or two of the top of the earth: which
may easily be perceived by those fruits and trees that grow upon hard rocks
near to the top of the earth, whose food, although it be near unto the top of
the earth yet do they flourish, and stand fast, as other trees and fruits do,
which have more fat and deep mould under them. And therefore cannot the
Tything of those things which are above, excuse the Tytheing of the treasures
that are below, albeit the conclusion were true, that two things are not to be
paid out of one ground in one year, for these are not one ground, and the
conclusion it self is erroneous, and therefore I conclude this point thus:
Since Metals and minerals, and other subterraneous bodies are in no less
Obligation to God, than other fruits of the earth are, there must be no less
Tithes paid of them, than are of other fruits of the earth: for that these are
the inward fruits of the earth, as well as those are the outward, and therefore
of like things, there must be like judgment and like consequence. And thus
much as concerning the Tithes of Metals and Minerals.

SECT. 3.
That Tithes of Turves be due.

ANd now because I am in this matter of Tithes, I will shape an answer to one
doubt that is made, as concerning the Tithes of Turves, that is, of earth
disposed, and prepared for fuel, which are said not to be Tytheable, and that
upon this reason: That Tithes are not paid of the earth it self, but of those
things which spring out of the earth: which opinion is true, if it be
understood of earth not separated from the body, and mass of the rest of the
earth. For if Tithes should be yearly paid thereof, as it is paid of other
things that grow out of the earth, all the whole earth in a short time would
become the Clergies. But if it be meant of earth that is severed from the rest
of the mass, and globe of the earth, then is it otherwise. For that earth that
is thus severed from the other earth, is no more part of that earth from whence
it is severed, than a man's hand, or leg being severed from the body, is part of
his body after it is cut off from it. And therefore of this earth so provided
for fuel, may Tithes as well be paid, as of any other fuel of wood, cole,
or otherwise that is provided to be burnt. For there is one reason of things,
when they are united together in one body, and another of those things, when
they are divided from the same body: for so long as they are in one and the
self same body, they follow the nature of the whole, but when they are
divided, then is there another consideration of them. Separatorum enim seperata
est ratio, and ex seperatis non infertur de uno ad aliud. L. finali. ff. de
calumntatoribus.
Corn, Grass, and such like, while they stand, are not Tytheable, although
the Tithe then is in them pro indiviso: For while that they stand, they are
part of the earth upon which they stand, and therefore so long untytheable,
because the earth it self is untytheable. But if they be cut down, then are
they to be Tythed, because they are now no longer parts of the earth, but
bodies by themselves separated from the earth, so that now the not tything of
them is penal: Of which sort are turves separated from the rest of the mass
of the earth. Neither is this my opinion alone, but it was Linwoods long ago,
and other Ecclesiastical writers, who not only make Turfe Tytheable,
Provincial, de decim. c. sancta, and ibi Linwood verbo turbaru^.
when it is prepared for fire, but also great rods, and small twigges, sticks,
and chips of timber, buts, and roots of trees, thorns, briars, walnut shells,
and nut shells, weeds, coals, and cole-brands (called Titiones, because they
are so L. Ligni appellaitione 4. 5 and 6 ff. de legate. 3.
burnt as they shall not make a smoke) cowshards, which the Law calls Editus
boum. All which a man can use to no other purpose than to burn: for where wood
lackes, these succeed in place of wood, and are called by the name of wood, and
are in like obligation, as concerning the Tithe due thereout, as wood it self
is; Vbicunque enim est cadem L. Illud. ff ad legem Aqu(...).
ratio, veleadem aequitas, ibi debet esse eadem juris dispositio. And therefore
not in that, that Turves sometimes were gremiall earth, they are to be
discharged of Tithe: but in that they are accounted for Fuel by the law, when
they are so prepared to be burnt, they are to pay Tithes in like sort, as other
things applied to that use do.

SECT. 4.
That the cognizance of barren heath, and waste grounds belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and what every of them are.

ANd so far as concerning the Prohibitions which arise out of this proviso.
Now it follows that I speak something of the next proviso, which is
concerning 2 Ed 6. c. (...). 3.
the Tithes of barren heath, and waste ground, and the Prohibitions thereupon.

This proviso has two branches, the one for comparitive barren heath, and
waste ground, the other for absolute barren heath, and waste, for either of
which is assigned a time of seven years, either for the payment of such
Tithes, as before the time of their improvement, and converting to arable, they
were charged with, or for the free and absolute discharge of them from all
manner of Tithes for seven whole years next after their improvement ended and
determined. For so I take the Statute meant, when as it made the one Tytheable,
the other not, for if otherwise they had been both in one predicament of the
barrenness, the statute had not made the one free from Tithe for so many
years as it does, and charged the other all that tune with Tithe.

For these two kinds of grounds, although the Statute say nothing, which is
comparative barren, which is absolute, yet reason tells us, that is
comparative that has a positive under it, and a superlative above it: and
therefore that is comparative waste, barren, or heath, in respect whereof there
is some over ground more or less, waste, heath, or barren, so that it has
simply and positively in it some condition of heath, waste, or barren: but if
it has nothing of any of these qualities in it, then is it neither heath,
barren or waste, howsoever long otherwise it has lien unmanured, and not
turned to tillage: For it is not the turning of a ground to tillage that makes
it heath, barren, or waste, but it is the ill disposition of the ground it
self, subject to these inconveniences, that causes it not to be turned to
tillage; for no man will willingly till that, where the gain of the tillage
will not quit the cost and labor of husbandry, as for the most part it
falls out these grounds that they do not.

Barren ground therefore simply, is that which being eared, yields not the
seed again, or at the most, yields so small advantage for the tillage, as
that the tenant Glos. L. licet. C. de locato and conducto verbo sterilitates.
after that he has paid his Rent, has not the worth of half his seed
again; much like unto that ground whereof the Scripture speaks, whose
barrenness is such, as being eared, and sowed, neither the Mower silleth his
hand, neither the Gleaner his lap with the yield thereof. These grounds are not
only called Sterilia of the Latins, but also Insoecunda, Infrugifera, and
sine prole, for the excessive barrenness that is in them: and the Greeks upon
like occasion term such conditioned grounds; (...) L. si quis usuras. ff. de
eo qus protutore.
(...), in which sense, money not put to usury is by the Law called barren
money, and Aristotle calls it fruitless money: for that money was not devised
thereby to increase money, as greedy usurers in all ages have done, but Arist.
1. l. politicorum.
that by the means thereof men might ease the difficulties, and necessities of
change of one kind of thing for another, as a horse for an ox, sheep for a
goat, iron for brass, and such like: for there is nothing that may not be
esteemed by Arist. 4. Ethicorum. c. 1.
money, and the use of money, is the uttering of money, whereby it is commonly
said, Money is lost by the use thereof, not that money does perish or decay by
use, for we see the clean contrary to that, for though money go thorough a
thousand men's hands, yet it is still of the same value, and remains in her
proper essence or being: but that the use of money is in the laying of it out,
and that by the use thereof, money passes from him whose it was, and the
property thereof goes to another, and therefore as to the first owner it is
spent, and lost: without which loosing, money naturally gains nothing; for
lay it up in a coster or chest never so long, it will never be the more in
number, although perhaps as S. James says, It will gather a rust Iam. cap. 5.
7. 1.
and canker, and that rust, and canker will be a witness against them which so
hoord it up from the service of God, and the Common wealth, in the day of the
Lord: So then, as that money is barren, that lies still, and brings out
nothing, so is that ground barren, that being tilled, yields no fruit, or at
the most, so little as the gains will not recompense the charge.

Although heath ground, and barren ground be almost Synonomies, yet to speak
properly, heath is as it were an effect of barrenness, for that there is no
ground that brings forth heath, but for the most part it is barren. And
therefore as heath it self is an unfruitful kind of shrubs, and is good
almost for nothing but for the fire; for that neither growing or cut down, it
has any beneficial use at all for the common wealth: so also the ground it
springs out of, has neither fairness to the eye, nor goodness to the
yield, but is commonly either a black sower ground, that has no sweetness at
all in it, or is a dry hungry soil, such as evermore cries give, give, and
never restores ought again. Proverb. 12.


Waste is that which for the unfruitfulnesse thereof has layen time out of
mind unmanured, in which sense it is all one with barren ground; or it is such
ground as for the charge of hedging, ditching, fencing, and tilling no man will
manure.

Our forefathers anciently comprised all these three under one name, calling
them them all by the name of Novalia, that is, new-broken-up-ground, not only
because they were not broken up in the memory of man before, but also, for
that being eared, they yielded little or no fruit at all: and therefore the
interpreters of the Law defining what Novalia are, say, that they are such
grounds as before the tillage thereof were inutilia; and example them out, in
Mountains, C. commissum de decimis verbo inutilia.
Marshes, Thickets, and such other unprofitable ground, as out of which before
the stocking of them up, and converting them to tillage, the Church took
little or no benefit at all. And those are the same or cosen German to those
which this Statute calls heath, barren and waste, for they are one and the
very self same with them, in all the chief points, for which they are
excepted out of the Statute.

So then now, there is no further question what is heath, barren, and waste
ground, but who shall try the matter of this quality; whether the
Ecclesiastical Judge, in whose continual possession this trial has been
until now of late, that under color of this Statute, it has bin incroched
upon as it may appear by all the Titles of the Ecclesiastical Law, where
there is any mention of the Tithes of new broken upground, and the decrees of
the Lawgivers in the same, between the Monastories challenging them by grant,
and the Parochian Ministers of the Parishes where they grew, claiming the same
by right: Or the Temporal Judges whose is the Cognizance of the Title, and
Tenure of the ground, as also is the setting, letting, buying, selling, and
other alienating of the same.

For the point it self, the Statute makes no mention but passes it over with
silence; and therefore it is to be presumed that it meant, that it should there
rest, where it was before the making of the Statute: for the Statute was not
made in derogation of the Ecclesiastical proceedings, that were before; but in
affirmance thereof, as the whole drift of the said Statute does show.

And if the Statute had meant otherwise, it would surely have expressed it
either in the proviso it self, or after in the derogatory clause; where it
makes an enumeration of such things as it intended should be exempted from the
trial of the Ecclesiastical Law, and by virtue of this Statute, should not be
comprised under the same, among which there is no word of this proviso, or any
other in the same Statute before named.

Neither is it unto the purpose, that the Common Law of this Land takes
knowledge of the Tenure and Title of Lands, and such other complements
belonging to the same; for these things that are here in question, are no part
of those Legal Essences, which the Law requires to the Title and Tenure
thereof, as is Fee-simple, Fee-taile, and other of like nature, according to
the learning of that Law, but these are certain accidents over and beside the
Tenure of the Land which may be present or absent without the injury of the
Title: as God many times turns floods into wilderness, and springs of water
again into dryness, and a fruitful Land makes he barren for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein, and yet the Title or Tenure of the ground is not
changed, by these changes of qualities, but remains the self same that it
was: so that these things are no more subject to the ordering of the Common
Law, than it is in the Common Law, to judge and determine what mould is white
and what is black; what ground will bear wheat, what barley, what oats; for
these things are no matters of skill of Law, that they need to be fetched out of
books, but they are matters of common experience which every country man can
as well skill of, as the greatest Lawyer that is, and therefore the Law in this
case is not desirous of any curious proof, but contenteth it self only with
the depositions of two or three honest men, which speak sensibly and feelingly
to the point that is in hand, which is enough to direct any wise Judge in his
sentence, so that it needs not these long circumstances of twelve men to teach
the Judge what, and how truly the witnesses have deposed. For if every quality
of the ground rests in the mouth of twelve men only, then should no man be
able to say out of the mouth of a witness, and pronounce thereupon, this
ground is mountain, this is plain, this is medowe, this is arrable, unless
he were warranted by the verdit of twelve men thereunto: which if it be an
absurdity to hold, then sure it is a like absurdity to say, that barren, and
heath, waste cannot be pronounced without a Jurie, for that these things are
like obvious to sense, and of like quality as the others are.

And I pray you, when they have drawn it unto their trial, what do they in
effect otherwise than the Ecclehasticall Judge would or should have done, if it
had remained still under him? for do they give credit simply to the conceit of
the Jurie, as touching that which has been declared, and pleaded in the cause
before them, or do not the Judges themselves rather make a brief of all that
has been pleaded in the cause before them, and thereof make as it were a
verdit, and put the same in the mouth of the twelve for their verdit, before
they go from the bar? So that the whole weight of the cause stands rather
in the Judges direction, in such sort as it is at the Ecclesiastical Law, than
it does in the mouth of the Jurie; for the Jurie men for the most part, are
simple people, and scarce four of the twelve understand their evidence: so
that it may seem rather to be a matter of superfluity than of good policy,
to refer a matter to their verdit, when as they say no other thing, than
what the Judge taught them before; Stultum est enimid facere per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora: for albeit perhaps some capricious fellow of the
Jurie, upon the confidence of his own brain, sometimes start aside from that
which the Judge has told him, and draw the rest of his fellows, as so many
sheep after him; yet for the most part the Judges voice is their direction,
their loadstone, and the North pole to guide them in this business. Besides,
in this Proviso, as in some other precedent, there is a great disadvantage
offered to the Clergy, which they much complain of, and that is, that in
cases of this nature, they are compelled to suffer trial under them, who are
in a manner, parties unto the suit, by reason of the interest they have
therein, either in present, or in consequence; so that many now adays
(learning too late by other men's harms what the event in their own cause will
be) choose rather to lose their right, than to venture their cause upon such
partial Judges, as the twelve men are.

SECT. 5.
That the Boughs of great Trees are tytheable, and so also are the bodies, but
in the case of the Statute only.

ANd so far as concerning those prohibitions which are forced out of this
Statute, for naturally they grow not out thereof: so that I might now pass
over to the other branch of my division, that is, of such matters as are now
held by the Common Lawyers, to be in a certain measure only of the
Ecclesiastical proceeding, but were anciently wholly of the Ecclesiastical
cognizance; but that the name of the Statute, De Sylua caedua, offering it
self unto me in the conclusion of this Statute of Edward the sixth, gives me
occasion to speak something thereof, before I come to the rest.

This Statute, as the words thereof do show, was made in behalf of the Laity
against the Clergy, for the exemption of great Woods of twenty years growth
and upward, from the payment of Tithes; and that in three cases only, where
the wood was great, when it was xx. years of age and upward, where it was sold
to Merchants, either to the profit of the owner himself, or in aid of the
King in his wars; so that without these cases, it seems the Statute
intended no further exemption: for Statutes are things of strict Law, and are
no further to be extended, than the words thereof give matter thereunto,
especially when the thing it self naturally was liable to ordinary course of
the Law, as other things of like nature are, and the Statute comes in
derogation of their ordinary course: as in this case, great timber anciently
was no less tytheable than small trees are, and so by nature ought to be, if
the Statute were not to the contrary; yet notwithstanding these limitations of
the same, if great wood be cut down to any other use than to sale, as to
build, or to burn to a man's own use, a prohibition in this case lies, and
yet is there no Identitie of reason to extend it, nor any absurdity would
follow, if it were not extended; for here is neither money sought, (which gave
occasion unto the Lawgivers to make this Statute of exemption) neither is it
an unnatural thing, for to pay Tithes of great wood; for before this time they
were paid, and by the Law of God, it seems, they ought to be Gal. 6. 6.
paid; for that he that is taught, ought to communicate to him that teaches
him in all things: and therefore since the reason that moved the Lawgivers to
order it so in one case, cease in the other, there is no reason of exemption;
and when there is not an Identitie of reason in the things that are in demand,
there can no sound inference be brought in from the one to the other, for of
several things, there is a several reason, and a several consequence;
neither can there be framed thereof a good implication, either positively, or
remotively: neither has this interpretation of theirs any warrant of Law for
it, save that it has been so defined and decided: but what is that to the
purpose, if it has been wrested and wronged contrary to the true sense of the
Statute, and that by those that take benefit thereby, whose partiality being
taken away, the thing it self would easily turn again to his own nature,
and right would take place?

The reason they yield for the exemption of great woods of the ages aforesaid,
although to themselves it be plausible, yet to others it is strange, as namely,
that great Trees are Plowd. in Soby contra Molyns.
part of the Freehold, and that men use not to pay Tithes of their freehold,
but of those things which spring out of their free hold, as out of Corn,
Grass, Fruit, and such other; whereas indeed the tallest Timber tree, that is,
if it were as high as the highest Cedar in Lebanon, is no more part of the
inheritance or freehold, than the lowest bramble that grows in the field;
for they are both equally part of the ground wherein they grow, and do take
alike nourishment and sustenance from the same; neither do they differ in that
they are trees the one from the other, secundum magis and minus, as the
Logicians say; but in that, the one is a great tree, and the other a small
shrub: and the cause of this provision here in England for these great trees,
was not for that one was more of the inheritance than the other, but for that
the one yields more profit to the commonwealth than the other, and
therefore they have made the cutting down of the one, more penal than the
other: as in like case by the Civil Law, whosoever privily cutteth down, or
barketh a Vine, an Olive, or a Fig Tree, or does ff. Arborum furtim caesarum,
toto tit.
any other unlawful act, whereby any fruitful tree, or any Timber tree does
perish and decay, it is Theft; and it is punished in the double value of the
hurt which is done, and if he be Tenant to the ground which has done this
villainy, he loses his hold: which comes not of that, that one kind of Tree
has more state in the ground than an other has, but that the Law has
respected, the necessary use of the one more than the other.

By the Civil Law, although this word, Wood, be general, L. Ligni
appellatione de Leg. 3 et L. Carbonum ff. de verb. significat.
yet it is thus distinguished, that some is wood, some is Timber, which the Law
calls Materia. Timber is that which is fit to build or underprop withal: Wood
is whatsoever is provided for fuel, so that under that name there passes
Reed, Cole, Turfe, Cow Dung, and whatsoever is any L. Ligni appellatione.
Ofiliu^, and. idem. ff. de lega^. (...)
where ordinarily used for fuel. Timber is of a higher consideration than
wood is, insomuch as if a man bequeath unto an other all his wood that is in
grove field, there shall not pass by this legacy, such Trees as are cut down
for Timber: but if they were dotterd Trees, or the owner thereof purposed them
for fuel, and so cut them out into billet, or faggot, in such sort, as there
could be no other use thereof than to burn, then it is otherwise: for by this
means, of great wood, it is become small wood, as being cut out in shides or
splinters, fit for to burn. So that in the reckoning of the Civil Law, Timber
stands not only in the nature of the wood it self, but is in the destination
and purpose of the owner, who according to his good liking may make that wood,
which is fit for timber, firewood, or timber: which if it were so in account
with the great Lawyers of this Land, the Church should have more Tithes of Wood
appointed for fuel, and less suite for the same.

As they exempt the bodies of great Trees above xx. Plowd. ut supr.
years growth, from payment of Tithes, so also they free the boughs thereof,
upon this reason, that the boughs thereof are fit and serviceable for
building, which although happily may be in some of them that are next to the
Trunck of the tree, yet it is far otherwise in those that are more remote
from the same, whereof there can be no other use, than to burn: and therefore
the Law precisely holds, in case where wood is bequeathed, by which is meant
firewood only, unless the Testator otherwise express his mind, the lops of
timber trees, which the Law calls Superamenta L. Ligni Appellat.. Ofilius De
Leg. and Fod. 3.
materiarum are bequeathed, for that the lops have not that use that the Timber
has, that is, to build or prop up withal, but they serve to burn only: By
which several ends, there is several consideration and account made of them.
Neither is it to the purpose, that they allege for the defense hereof, that
the accessorie follows the nature of the principal, for that rule is not
true in every accessory, L. Etsi. C. de Praediis minorum.
but only in such, wherein is the like reason as in the principal, which in
the trunck and lop of a tree cannot be alike for building.

Further, how the Boughs of a tree that are of the same substance, as the body
of the tree is, should be accessories to the tree, I see not, for nothing can
be an accessory to an other that is of the same nature and substance as the
other is; as the leg, or hand, are no accessaries to the body, for that the
leg or hand are of the same substance that the body is: The Child, neither
while it is in the Mothers womb, L. 1. ff. de ventre inspiciendo.
neither after it is borne, is an accessorie to the Mother, for while it is in
the Mothers womb, it is part of the womb, and after it is severed from her
womb, it is a man or woman like principal as her self is: But that which is
an accessory to an other, must be of an other nature than the principal is; so
in natural living creatures, hair, hoofes, horns, and finnes, and such other
like excrements, are accessories to the creature whose they are, for that they
are of a far different nature from the bodies, out of which they come: and so
in other natural things not living, as the Earth it self is, the Trees,
Grass, and fruit that spring out of the same, are accessories thereto.
Further, in Civil matters, expenses and executions are accessories to the
causes out of which they rise: and in Marriages, Dowries, and Jointures are
accounted accessories to them, for that without L. dotis ff. de jure dotium.
Marriage, neither Jointure nor Dowry can stand. Usurie is said to be an
accessorie to the principal, not in respect that the proper subject of either
of them is Money, and so there is one substance or nature of them both, but in
regard of the dependencie the one has of the other; for he that will make
challenge to Usurie, must first prove there is a principal. But for the better
clearing of these matters of accessorie and principal, we must know that in
bodies whose substance is all one, There are some parts like, which the
Philosophers call parts similares; some other unlike, being likewise called of
them parts dissimilares, which in no sort are accessories one to an other, but
make one continued body of both, which the Law calls (...): Similar parts are
such, as have one substance, form, and figure, as the trunk or body of a tree
is all one in inward essence, and outward shape: Dissimilar parts are those,
which have one inward nature with the other, but are diverse in outward show, as
the boughs and roots of the Tree are diverse between themselves, and
different from the body, and yet all agree in one substance, and have all the
general name of Wood, whereby they are discharged from being accessaries the
one to the other, and yet they are not under one capacity or service, or one
comprehension of Law, because they are unlike one to the other; and of unlike
things, there is unlike reason, and unlike consequence.

Now upon these grounds to exempt Timber Trees wholly from the service of him,
that is Lord as well of the tall woods, as of the low shrubs, is very hard, for
though himself dwells not in houses that are made with man's hand, nor has any
need of tall Trees to repair his Tabernacle, or prop up his dwelling: yet
since he has left such behind him, as have charge of his flock, and feed
them in word and work until he come, and they dwell in earthly habitations,
as other men do, and their edifices and buildings have need of repair, in
like sort as other mortal men's houses have, being all in like manner subject
to rottenness and corruption; great reason it had been to have allowed him
some proportion of these great woods, toward his servants necessary uses,
during the time of their service here, and if not in the very tenth it self,
yet in the xxx. xl. or l. part of the same, that God thereby might have been
as well acknowledged to be the Lord of the great Oaks of the Forest, and that
by him they have their length, breadth, and thickness, as he is accepted and
reputed to be Lord of the small brambles and bushes of the field: for as now
the case stands, God may either seem to have forgot himself, that he has
not made timber trees tytheable, as he has done other smaller woods,
especially having such occasion to use them, both in the Chancels of Churches
that are dedicated to his uses, and also in the buildings and repairings of his
Ministers houses, who supply his room in their several Congregations, until
he return to Judgment; or that may well be objected against us, in allowing
such things for Tithes as us please, and disallowing the rest, as was by that
ancient Father of the Church Tertullian, objected against the Senate of Rome,
who being entreated by the Emperor Tiberius (for the strange wonders and
miracles he heard to be wrought by our Savior Jesus Christ) that he might be
entertained among the number of their Gods, refused so to do, for that they
heard that our Savior was a Jealous God, and did in no sort admit the society
and fellowship of other Gods; which this grave Father hearing, (although many
years after) said merrily, although wisely, That God should be God, if Man
would let him.

And thus far of those causes which are held to be absolutely of the
Ecclesiastical cognizance, and yet notwithstanding are ecclipsed by
interposition of sundry contrary matters.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1.
In what cases Diffamatorie words belong to the Ecclesiastical, and what to
the Common Law.

NOw as concerning those things which have been accounted but in a certain
measure of the Ecclesiastical cognizance, and yet notwithstanding have
anciently, in a manner, been tried wholly at the Ecclesiastical Courts, such
as are matters of Diffamation, and matters of Bastardie, both which now adays
are much challenged by the Temporal Courts, to be of their cognizance. But
here first of Diffamation, then of Bastardie.

To diffame therefore is, as Bartol says, to utter reproachful Bartol l.
turp^t ff. de legate. 3.
speeches of another, with an intent to raise up an ill fame of him; and
therefore himself expresses the act it self in these words, Diffamare, est
in mala fama ponere.

Albeit Diffamations properly confist in words, yet may they also be done by
writing, as by Diffamatory Libels, and also by deeds, as by signs and gestures
of reproach; for these no less show the malicious mind of the Diffamer, than
words do.

Diffamatory words are uttered either in some scoffing or jesting manner, so as
facete and merry men use to do, to make Linwood c. authoritate verb. quacunque
de causa in glos^de sent. excom.
the company merry wherein they are; or they are spoken by some that have some
weakness, or distemperature in their brain, either by drink, frenzy, or
other lightness, or by any rashness in their tongue: or they are poured out
upon some rancor and malice, by some that envy another, with intent to diffame
him, and spread abroad a matter of disgrace upon him.

If they be spoken in a jesting manner to make the company Arist. 4. Ethic.
cap. antepenult.
merry, if it be in a fine sort delivered, it is by the Greeks called (...),
and is by Aristotle held to be a virtue, although by S. Paul it is condemned as
a vice; but if it be in homely and gross sort delivered, then is it accounted
to be a Ephesians 4 5.
kind of rudeness or rusticitie; but whether way so ever Extra de presumpt.
c. 1.
they be uttered, there is, for the most part, no advantage taken against them,
unless thereby there follow any discredit to the party, upon whom such jests
are broken, for then are they not without blame, Noxius enim ludus est in
vitio, neither ff. ad l. Aquiliam, l. nam ludus.
can that be called a jest or sport, whereby a man's good name is hurt, or any
crime imposed upon him.

The like may be said of those which speak hardly of any by the lubricitie of
their tongue, or weakness of their brain, who for that they are not thought
to speak such words maliciously, pass for the most part unpunished, Lubricum
enim ff. ad l. ^ul. Ma^estatis l. famo^i.
linguae non facile ad poenam trahendum est, no though a man in this case speak
ill of the Prince himself: And the Civil Law is so far from taking hold of
such words in these cases, that the Emperor himself has said of them thus:
Si id ex levitate processerit, contemnendum est; si ex insania, miseratione
(...). Si quis Imperatori maledixerit.
dignissimum est.

But if the cause of such words be rankor or malice, then are they altogether
to be punished, for that there can be no just excuse made for them.

Such diffamatory words as proceed of malice, imply either B^bic. cap. Si culpa
de inju(...).
matters of crime, or matters of defect.

Such as imply matters of Crime, either are such crimes which it is expedient
for the Commonwealth to know, as Lanwood provinc. de sent. excomm. cap. 1.
verb. mal^^ rose.
Treason, Felony, Murder, Incest, Adultery, and such like, to the end they
may receive due punishment, whereby God may be pleased, and the Commonwealth
satisfied: Or they are such crimes or faults, which it is not expedient for
B^^ic. ubi supr.
the Commonwealth to be acquainted with; as where one calls one prodigal,
or spend-thrift: For albeit it be exexpedient for the Commonwealth, that no
man mis-spend his estate, for that the Commonwealth has as it were an
interest in every private Subjects state, yet this is rather his own hurt,
than any other man's, and that which he spends away unthriftily, commonly
turns to another better subjects gain, whereby the Commonwealth is relieved
in one, that it lost in another; and for the most part there is no great
corruption of manners in the example thereof.

A great while it was before the Laws of this Land took knowledge of
Diffamations, as counting them things belonging to the Spiritual Law, so they
were duly prosecuted, as may appear by certain Judgments and consultations
which have issued out thereon: but now let Term. 12. Hen. 7. fol. 22. Regist.
page 49.
men prosecute them never so duly, yet Prohibitions go out on them daily, and
sundry others are drawn to the common Law Courts by action of the case;
wherein they have so infranschised themselves, as that they take upon them to
confine the Ecclesiastical Law how far it shall go therein. Which
limitations notwithstanding, as far as I can conceive, are but distinctions
without differences, and so are in very deed but bare Synonomies, that is,
diverse names expressing one thing: for all the words in the said limitation
infer no more than this, that Ecclesiastical men are not to deal in matters
of Diffamation, but where the matter of Diffamation is only Ecclesiastical;
and yet I reverence the Author thereof as a great man, and of like excellency
in this Law, as Papinian was in the other Law, and this I think to be
commendation enough, for never any Lawyer in former age had more commendation,
or eulogie of wit than himself had.

In the first of these cases, if a man proceed by ordinary C. ad L. Iu(...)
repetunda(...)um. l. 1. and 2.
course of Law, either for the punishment of the sin, as by presenting the
offender to the Ordinary, or indicting him before the Temporal Judge, or by
admonishing him by any charitable denunciation, with purpose to amend him, and
to recall him from such offensive ways as he is charged to walk in: Or do
any thing in Judgment for the defense ff. de aqua plu. arcenda. l. 1..
denique. L. Proculus and l. fluminum in fin. ff. de damn infecto. ff. de
regul. juris. l. factum. non videtur.
of his own cause, as in objecting some thing against the party himself, or
his witnesses, either for the elevating, or discrediting of the truth of the
cause, or the testimony of the witnesses; there can be no advantage taken
against him for he cannot be said to defame, which uses the liberty the Law
gives him: albeit in this case some advise that a man shall object none of these
matters against another in judgment, but when his cause necessarily requires
such things to be spoken for the defense thereof, and that the party that
objecteth them does protest he does it not with a calumnious mind, but that
the defense of his cause otherwise would not be justified.

But if any man do any of these things maliciously, with purpose rather to
utter his own cankred stomach, than L. Labeo de supell. legate. C. de famosi^
libel. l. 1. ff. ad. l. Aquileam l. si ita vulneratus.
that he would benefit the Common wealth thereby, then is he punishable: for
although it be behoofefull for the Common wealth that bad men's faults should be
manifested, that so wickedness may be punished, yet is it not fit they should
be uttered in reproach and choler.

Of the second sort, although there be some that contain petty crimes, yet
are they many times so frivolous, as that they yield no action: for frivolous
and small things the Law regards not.

For such Diffamations as arise upon defects, if the defects be such that the
contagion thereof is to be feared, unless the people be forewarned of the
danger that may ensue thereon, as in cases of Leprosy, the Plague, the French
Pox, and other like infectious diseases, and that it be revealed with a sincere
mind, rather to cause men to refrain their company for fear of the
infection, than of any malicious humors against the party, thereby to reproach
him, it is no Diffamation. But if it be uttered in any spleen or choler
against the party defective, then is it actionable; for it is C. quando and
quib. quarta pars l. 2. lib. 10.
an uncivile part to lay open another man's defects: but if the defects be such,
as it nothing avails the Common wealth they should be known; as where a man
objecteth against another any imperfection of his mind, or deformity of his
body, which he had from his cradle, or has happened to him by any accident
without any default of his, and cannot be easily remedied; or reprocheth him
with any thing in his state or condition, wherewith he is not justly to be
charged, neither is there any just cause offered the diffamer why he should
use such disgraceful speeches against the other, then is it altogether
punishable: For that such things tend only to contumely and despite, which
the Law seeks by all means to repress, for that thereby charity between
man and man is violated, and the peace of the Commonwealth is many times
broken and disturbed.

The proceeding in these causes in the Civil Law was of two sorts: for it was
either ad publicam vindictam, or else, ad privatum interesse, as the party
injuried made his choice thereof.

Ad publicam vindictam, was when the party Diffamed, ff. ad L. Corneliam l. in
constitutionibus.. ult.
sought to have the Diffamer recant his words, or to undergo some open and
infamous punishment for his rash and malicious speeches, whereby it might be
publicly known abroad that he did the other wrong.

But Ad privatum interesse, was when he sought not the ff de verborum
obligation. l. stipulationum. plane. ff de rejudicat. L. si quis ab al^o.
recalling of the slanderous speeches which were given out against him, but
esteemed his credit at some great rate (as that he would not for a thousand
pounds; or more or less quantity according as the worth and calling of the
person is, have had such speeches gone out of him) and so seeks to have his
credit salved by recompense in money, as the Judge or Jurie, upon proof of his
worth and place, shall esteem it, and tax it. In these actions, he that sued
ad publicam vindictam, and had followed so far, as that he had brought it to
a Recantation or a public disgrace, could not have recompense of his credit by
money, save only in case of commutation: neither he that had got his credit
valued by money, could have a public disgrace also inflicted for his
satisfaction, but what way he had chosen, with that he must have rested
contented, for that irefull men's wraths otherwise would never have been
satisfied, and the prosecution of these actions otherwise would be confounded.

These two kinds of proceedings the Princes and Sages of former ages seem to
have sorted to the two kinds of Jurisdiction that are amongst us, the one
Spiritual, the other Temporal: and therefore the Law of the Land it self
says, in a cause of Diffamation, when money is not demanded, but a thing done
for punishment of sin, which is all one, as when the Civilians say, when it
is done ad publilicam vindictam, it shall be tried in the Spiritual Courts:
whereupon by argument of contrary sense it follows, that where the punishment
of sin is not required, but amends in money is demanded, there it is to be
tried in the Temporal Court, for the Law would that ^^ery man should have his
remedy agreeable to reason in what sort him best likes. And therefore be the
fault what it may be, that the words of the Diffamation do sound unto, as long
as it stands but in words, and the party does not take upon him to justify
the matter that is comprised under those words, and does seek but for the
punishment of the slanderous words only, so long it is to be tried at the
Spiritual Law; for the Law speaks in general in cases of Diffamation, where
punishment of sin only is required: so that where a man is called Traitor,
Felon, or murderer, or any other crime belonging unto the Common Law, being
every one of them words of great diffamation, so the party therein seek
punishment only, and not his private interest, there the Spiritual Law is to
hold plea thereof. For where the Law does not distinguish, there neither ought
we to distinguish: but the Law has said in general, that causes of
Diffamation, whose prosecution is thus qualified, do belong unto the trial of
the Spiritual Law: and therefore even those cases before remembered where the
party follows this kind of prosecutions, ought by that Law to belong unto
the Spiritual Court, as on the contrary side, Spiritual causes of
Diffamation being propounded to a pecuniarie end ought to be ordered in a
Temporal Court,

But where any man takes upon him to justify the crime that he has objected,
there either Court is to hold plea of the crime that properly belongs to that
Court, for that now words are no longer in question, but matter is in trial,
whether the party diffamed has indeed committed that offense that he is
charged withal or no; which can be tried in no other Court, than in that to
which it does properly appertain. And that this was the course anciently held
in matters of Diffamation between the Ecclesiastical and Common Law, it is
manifest by the Statute of 2. of Edward 2. Edw. 3. c. 11.
the 3. chapter 11. where although the Statute taxes the perverse dealing of
such, who when they had been indicted before the Sherifes in their Return,
and after delivered by Inquest before the Justice of the Assise, did sue the
indictors in the Spiritual Court, surmising against them that they had
diffamed them, and therefore in that case forbad the like suits; for that
justice thereby was hindered, and many people were feared to indict Offenders:
yet that Statute plainly shows that in all other cases of Diffamation rising
out of Temporal crimes beside this, the Ecclesiastical Law had the
cognizance: and that this was forbidden, it was not for that words of this
nature, could not be censured at the Ecclesiastical Law, when punishment of
sin only is required, but for that it was not fit that those things, which had
been once ordered in one Court, should be called again to examination in
another: and therefore the general proceeding in matters of Diffamation, is
not there prohibited, but the particular crossing of matters after judgment is
there reprehended.

So that the distinction whereof I formerly spoke, which takes upon it to
determine when a case of Diffamation is of the Temporal cognizance, and when
of the Ecclesiastical, cannot here take place: for that it is contrary to the
former Statute or Decree that divided these cases into Temporal or
Ecclesiastical cognizance by the variety of the prosecution thereof, and that
it is contrary to the ancient practice that has confirmed this prosecution in
either Court, but especially in the Ecclesiastical Court, which has still
holden the trial of such Diffamations wherein sin has bin only sought to be
punished, until now of late, that men have stepped over the banks, of
theirauthoritie and confounded either Jurisdiction with the promiscuous acts
one of another; when as the Statute it self is plain, that the Authors of
this Statute or Decree, whethersoever you call it, which set these bounds to
either Law, in proceeding upon matters of Diffamation, respected not so much
the quality of the crime, upon which the Diffamation grew, as the manner of
proceeding therein, aiming in the one at public vendict, which is to be
sought out of the Ecclesiastical Law, and in the other at private interest,
which is to be had out of the Temporal Law.

Neither is an Action of Diffamation, a matter of so light esteem or quality,
(a man's fame or good name being in equal balance with his life) as that it
should be drawn away to be attendant on any other action that is of smaller
weight or importance than it self is: for this is one of those Actions which
for the special pre-eminence thereof, are called Actiones praejudiciales, that
is, such that draw smaller causes unto them, but themselves are drawn of none
other, but such as are like principal, or greater than themselves are. So that
unless the manner of proceeding bring these causes under the compass of the
Common Law, in such sort as I have before showed, the coupling of them with
another matter of the same Law, will hardly bring them under the trial
thereof: for that there be few actions greater then it self is, so that if the
crime be Ecclesiastical, howsoever it touches a Temporal cause, the trial
shall be still at the Ecclesiastical Law. And the same that I say of
Diffamations rising out of Ecclesiastical crimes, I hold also to be true in
Diffamations springing out of Temporal crimes, where punishment is required
for the offense committed, and amends in money is not demanded, unless
happily that grow of penance enjoined, which the offender will redeem by
giving money to the Judge, or to the party grieved. And this I take to be a
far better limitation for either Law, having the ground of the Civil Law,
and a Statute of the Common Law, and common reason it self for it, than the
other divise is, which so distinguishes this business, as still it makes it
rest in the mouth of the Judge, which cause of Diffamation is mere spiritual,
and which not, which were not to be done if there were clear dealing in the
matter: for Laws are so to be made, as that as little as may be, be left to
the discretion of the Judge, but all be expressed as far as the nature of the
cause will give leave: which albeit it be hard to do, for the variety of
the cases that every day happen, never thought on before, yet that is to be
labored so far as may be; for this liberty of leaving many things to the
Judges discretion, is many times great occasion of confusion in Judicature,
saying sometimes this, and sometimes that, as his private humor shall lead him:
and therefore a plain distinction between both the Laws were best, that
every man may see, and say what is proper to either of them.

SECT. 2.
That the suit of Bastardie, as well in the principal as in the incident
belongs unto the Ecclesiastical Law.

ANd thus far as concerning matters of Diffamation. Now follows that I
speak of matters of Bastardie.

Bastardie is an unlawful state of birth, disabled by divine and humane Laws
to succeed in inheritance.

Of Bastards, some are begot and borne of single women, (in which rank also I
put widows) some other of married women.

Of single women, some are such as a man may make his wife, if himself be
sole, and unmarried, as those that are kept as Concubines in place of a man's
wife; some other are such as a man cannot make his wife, although himself be
sole and unmarried, for that either they are already precontracted to some
other, or that they be in so near a degree of affinity or consanguinitie one
to the other, that the marriage would be damnable, and the issue thereof
unlawful.

Of such as are begotten of single women, by single men, who are in case to
marry them if they will, some are called by the Civil Law Filii Naturales,
because they were begot by such as they held for their wives, and yet were not
their wives, who might be legitimate by sundry ways, as hereaster shall be
showed.

Some other begot of single women, if they were begot in vage lust, without any
purpose to hold such a one for a Concubine, but upon a desire only to satisfy
a man's present lust, whether they were begotten by married men or single men,
were called Spurii, who for the most part are putative children, and their
father is not otherwise known then by the mothers confession, which sometimes
says true, sometimes otherwise. Isidore says, they were so called because
they were borne out of purity, for that such kind of lust is contrary to holy
Matrimony, whose bed is undefiled, and therefore the other is corrupt, and
abominable.

But where any was borne of a woman single or married, that prostituted her
self to every man's pleasure, and made public profession of her self to be an
harlot, (such as they are whom the Law calls Scorta) these were called
Manzeres.

Those which were begotten of married women were called Nothi, because they
seemed to be his children whom the marriage does show, but are not, no
otherwise than some fevers are called Nothi, that is, bastard fevers, because
they imitate the tertian or quartan Fever in heat, and other accidents, but
yet are neither tertians nor quartans, as the learned Phisicians well know: but
these are counted so to be bastards, if either the husband were so long absent
from his wife, as by no possibility of Nature the child could be his; or that
the Adulterer and Adulteress were so known to keep company together, as that
by just account of time, it could not fall out to be any other man's child but
the Adulterers himself: and yet in these very cases within this Realm,
unless the husband be all the time of the impossibility beyond the Seas, the
Rule of the Law holds true, Pater is est quem nuptiae demonstrant.

The most nefarious and last kind of Bastards are they whom the Law calls
Incestuosi, which are begot between Ascendents and Descendents in infinitum,
and between Collaterals, so far as the Divine Prohibition and the right
interpretation thereof does stretch it self.

The effects of these sorts of Bastardies are diverse.

First, it staineth the blood, for that he that is a Bastard can neither
challenge Honor nor Arms from the Father or Mother, for that he was begot and
borne out of Matrimony, which is the first step to Honor: and therefore the
Apostle calls Marriage honorable, whereupon it must H(...) 13. 4*
follow, that the opposite thereof is shame; for, albeit it be no sin for a
Bastard to be a Bastard, yet is it a defect in him to be such a one, and a
thing easily subject to reproach.

Secondly, it repelleth him that is a Bastard, from all succession, descending
from the Father or the Mother, whether it be in Goods or Lands, unless there
be some other collateral provision made for the same: for that all such Laws
and Statutes as are made to any of these purposes, were intended to the benefit
of such as are legitimate, and are next of kin by lawful succession, and not
by unlawful conjunction.

To legitimate him that was a Bastard, when there could no claim be made unto
his birthright but by grace, among the Romans were sundry ways; first where
the Father of the Bastard (they being both single persons) married the woman,
by whom he begot the child; secondly, where the father did by his last Will and
Testament, or by some public instrument subscribed by witness, name him to be
his natural and lawful son, or simply his son, without the addition of
any of these two words, base, or natural, and therewithal did make him his
heir, which could not be, but in such cases only, where the father had no
other natural and lawful child left alive.

Thirdly, whereas the Prince by his Rescript, or the Senate by their Decree,
did do any one that credit, as to grant them the favor of legitimation, which
was done, for the most part, in such cases only, where either the father of
the child, or the child himself, offered himself to be attendant on the
Court or Prince.

In this Realm, none of the foresaid legitimations take place, as far as I
can learn, but only that which is done by Parliament, and that very rarely;
for besides those that King Henry the eigth did in the variety and mutability
of 28. 8. cap. 7.
his mind, toward his own issue, I think there cannot be many examples
showed: for, as for that which is wrought 1. Mar. 1. parliament. cap. 1
by subsequent Marriage, being a thing anciently pressed by the Clergy of this
Land, to be admitted in like sort, as it is used in other Lands, where the
Ecclesiastical Law takes place; it was rejected by the Earls and Barons with
one voice, and answer was made, that they would not change the Laws of the
Realm in that point, which to that time had been used and approved. All these
cases of Bastardie in other Lands, whether they be such, or not such, are
triable by the Ecclesiastical Law: But here with us it is questionable, to
what Law, and how far they do appertain, whether to the Ecclesiastical or
Temporal.

For the matter of Bastardie, what it is, the Ecclesiastical Law, and the
Temporal differ not; but there is a diversity between them in the
prosecution thereof, for the Ecclesiastical Law brings it two ways in
Judgment; the one incidently, the other principally; but the Common Law makes
two sorts thereof, the one general, the other special: But first of the
Ecclesiastical division, then of the Temporal. Bastardie is then said to be
incidently propounded, when it is laid in bar of some other thing, that is
principally commenced; as when one sueth for an inheritance that he pretends
is due unto him by his nativitie, an other crosses him therein, by objecting
against him bastardie, with purpose to exclude him from his action in the
inheritance: here the bar is in the incident, because it comes exclusively to
the action of inheritance, but the action for the inheritance it self was in
the principal, for that it was begun in consideration of the inheritance, and
not with intent to prove himself legitimate; which happily he never dreamed
of, when he first entered his action for the inheritance. In which case, he
which is charged with the bastardie, may require himself to be admitted to
prove himself legitimate, before the Ecclesiastical Judge, and to be
pronounced to be such a one. Ad Curiam enim Regiamnon pertinet Glanvill lib. 7.
cap. 13.
agnoscere de Bastardia: Against which the Law of the Land does not oppose it
self, but acknowledge it to be the right of the Church. And yet to avoid all
subtle and 9 Hen. 6. ca. 11.
surreptitious dealing in this behalf, it has set down a wary and cautelous
form of proceeding, by which the same shall be brought unto the Ordinary, and
such as have interest in the suit, may have notice thereof, and time to object
in form of Law against the proofs and witnesses of him that pretends himself
to be Mulier, if they so think good: and what shall be certified herein by the
Ordinary, as concerning the nativity of him that is burdened to be a Bastard,
(that is, whether he were borne before or after Glanvill lib. 7. cap. 15.
his Parents marriage) shall be supplied in the Kings Court, either by judging
for, or against the Inheritance.

But Bastardie is then taken to be principally propounded, when either one
finding himself to be greeved with some malicious speech of his adversary,
reproaching him with Bastardie, or himself fearing to be impeached in his good
name, or right, does take a course to clear his nativitie, by calling into the
Law, him or them by whom he is reproached, or fears to be impeached in his
right and credit, to see him, to prove himself legitimate, and to allege and
object against it, if they ought have, or can have to the contrary: which if
either they do not, or doing to the utmost what they can, can bring no good
matter against his proof, but that it stands still good and effectual in Law,
to all intents and purposes whatsoever (although perhaps hereby he shall not
be able to carry the inheritance, both for that it appertains not to the
Ecclesiastical Law, to judge of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments; and also
for that there is a precise form set down by Statute, how suits of this
nature shall be recovered) yet if no opposite or contradicter appear herein,
and the suit was only taken in hand against such, as either openly reproached
him, or secretly buzzed abroad slanderous speeches, as concerning his
legitimation: it is not to be doubted, but by an accident also it will be good
for the inheritance it self, for where a man's legitimation is sufficiently
proved, thereon follows all things which naturally thereto belong. But if any
man 9. Hen. 6. c. 11.
urge the form of the Statute, being interessed therein, then must it
necessarily be followed, for that otherwise it would be thought, all that was
done before, so far as it may concern the inheritance, although it were but
in a consequence, were done by collusion. This kind of proceeding has been
much more in use in former times than it is now, and never any opposition made
against it: but now it goes not altogether clear without contradiction, as
many other things are offensively taken, which notwithstanding have good
ground, and sufficient warrant for them.

And so far as concerning the Ecclesiastical proceedings in this business:
Now to the Temporal sorts of them.

General Bastardie is so called, because it comes in incidently, and is in
gross objected against some that sue in a matter principal, to disappoint his
suit. This suit, because it is of the Ecclesiastical cognizance, it is sent by
the Kings writ to the Ordinary, with certain additions for more perspicuity
of the inquiry thereof; as that whether he that is charged with the Bastardie,
were borne in lawful Matrimony, or out of Matrimony, or whether he were
borne before Lib. Intr^c* fol. 35.
his Father and Mother were lawfully contracted together in Matrimony, or
after. All which the Ordinary makes inquiry upon by his own Ordinary and
pastoral authority; for that matters of Bastardy do originally belong to the
Ecclesiastical Court, and not to the Temporal: And as he finds the truth
of the matter by due examination to be this, or that, so he pronounces for
the same in his own Consistory, and makes certificate thereupon to the Kings
Court accordingly; and as he pronounces, so the Temporal Judges follow his
sentence in their Judgments, either for, or against the Inheritance that is in
question.

Special Bastardy they say is that, where the Matrimony Bracton.
is confessed, but the priority or posterioritie of the Nativity of him whose
birth is in question, is controversed; which to my thinking, if I conceive
aright, is no other thing than the general bastardie, transported in words,
but agreeing in substance and matter with the other: for even these things
which they pretend make special Bastardie, are parts and members of the
general Bastardie, and are either confessed or inquired upon by virtue of the
Kings writ in the same: For first for the Matrimony that is here mentioned, it
is there agnised both by the Plaintiff in pleading of it, and the Defendant in
the answering thereto, and therefore the Plaintifes plea is thus; Thou art a
Bastard, for that thou wast borne before thy parents were lawfully contracted
together in Marriage, or before their Marriage was solemnized in the face of
the Church: To which the Defendants reply is, I am no Bastard, for that I was
borne in lawful Matrimony, or that I was borne after that my Father and Mother
were lawfully married together: In both which you see, there is a Marriage
confessed, and the question only is of the priority or posteriority of the
nativity of him that is charged withal, whether it happened before, or after
his parents marriage, which, as they hold, is the other member of special
Bastardie: and yet this prioritie or posterioritie of nativity, by virtue of
the Kings writ, comes no less in inquiry to the Ordinary in the case of the
general Bastardie, than they make it to be traversable in the special
Bastardie; and therefore the writ to the Ordinary for general Bastardie, is
conceived in this manner: viz. Inqutratis utrum praedictus A. pars rea, genitus
vel natus Lib. Intrac. fol. 35.
fuit anto Matrimonium contractum inter talem Patrem suum, and talem Matrom
suam: vel post. So that either they Glanvill lib. 7. cap. 15.
must confess there is no such bastardie, as they make show there is, diverse
from that that is tried before the Ecclesiastical Judge, or that themselves
do confound the members that should divide the same, and make them one, or the
other, as them list; for both simply they cannot be, unless they be
distinguished with other notes and differences, than hitherto I find they are.
But to say the truth, if these things be well weighed and considered, special
Bastardie is nothing else, but the definition of the general, and the general
again is nothing but the definite of the special: for whosoever is born out
of, or before lawful Matrimony, he is a Bastard, and he again is a Bastard
that is borne before, or out of lawful Matrimony, so that these things to be
a Bastard, and to be borne out of lawful Matrimony are convertible one with
the other: so then as it were very hard to make a divorce between these things
that are so ^eere in nature one to the other, being convertibl^ terms one to
the other; so hard again it were in policy to disjoyne these things in
trial, that are so near in affinity one to the other, because they are the
same in substance and nature as the other are, and therefore Eodem jure conseri
debent; And also ne continentiae causarum dividantur, (...)q. c. 2. cognorimus.
which is no less absurdity in Law, than it is a grossness in other
learning, to deny a principle, or general Maxim of the profession.

And so far hitherto as concerning the reasons and arguments, that may be
brought against this special Bastardie. Now it rests that I show by ancient
precedents, that both these sorts of Bastardy have appertained to the
Ecclesiastical Courts only, and the first precedent is in the incident the
other in the principal: and the precedent is no less ancient than Henry the
seconds time, as that which happened under Alexander the third, about the year
of our Lord 1160. and the case is this.

A certain man of Norwich Diocese called R. H. had issue I. H. who had a Son
called C. H. I. H. deceasing before R. H. Cap. L^or. ext. qui filii sunt
legitimi,
his Father, C. H. succeeded in his Grandfathers Inheritance, his said
Grandfather being dead; but M. H. Brother to the said Grandfather, pretending
that the said I. H. was a Bastard, draws the said C. H. into the Temporal
Court upon the Inheritance; whereupon C. H. called the said M. H. into the
Bishop of Norwich his Court, for the trial of his nativity; but the Bishop
long protracting the cause, C. H. appealed to the Pope, who delegated the same
cause to the Bishop of Excester, and the Abbot of Hereford, with order, That if
the said M. H. should not within two Months, prove that which he objected
against C. H. that then they should intimate the same to the secular Judge,
before whom the inheritance was in question, that he should not stay any longer
upon the question of legitimation, but proceed to Judgment in the cause of the
inheritance. Which president, though it be long before the Statute of
Bastardie, made by Henry the 6. and so no writ went from the Temporal Court,
for the certificate thereof: yet it shows, that the Temporal Judges in those
days did not proceed to Judgment in the principal cause, before the incident
were decided by the Ordinary; and that they counted bastardy then to be of the
Ecclesiastical cognizance; and that it was lawful for him that was pretended
to be a Bastard, to appeal from his Ordinary, if either the Ordinary
detracted the determination thereof, or were suspected of partiality.

And thus far of the incident. There is an other much like precedent to this
in the same Kings days, but that is in the principal, for that the
inheritance came not first in question, but the legitimation it self, and the
case is as follows. A certain man called Ralph, kept one Analine, the wife of
one Allin, by whom he was supposed to have begot one Cap. Causam. ext. qui
fill(...) sunt legitimi.
Agatha, who also being married, had a Son called Richard; Ralphe going
beyond the Sea, left Richard and his Mother Agatha in possession of all his
goods and lands; but news being after brought, that the said Ralphe was dead
beyond the Sea, Francis the Brother of the said Ralphe, spoiled the said
Richard of the possession of all the goods and lands he had of the said Ralphe
his Grandfather, for that he did pretend the said Agatha his Niece, and Mother
of the said Richard was not borne of lawful Matrimony, so that neitheir she
her self, nor her son ought to succeed the Brother of the said Francis, but
that the inheritance thereof did belong unto himself: whereupon the said
Richard being thus spoiled by Francis his great uncle, obtained Letters of
restitution to the Bishop of London, the B. of Worcester, and the B. of
Excester, under this form: That before they entered into the principal cause,
which was this, Whether the said Agatha were borne in lawful Matrimony, or
not, they should restore the said Richard to his Grandfathers inheritance. But
the Bishop of Rome, after understanding by the said Delegates, that the plea of
inheritance within this Realm, did not belong unto the Church, but unto the
King, recalled that part of his rescript, which concerned the restitution of
the said Richard to his inheritance, and gave order to the foresaid Bishops, to
proceed in the cause of legitimation; willing them to inquire, whether the said
Agatha were borne of the said Aneline in the life time of her husband Allin,
and when she dwelt and cohabited with him, as with her husband; or whether the
said Ralphe, Father of the said Agatha, kept the said Aneline openly and
publicly, while the said Allin yet lived; And if they found it to be so, then
they should pronounce her the said Agatha to be a Bastard, for that Anelina
her Mother could not be counted to be a wife, but a whore, which defiling her
husbands bed, presumed to keep company with an other, her husband yet being
alive: But if they found it otherwise, then they should pronounce her, the said
Agatha to be legitimate. All which was done after the death of the said Ralph
and Aneline, as the Decretall it self shows: Neither was there any authority
that opposed it self against that proceeding, but held it to be good and
lawful, though it were in term of special Bastardie, for then that which
they now call special Bastardie, was not borne. Besides hereby it appears,
that the Ordinaries then did not only proceed in cases of Bastardie
incidently, that is, when a suit was before begun in the Common Law, upon a
trial of inheritance, and that by writ from the Temporal Courts, but even
originally, and that to prepare way unto inheritance, or any other good that
was like to accrue unto a man by succession, or to avoid any inconvenience that
might keep him from promotion, as may appear by this practice following.

Priests in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the 3. Constitut. Otho.
innotuit de uxoratis a benefic(...) amovendis.
yet married secretly, and their children were counted capable of all
inheritance, and other benefits that might grow unto them by lawful marriage,
so that they were able to prove that their parents were lawfully married
together by witnesses, or instruments: which many children did, either upon
hope of some preferment, that by succession or otherwise was like to come unto
them, or to avoid some inconvenience that otherwise might light upon them for
the want of that proof, some their parents yet living, others their parents
being dead, and the proceedings before the Ordinary was holden good, to all
intents and purposes, even in the Common Law, for otherwise they would not have
so frequented it: for as yet there was made no positive Law against marriages
of Priests, and Ministers, but the Church of Rome then plotting against it,
(for that by that they pretended the cure of Souls was neglected, and the
substanc of the Church wasted and dissipated,) did by Otho then Legate a Latere
to Gregory the ninth order by a Constitution, that all such Ministers as were
married, should be expelled from their Benefices, and their Wives and Children
should be excluded from all such livelihood, as the Fathers had got during the
time of the Marriage, either by themselves, or by any middle person, and that
the same should become due unto the Church, wherein they did reside, and that
their children from that time forth should be disabled to enjoy holy orders,
unless they were otherwise favorably dispensed withal; which Constitution
although it wrought to that effect, to bar Priests for that time of their
Marriage, until the light of the Gospel burst out, and showed that that
doctrine was erroneous, yet to all other effects, the proceeding in the case of
Bastardie stood good as a thing due to be done by holy Church. And therefore
Linwod coming long after, in his Catalogue that he makes of Ecclesiastical
causes, recites Legitimation for one among the rest, for that in those days
there was no dispute or practice to the contrary.

And thus far as concerning those things wherein the Ecclesiastical Laws are
hindered by the Temporal in their proceedings contrary to Law, Statute, and
custom anciently observed, which was the third part of my general division.
Now it follows that I show wherein the Ecclesiastical Law may be relieved,
and so both the Laws know their own bounds, and not one to over-beare the
other as they do at this day, to the great vexation of the subject, and the
intolerable confusion of them both, which is the last part of this Treatise.

PART. IV.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
The means how to relieve the Civil Law: that they are of two sorts: that two
things are required to the first mean, and that the former of these is the
right interpretation of Laws, and what that is.

THe means therefore to relieve the profession of the Civil Law are two. The
first is, by the restoring of those things which have been powerfully by the
Common Law taken from them, and the bringing of them back again unto their
old and wonted course: The other is by allowing them the practice of such
things as are grievances in the Commonwealth, and fit to be reformed by some
Court, but yet are by no home-Law provided for.

The first of these stands in two things, whereof the one is the right
interpretation of the Laws, Statutes and customs which are written, and
devised in the behalf of the Ecclesiastical Law. The other consists in the
correcting and supplying of such Laws and Statutes that are either superfluous
or defective in the penning, made in the behalf (as it is pretended) of the
Ecclesiastical profession, but yet by reason of the unperfect pe(...)g
thereof, are construed for the most part, against them.

The right interpretation of the Law, Statutes, and Customs pertaining to the
practice, stands as is pretended in the Judges mouth, who notwithstanding
has that authority from the Sovereign, and that not to judge according as
him best likes, but according as the right of the cause does require.

The supply or reforming of that which is overplus, or defective, is in the
Parliament, so notwithstanding as that the Prince evermore breaths life into
that which is done.

Laws, Statutes or Customs, are then best interpreted when as the very plain
and natural sense of them is sought after, and no foreign or strained
exposition is mixed with them; for that turns justice into worme-wood, and
judgment into gall: then that the Judge be not too subtle in his
interpretation, but follow such exposition of the Laws, as men of former age
have used to make, if they be not plainly absurd, and erroneous, for often
shifting of interpretations breeds great variance in men's states, among such
as have busy heads, and much discrediteth the Law it self as though there
were no certainty in it: with which although the fage Judges of our time
cannot be charged, for ought that I know, yet (I cannot tell how) men much
complain that Laws are far otherwise construed in these days, than they
were in former ages: which as it is an ordinary complaint in the Temporal
Courts, so it is not without cause, much lamented at the Spiritual Court,
where the interpretation upon the three Statutes of Tithes made by King Henry
the eight, and Edward his son, among other inconstancies of other Laws, has
such great variety of sense and understanding in sundry points thereof, as
that if the makers thereof were now alive, and the first expositors thereof
sat in place of Judgment again (the Statutes being measured by the
interpretation they now make of them) would hardly acknowledge them either to
be the Statutes that they then made, or the other did after expound, and
declare: for every of these Statutes and the sense that was given of them, was
wholly for the benefit of the Church, according to the tenor thereof, but as
they now receive explication,, they are not only not beneficial unto the
Church, but the greatest hinderance to the same that may be; for the words are
made to jarre with the sense, and the sense with the words, neither is there
kept any right analogy in them: and therefore the Reverend Judges are to be
entreated (because they challenge unto themselves the opening of the Statutes
alone, albeit peradventure that be yet subjudice, where the Statute of
Ecclesiastical causes is to be interpreted) that they would recall such
exorbitant interpretations, as have of late gone abroad upon these Statutes,
and restore them to their ancient sense, and understanding. No man can so
cunningly cloak an interpretation, but another will be as cunning as he to
spy it out, and then the discredit will be the Laws. Lib. 1. Polit^^.
A small error (says Aristotle) in the beginning, is a great one in the end,
and he that goes out of the way a little, the longer he goes on, the further
he is off from the place his voyage was to: and therefore the speedier return
into the way again is best. The old Proverb is: He that goes plainly goes
surely, which may be best verified in the exposition of the Law, if any where
else; for commonly men offend no where more dangerously than under the
authority of the Law, and therefore one says very well, that There are two
salts required in a Judge, the one of knowledge, whereby he may have skill to
Judge uprightly; the other of conscience, whereby he may be willing to judge
according to that as his skill leads him unto: both which being in the grave
Judges, it is not to be doubted, but they will be easily induced to review
their own, and their predecessors interpretations, and reduce such exorbitant
expositions as have escaped out thereof unto the right and natural sense
thereof: which if perhaps they shall be loath to do, for because it makes for
them, or for some other like partial respect, then humble supplication is to
be made unto his Majesty, that he himself will be pleased to give the right
sense of those things which are in controversy between both the
Jurisdictions: for his Majesty by communicating his authority to his Judge to
expound his Laws, does not thereby abdicate the same from himself, but that
he may assume it again unto him, when and as often as he pleases. Whose
interpretation in that is to be preferred before theirs, first for that his
interpretation is impartial as he that will not weaken his left side to make
strong his right (for so are these jurisdictions as they are referred unto his
politic body) but will afford them equal grace, L. 1. number. 8. C. de
legibus. L. 1. number. 7. C. cod^. omnes populi ff. de justit. and jure.
and favor, that he may have like use of them both, either in foreign or
domestical business, as occasion shall serve: then that his Judges
interpretation makes right only to them between whom the cause is, but his
highness exposition is a Law unto all, from which it is not lawful for any
subject to recede, neither is it reverseable by any, but by himself, upon a
second cogitation; or him that has like authority as himself has: and
therefore most fit to be interposed between Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction,
that the one party be not Judge against the other in his own cause, which is
both absurd and dangerous.

And let this suffice for the right interpretation of Laws and Statutes: Now
it follows that I speak something of the supplies that may be made to the
defects that are in the same.

SECT. 2.
The second thing required to the first correcting of superstition, and
supplying of defective Statutes.

IT is not to be doubted, but it was the full mind and intent of the
Lawmakers, which made those three Statutes to infeoffe the Ecclesiastical
Courts in the inheritance of all those causes that are comprised in those
Statutes, save those that are by special name exempted, and that they did by
the said Statute, as it were deliver unto them full and quiet possession of the
same, for even so sundry branches of the said Statute do show, as I have
elsewhere made it manifest: and that there has grown question upon many
points thereof, and that the professors of the Ecclesiastical Law have been
interupted in the quiet possession thereof, comes of the unperfect penning of
the same, and not of any just title or claim that may be made by the
professors of the other Law thereunto: but this is a thing not only proper to
these three Statutes, but also common to all other Statutes which are writ of
any Ecclesiastical causes within this Land; which notwithstanding may be
remedied, if it seem good unto his sacred Majesty and the rest of the
wisdom of the land assembled together at any time for the making of wholesome
Laws, and the reforming of the same, by supply of a few words in some places,
or periods that are defective, and yet keeping the true meaning and sense of
the same.

As for example in the Statute of the two and thirtieth of Henry the eight, in
the wherefore, near the beginning of the same Statute, the Statute ordering,
that all persons of this Realm, and other of the Kings Dominions shall truly,
and effectually set out, and pay all and singular Tithes, according to the
lawful customs, and usages of the Parishes where they grow, and become due:
because there is a question made where these customs and usages shall be
tried, in the Ecclesiastical or Temporal Law; if these or the like words had
been added to the same (to be proved before an Ecclesiastical Judge after the
form of the Ecclesiastical Law, and not elsewhere) the whole matter had been
clear for that point.

And whereas again in the end of the same Statute, there be some good words
tending to the appropriating of these matters of Tithes, and obligations, and
other Ecclesiastical duties to the Ecclesiastical Court: and that the remedy
for them shall be had in the Spiritual Court according to the ordinance of the
first part of that Act, and not otherwise: yet because there is no penalty to
that act, busy men easily make a breach thereinto, for that Laws without
penalties, for the most part are weak and of no force: if therefore this or
the like supply were made (if any man sue for these, or like duties in any
other Court, than in the Kings Ecclesiastical court, the parties so suing, to
forfeit the treble value of that which he sued for, to be recovered in the
Kings Ecclesiastical Court, where it ought to have bin commenced, by the way
of Libells, or Articles, the one half thereof shall be to the King, the other
to the party grieved) many of these suits would easily be met withal. Neither
is it to the purpose that this is matter of money, and Lay-Fee that should be in
this sort forfeited, and therefore is not Regularly to be sued for in the
Ecclesiastical Court; for seeing the cause is Ecclesiastical, upon which the
matter of forfeiture arises, it may be very well allowed, Ne continentiae
causarum dividantur: and for that ordinarily every jurisdiction that is wronged
may defend it self with a penalty: beside, we do by the like right in the
Ecclesiastical courts recover expenses of suits in Law, fees of Advocates, and
Proctors, and money for redemption of sin, so that it will be no strange matter
to have this kind of suit allowed unto the Ecclesiastical Court.

Further, whereas there are in the Statute of Edward the sixth, chapter 13. in
the beginning almost of the said Statute two clauses under pain of forfeiture,
one of treble value, for Tithes carried away before they were divided, set out,
or agreed for: The other of double value where the Tithes were hurt or impared
by the party stopping or letting him that had interest thereunto to carry
them away, or by withdrawing, or carrying them away himself; and the same is
ordered by a clause in the second branch thereof reaching unto them both (for
that a clause put in the end of two sentences, stretches it self
indifferently unto them both, if there be no more reason it should belong to
the one than the other, as there is not in this case, for if it were not so,
the first penalty had no order set down, how it might be recovered) that the
same shall be recovered according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law: to which if
there were added this word [only] and not elsewhere, or otherwise, and they
martialled in their right places, there were nothing more sure or strong.

Moreover, whereas in the first proviso of that Statute it is decreed, that
none shall be compelled to pay any manner of Tithes for any Hereditaments,
which by the Laws or Statutes of the Realm, or by any Privilege,
Prescription, or Composition Real, are not chargeable therewithal; whereby it
is doubtful in what Court the said Exemptions are to be alleged: if there
were inserted these words, or other of like nature [the said Laws, Statutes,
Privileges, Prescriptions, or Compositions real to be alleged, argued,
traversed, and determined before the Ecclesiastical Judge only according to
the form of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and not else-where] upon like
forfeiture of treble damages, as is aforesaid, it would make this point sure
unto the Ecclesiastical Law.

Over and besides this, whereas in the same Statute there is a discharge
allowed to barren, heath, and waste ground, in some for not payment of tithes,
in other for the manner of payment of them for the space of 7. years, after
the improving and converting of them into arrable ground or meadow; it would
make the matter plain, which Law should have the pronouncing thereupon, if
there were added these or the like words [So the same ground be proved in form
of Law in the Ecclesiastical Court, to be barren, heath, and waste.]

Lastly, whereas in the said Statute among other limitations of causes, wherein
the Ecclesiastical Judge is not to deal by virtue of the said Statute, there
is one in these words, near the end of the said Statute [Ne in any matter
whereof the Kings Court of right ought to have Jurisdiction] which limitation
is so vage and large, that thereout there may be forged as many diverse kinds
of Prohibitions, as the Poets sained Vulcan ever made thunderbolts for Jupiter.
And therefore it were very well and consonant to the good meaning of the said
Statute, that this vagenesse were restrained and reduced to a more certainty of
matter, by these or like words, [By any ancient Law or Statute of this Land.]

And so far as concerning the imperfection of the said three Statutes, and
how they may be amended and made reducible to the first meaning and intent of
the makers thereof, by some small supply, alteration, or change of words, the
sense and groundwork standing ever the same, according to the wisdom of his
Majestic, and his great Council assembled in Parliament.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
The second Mean to releeve the Civil Law, which is, by allowing it the
practice of such things as are greevances in the Commonwealth, and fit to be
reformed by some Court, but yet are not otherwise provided for: And first of
the greevances which concern Parents and Children, and how they may be
releeved.

NOw it follows, that I show wherein the practice of the Ecclesiastical Law
(under which I comprise the Civil Law, so far as it is in use amongstus) may
be increased to the benefit of the subject, and the enlargement of the
profession, without the prejudice of the Common Law. And that I may first begin
with the piety of Fathers toward their Children, and children again toward
their Parents, which is the beginning of all Commonwealths; for even Nature it
self has taught that, not only in the most brutish people that be, but also
settled it in the savagest kind of beasts that are upon the earth, the one to
cherish that which it self has brought out, and the other to love again that
which has brought it out: and yet, what Law is here in England, which
provideth for the one or the other, unless it be the Statute of the xliij. of
Elizabeth? and that is but for poor folks children only (where otherwise
they should be a burden to the Parish) but for the Parents themselves, or
other children that are cast off, either by the negligence, or the
unnaturalness of the one toward the other, there is no provision at all. Yet
by the Civil Law there is a purveiance made, whereby both the Father ff. dc
agnoscend. et alendis liberis vel parenti^. c. de alendis liberis vel parentib.
is compelled to acknowledge his child, (if there be any variance between
the husband and the wife upon any jealousy or suspicion of Adultery, if the
same cannot be proved by the woman's own confession, by witnesses, by the act
it self, or some other violent presumption) and to ff. de ventre inspiciendo,
custodiendoque partu. ff. de ^fficio proconsuls, l. nequicquam. de plano.
nourish and maintain the same; but if the fault appear against her, and it
be so sentenced by the Judge, then may he as well refuse the one as the other:
but for other children upon whom there is no such doubt, the Parents may be
constrained to maintain, clothe, and feed them, and to set them out a portion
of their goods, so that either the State and faculty of the Parents will bear
it, or the children have not deserved to the contrary, wherefore they should
not in that sort be provided for. And as the Father in this sort is bound unto
the Child; so the Child again is obliged unto his Parents, to provide for
their sustenance, so far forth as their ability will reach unto: for it is
very unnatural, that the Parents should want, so long as the children have
means to releeve them. In both which cases, if either the Parents refuse to
admit of their children, or the children again refuse to yield comfort unto
their Parents, the Judge may interpose his authority, and injoyne each to
maintain other according to their ability, and as to his discretion shall
seem meet, which if any of them should deny to yield unto, the Judge may, be
Distress of their goods taken and sold to the value thereof, compel them to
perform his order: and yet that only in case of Maintenance, and not to
discharge debts, wherein either of them stand bound unto their creditors.

A man here in England dying, and leaving his wife Executrix, she after
marrying, carries away all his State unto her second husband, who gives and
spends thereof as him lists, without any regard of the children of the first
husband, (by whom all, or most of those goods came) insomuch, as many times
those children when they come to age, and are to go abroad into the world,
they have nothing to begin the world withal, whereby many of them come to
beggerie, and others to more fearful ends (for Necessity, as the Proverb has
it, is a hard weapon) neither is there any means in this Commonwealth to
releeve this mischief, for ought I can learn: but by the Civil Law there is
very good remedy; for by that Law, neither C. De secundis nupt(...) tot tit.
the woman surviving her husband, neither the man surviving his wife, having
issue between them during the Matrimony, have the property of those goods,
which either of them brought one to the other, and are left behind by the
defunct; but the property is the childrens of the deceased, and the use or
benefit his or hers only which does survive, during his or her natural life:
which course if it were taken here in England, many poor fatherless and
motherlesse Children would be in better state than they are; for then
howsoever their present estate were hard, yet their future would be better,
when they should be secured to enjoy their fathers or mothers right: neither
could such men or women which marry, or are married with persons of this sort,
much complain if this Law were established here, for so should they have,
though not a perpetuity in an other man's state, yet a long and beneficial
fruition thereof, even so long as the party, in whom they were interessed did
live: but for the return thereof unto the right owners, the Law is so
scrupulous, that if the husband or wife do remarrie, it will have him that is
to marry the widow, bound with good suerties for due restitution of the
defuncts part, unto the children of the former marriage.

SECT. 2.
The Greevances which arise by Executors, and how they may be releeved.

AN other inconvenience there is in Executors in this Land, Cosen german to the
former, which goes altogether uncontrouled, whereby I guess there is no Law
in this Land to correct it: and that is, the trifling of Executors in paying of
Legacies and bequests, under pretense of debts unknown, which they make show
they must provide for, upon danger of their own indemnitie; whereby many
Legacies are never paid, but stand, as it were, suspended until the day of
doom. Against this abuse, the Civil Law has two remedies: One by exacting
bond of the Executor, that L. 1.. 1. 2. and 3. ff. ut Legatorum nomine careatur.
he shall pay the Legacies without fraud or deceit, according to the will of
the defunct; the other, that if he refuse so to do, then the Judge may put the
party complaynant in the possession of that which is demanded: for it is not
enough for L. haec autem ff. si cut plus quam per Legem falcidiam. ff. de
regulis juris L. van^ to(...)
the Heir or Executor to pretend a debt, to the end that he may stay the
Legacies, which the Testator has given, in his hand, but he must make plain
and manifest unto the Judge, that there is such a debt owing, and that the suit
thereupon is either already begun, or very like to be begun in very short time,
without fraud or collusion, otherwise many of those pretenses and threats may
be vain and elusory. And in case there be any such just cause of fear in
deed, or there be any such suit in truth commenced upon the same, the Executor
L. Nisi si dolo. si Legatarius ff. si cut plus quam per legem falcidiam
licuerit.
may secure himself by bond or suertie from the Legatorie, that in case the
debt be evicted of him, he shall repay to the Executor what he has received:
wherein, although it may be said, it is safer for the Executor to secure
himself by keeping the Legacy still in his hand, than to trust upon suerty or
other caution, for that these provisions many times are frail; yet since this
kind of dealing is injurious to the Legatory, and the withholding thereof, for
the most part, has no honest defense, but is grounded upon deceit and
covetousness, it were behoovefull for the commonwealth, that such ill dealing
were redressed: for so men's Wills, which are their last Ordinances, (than the
which, Princes have granted no greater benefit to men, than that in their life
time they may dispose how their goods shall be bestowed after their death)
shall have that end that the Testators themselves intended: ff. Si quis omissa
causa testamen. L. nam facit totum* l. 4 ff. do h^^edib. instituend. l. pater*
familias.. 3.
which if they had known in their life time, their Executors would not have
performed, they would never have put them in trust as they did. Besides, hereby
the names of Executors which now are charged with manifold imputations, by the
ill dealing of some, shall by this means be unburdened and restored unto their
former credit, which was, to discharge the trust that by the defunct was
reposed upon them: for the Will of the defunct cannot be defrauded without
great sin.

An other mischief there is in Executors and Administrators, not only
uncontrollable by the Law of this Land, but rather allowed and justified by it;
and that is, when they have once got the authority into their hands, and
priced all at the lowest rate, they will sell away all at the highest price
they can, and answer the poor Children, and Legatories, for whose good they
were appointed Executors, at the value in the Inventarie only, contrary to
all right and reason: for by the Law, an Executor is to sell nothing of those
things ff. de reb. eorum qui sub tutela sunt sine decreto non alienandi^, vel
obligandis, tot. tit. and ibi Bartol. in rubrica.
which are left unto the Children, or Legatories, but such things only, which
by keeping cannot be kept, or which being kept, will be chargeable to the
inheritance: or otherwise the Testator were so indebted, that his state must
needs be sold, for the satisfying of the Creditors: or lastly, that he himself
ordered by his Will something should be sold. But for such things as may be
kept, and by keeping, will not be the worse, he ought precisely to preserve
them, specially where the Testator has bequeathed any thing in kind. And if he
sell ought of those things which he ought not to sell, he may not sell it but
by the decree of the Judge, interposed upon the same, and upon just cause
proved before him: wherein if it appear after, the Judge was abused, by any
false allegation and corrupt testimony, the sale is void, and the Minor, when
he comes to his full age, or within 5. years after, may reverse and recover
that which is thus sold by collusion, out of the hands of him, to whom it was
sold, as being done against the authority of the Law. And that it may be better
understood, how precise the Law is in this point, and what things it allows
may be sold without the decree of the Judge, and what not, I will set down
the words of the Law it self, speaking of Tutors and Governors of Puples;
whose place Executors and Administrators do supply, so far forth, as they have
the tuition and governance of Minors, during their under-age, faithfully
translated. And it is a law of Constantine the great, reproving a former law of
S^v(...) the Emperor, C. de administrat. tutorum, vel curatorum. (...). lex
qua.
which gave leave to Tutors and Curators to sell away all the gold, silver,
precious stone, apparel, and otherrich movables the Testator had, and to
bring the same into money, which turned greatly to the hinderance of many
Orphans: whereupon Constantine, after he had first ordered, that nothing should
be sold of the pearl, precious stone, naperi^, utensels of the house and
other necessary stuff and ornaments of the same, says thus. Neither shall it
be lawful for them, (meaning the Tutors or Curators) to sell the house wherein
the Father died, and the child grew up, wherein it is woe enough to the child
not to see his Ancestors images not fastened up, or else pulled down.
Therefore let the house, and all other his moveable goods still remain in the
Patrimony of the child, neither let any edifices or buildings, which came in
good reparation with the inheritance, ruin or decay by collusion of the Tutor:
but rather if the Father, or he whosoever the minor was heir unto, left any
building in decay, let the Tutor both by the Testimony of the work it self,
and the ^aith of many be compelled to repair it: for so the yearly rent will
bring in more profit to the Minor, than the price of the things being
deceitfully sold under-foot, will do the Minor any good. Neither does this Law
only make provision against Tutors, but also against immodest and intemperate
women, which many times gage unto their new married husbands, not only their
own state, but even the state and lives of their children. Further, it
crosses the course of putting the childrens money to usury (notwithstanding
anciently it was thought, therein consisted all the strength of the Patrimony)
for that course is seldom long, scarcely continual and stable, and that
thereby many times the money being lost, the childrens state comes to nothing:
and therefore his conclusion is, The Tutor should sell nothing, without the
order of the Judge, saving the Testators over-worne apparel, or those things,
which by keeping could not be kept from corruption, and such cattle as were
superfluous. Whereby it appears, how careful that age was, not to give way
to Executors by sale of the Testators goods, to make gain of the Orphans;
neither is this age better than that; but that which was feared then, may be
provided for now, by like authority as was then.

In this Land a man dying, leaving Legacies to his children, and his wife
Executrix, or dying intestate, and she taking administration, and in her
second marriage bringing all her first husbands state, and her childrens
portions unto her second husband, and then dying, there is no remedy against
the second husband, to recover the said Legacies or portions due unto the
children out of his hands, because he is neither Executor nor Administrator,
and that he came not to those goods by wrong, but by the delivery of the
Executrix, with whom he married: but yet by the Civil Law there is, and L si
and me ff. de rebus creditis si certum petatur.
that by this claim, that the said goods came unto his hands, and that it is
no reason, any should be made rich by my goods against my will: for Legataries
have no action against any, as Administrators in their own wrong, or hinderers
of the performance of the last Will of the deceased, but Executors only, and
they then alone, when the party having it, holds it by wrong, and not by
lawful delivery, which in this case is otherwise.

By the Law of this Land, there is no provision to preserve the state of a
prodigal person from spoil, which neither has regard of time, nor end of
spending, unless the Father provide for this mischief in his Will, or by some
other good order in his life, but he is suffered to waste and spend his goods
until there be nothing left (as though the Prince and Common wealth had no
interest in such a subject, to see he did not waste his state, and abuse his
goods) whereby many great houses are overthrown, and many children whom the
Fathers carefully provided for, never leaving raking and scraping all their
life time, that their children after them might live in great plenty and
abundance, come to great shame and beggerie. But the Civil Law has remedy
for it: for the Law counting such a man that is in this sort ff. de curatorib.
furioso, and aliis ^^tra minores dandis.
impotent in his deeds, howsoever he be otherwise sensible in his words, to be
half mad, and to be a young man in his manners, how old soever otherwise he be
in his years, sets a Curator over them for the preserving and well ordering of
their state, no otherwise than if they were children, or mad men indeed, who so
long have power over them, and their goods, until they come to sane manners,
to which if they once return the Curators office cease.

The like they do to a widow or sole woman which lives riotously, having
neither regard of her fame, nor of her state. L. et mulieri. ff. eod.


I find an old practice auciently used in the Ecclesiastical Courts, for
restraining Executors or Administrators for dealing covenously in an
Executorship or Administratorship, when there are more Executors named in a
Will, than one, or more Administrators deputed by the Ordinary in an
Administration than one, which were well if it were recalled, and brought back
to his former use again. For now, as things stand many times one capricious
fellow named an Executor in a Will, or appointed Administrator by the Ordinary
with some other well-meaning men, getting a start in this business of the
rest, ingrosseth all into his own hands, and without privitie, or concurrence
of the other, sells, releaseth, and disposes all at his own pleasure,
contrary to the mind either of the Testator, or the Ordinary, who would not
have named so many in the Will, or Administration, but to the intent that all
might or should execute and administer, and one communicate their acts with
another. The contrary whereof is many times very prejudicial and hurtful, to
those that are to take benefit by the said Will or Administration, who for the
want of the due performance of this kind of proceeding, are defrauded of all
that which in right or reason should have come unto them, either by the
Testators good will, or by the benefit of the Law. And yet there is no remedy
for this in Law, so far as I know, for that all these making but one person
in Law, the Law yields no action to the one to sue the other: but yet the
ancient practice of the Ecclesiastical Law has remedy, which would redress
all this mischief, if it were called again to use, and might go without
controlme^t, as the equity of the cause does require. And the remedy is this,
that such other of the Executors or Administrators as are in this sort
interverted from the execution of the Will, or Administration by the subtlety
of any like Executor or Administrator, should crave the assistance of the
Judge, and will him by virtue of his office, to call in such practique Executor
or Administrator, and to command him under pain of excommunication, he
proceed no further in the sole execution thereof, but communicate all his acts,
and dealings with the rest of his Coexecutors or Coadministrators: which if it
were so ordered, would make many men's Wills and Administrations better
performed than they are, and a great sort of poor Orphans states more sure and
certain, than commonly they are in such Executors or Administrators hands.

And certainly in this case, there is some good use of Supervisors in dead men's
Wills (whom many men merely jestar, calling them candle-holders, as though they
could do nothing else in the execution thereof, but hold the candle while the
Executors tell the Defuncts money) if they might be permitted to put in practice
that authority which the Law gives them, and that is when they find any
Executor deal fraudulently in the execution of any Testators Will, wherein
they are named supervisors, or do ingrosse all the state of the Defunct into
his hands, as has been before said, they call him to a particular account,
that it may be seen how the administration stands, and each Executor may
commumunicate to other particular receipts and disbursements: which if any
shall refuse to do, then may the Supervisor make thereof complaint unto the
Judge, as though the same man dealt not truly in the execution thereof, who
though perhaps in the beginning could not take bond of him, for ff De
administratione tutorum. l. 3.. 1.
the true execution of the Will (because the Testator had made choice of him,
and therein approved his faith, and that no man required caution of him for any
Legacy in the Will be queathed, in which case the Judge might take bond of him
for security of such Lagacies as are bequeathed in the Will, yea though his
faith has been approved by the Ordinary, as has been before remembered) yet
may the Judge in this case, if he find him justly suspected of fraud and
deceit, remove him by the learning of that Law. For Instit. de suspectis
tutorib. vel curator. teto tit.
neither the Testator himself, if he were alive again, would endure him in
this case, but would blot his name out of his Will, neither ought the Judge to
suffer him, whose care is to see that dead men's Wills take their effect,
according to the Testators meaning. All which the Law has provision for, and
for infinite things else of like good order in these cases, if they might be
suffered to put them in execution without impeachment.

And so far as concerning those things wherein the Civil, and the
Ecclesiastical Law might be relieved, without prejudice to the Common Law, for
because they have no practice thereof* and yet do not I bring forth these as
the only causes wherein the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law may be licenced to
deal in, over and besides the practice of those things that they have already,
but that these are few among many other which might be sorted out, if so be
there were any hope for the further enlargement of the profession.

CHAP. III.
Of the necessity of retaining the practice of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Law in this Land.

BUt now to the necessity of the maintenance of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Law in this Realm, as they are now practiced, or ought to be practiced, which
was a thing first propounded, but last put in execution in this work.

Albeit that which has been already said as concerning the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law may well imply the necessary preservation of them both
within this Land, yet because it was a thing I promised to show in the
beginning of this Treatise, after that I had gone over the rest of the parts of
my division, I will in a word or two make plain the necessity thereof.

And therefore for a ground of all the rest, I will assume this for a matter
confessed, that every man knows, that every well ordered Commonwealth stands
on two parts principally, the politic part, which consists of the Prince and
people, and the Ecclesiastical part which stands in Sacris and Sacerdotibus.
And therefore well said the Emperor, Two of the greatest things that God ever
gave unto In authent. quon. oport. Episcopod in prin. col. 1. Auth. de non
alienand. etc. rebut Eccl. c. 2.. 1.
the world (meaning earthly things) was the Empire or secular government
whereby the outward man is ordered and made, as Aristotle says, bonus civis,
that is, a good and loyal subject: and the Priesthood whereby the inward man
is ruled, and is made, as the said Author testifies, bonus vir, that is, a
good and virtuous man, which are two wonderful effects of the whole government
in general; neither can the one of these be wanting, but the other will be
ruinated and brought to desolation.

Secondly, no man is ignorant of this, but in politic government two things
sway the whole state, the one is peace at home, and the other is war abroad:
which as they have their seasons, so they have their causes and effects, the
one from counsel at home, the other from discipline abroad; neither can the
one, or the other of these be maintained, but by their private and proper Laws.

Beside, in peace who sees not, there is as much need of vent by sea, for to
benefit the Commonwealth by, either by importation of those things that we
want at home, or by exportation of those things we abound with; as there is
provision to be made for the increasing and preserving of those things that we
have rising and growing by land in our own country, neither of which can be
had or enjoyed without their proper Laws fit and appertaining to either
policy? And what Law is there that orders these businesses but the Civil
Law only, which gives a form to Navigation, and all occurrents that happen
by sea, whether they be in, or about the Navigation it self or the
concontracts, or as it were contracts that are made in, upon, or beyond the
same.

As a Legal form is requisite in peace at home, and Marine affairs abroad,
that every thing may have his due effect according to the right thereof, so
also it is necessary in warlike exploits upon the Sea, that every action have
his limits and bounds, whereby Justice may be ministered: which if it be to be
observed where lawful war is held between Prince and Prince, that every one
be not left unto his own lust, much more is it expedient to be put in ure in
Piracies and other Sea-robberies, where the innocent is spoiled, and the
spoiler is enriched. The redress whereof is not, but by the Admiral Law, to
whom the Princes of this Land have granted that authority.

For the often commerce of Princes with Princes, and the negotiation that one
State has with an other, there is nothing more necessary, than frequent
Embassages, wereby intelligence may be had what danger one State intends to
an other, and how the same may be prevented by Leagues or otherwise, and how
the same may be made and maintained: I know not what Law serves better for all
these ends and purposes than the Civil Law.

In matters that appertain to the souls health, the Preacher teaches out of
the word of God, wherein the right service of God stands, he ministers the
Sacraments unto the people, and instructs them in other fundamental points
of Religion. but it is the Ecclesiastical Law that compels men to the due
observance hereof, and punishes the trangressors.

All men grant, that there is a provision to be made for the Minister, for that
it is against reason that any man should go to warfare on his charges: but it
is the Law of the Church that sets out this provision, and yields remedy for
the recoverie thereof, if it be denied.

Nothing is more due unto the dead, than that their last Wills should be
observed; for that it is such an ordinance as a man has not in his power
again, when God has once called him hence, neither is there any thing that
Princes have more graciously granted unto their subjects, than that in their
lifetime they may dispose of that which after they are dead, is none of
theirs; and yet shall take place when they are not, as though yet they were
theirs: in which provision the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Law, are above
all other Laws most religious.

Christening, Wedding, Burying, whereby a man enters into this world,
converseth in the world, and returns again unto the earth, from whence he
was taken, and so after passes to glory, and everlasting bliss, are every
one of the Ecclesiastical cognizance.

How many men of great skill, such as few Princes have greater in all kind of
learning, are of this rank, not only in the society of them that profess
this knowledge here in the chiefest City of the Land, but also in both the
Universities, and in sundry other places of this Realm, not strangers, or
forrainers, but home-borne subjects, of the same faith, of the same religion,
of the same kindred, and family, of like alleagiance to the Prince, and
service to the Commonwealth as other his good subjects are, even those that
oppugn this profession chiefly; whose practice, if it be overthrown, or
provision lessened, not only those that are now present, and make profession
of this knowledge shall be feign to turn their copy, but those that are
futurely to come, will change their profession, when they see there is no
reward or estimation belonging thereto? for it is honor that nourishes Arts,
and no man will follow that profession that is out of count, and credit; but
every Father will say unto his Son in like sort as Ovids Father said to him,
when he saw him addict and give himself wholly to Poetry, Studium quid
inutile tent as? It was anciently said of the profession of these Laws, Dat
Justinianus honores; but now it is so far off from that, that it conferres
honors, as that it is almost a discre. dit for any man to be a Civilian in
this State, and the profession thereof does scarce keep beggerie from the gate.

As God does dispose his government by justice and mercy (whoreof
notwithstanding mercy has the supreme place in the Lords Tabernacle, as that
which was put above upon the Arc, wherein were the two Tables of stone, in
which the Law was written, to which St James alluding, Exodus 25.
says, that mercy triumphs over judgment) so the Princes of this Land to
the imitation of that heavenly representation, lames. 2.
have appointed two supreme seats of Government within this Land, the one of
justice, wherein nothing but the strict letter of the Law is observed, the
other of Mercy, wherein the rigor of the Law is tempered with the sweetness
of equity, which is nothing else but mercy qualifying the sharpness of
Justice: to either which Courts they have sorted men fit for their skill, and
education to manage the same; that is, to the seat of Justice, the professors
of the Law of this Land, who may be thought best to know the Justice of the
same: but to the other they have assigned the professors of the Civil Law, for
that a great sort of titles of that Law, are titles of equity, as, whatsoever
is Jus praetorium, or Jus aedilicium, with them is matter of equity; so that
they may seem best able for their skill in these titles (of which no other
Land has the like) to assist the Lord Chancellor in matters of Conscience.
Who though he be a man, for the most part, chosen by the Prince himself, out
of the rest of the Sages of this Land, for his special good parts of learning
and integrity above the rest (as now the honorable person is that occupies
that place, who is, as Tullie said of that eloquent Orator Marcus Crassus, Non
unus ex multis, sed unus inter omnes prope singularis) so that they might be
thought for their great and eminent wisdom in all things appertaining to their
place, able to direct themselves; yet because it is, Divinitatis potius qua^
humanitatis, omniu^ reru^ habere memoriam, and in nullo errare, as one says,
It was providently done by Princes of former age, to join to these great
personages, men furnished with knowledge in these cases of conscience; wherein
if they should at any time stick, they might be advised by them that are
assessors with them, what they find in the law proportionable to the case in
hand, that thereto they might square their decree, or order accordingly; whose
variety in these cases is such, that hardly there can fall out any case in
practice, but there will be some Law, in that learning, conformable unto it:
which opportunity of men furnished with this knowledge for that seat, his
Majesty shall want, unless the study of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law be
maintained, which also for the cases of equity and constience therein, is called
of the old writers, Aequitas Canonica.

And what reason gave occasion to these precedent Princes to place men endowed
with the skill of the Civil Law, in the Court of Chancerie, the same also
ministered unto them minds to commit unto the self same men, the ordering of
their Courts of Requests: for that therein, for the most part are handled poor
miserable persons causes, as widows and Orphans, and other distressed people,
whose cases wholly rely on piety and conscience, as a fit subject for that Law
to deal in, which also will take a maime, if the study of the Civil Law be
not upholden.

So then to deny a free course to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law in this
Land, in such things as appertain to their profession, or to abridge the
maintenance thereof, is to spoil his Majesty of a part of his honor (whose
glory it is to be furnished with all sorts of professions necessary for his
state, and beneficial for his subject) to weaken the State public, and
bereave it of grave and sage men, to advise the State in matters of doubt and
controversy between foreign Nations and themselves, to disarme the Church of
her faithful friends and followers, and so to cut the sinews (as much as in
them lies) of Ecclesiastical discipline, and to expose her to the teeth of
those, who for these many years have sought to devour her up; and so now
would do it, if the merciful providence of God, and the gracious eye of the
Prince did not watch over her.

And so far of the necessity of these two professions, and generally of the
use and disuse of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law in this Land, and wherein
it is overlaid by the Common Law, and how it may be relieved, if it seem good
unto his Majesty, and the wisdom of this Realm. All which I have written,
not of any purpose to derogate from the credit of that Law, under which I was
borne, and by which I hold that small maintenance that I have: (fo, I reverence
it as a necessary Law for this State, and make such reckoning of every of the
professors in his place, as becomes me) but that it pitieth me, and not
only me, but all those that tender good learning, and have no prejudicate
mind toward the Common Law, to see two such Noble Sciences as the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law are, so to be disgraced, as that there is no more reckoning
made of them, or their professors, than if they were matters and men of no
worth, and fit or apt for no service in the Commonwealth: and yet
notwithstanding, the use of them is so necessary as that the Commonwealth
cannot want the service of them in matter of great importance to the State,
which (if the profession should come to a downfall, as it is like shortly to
do, if it be no more cherished and made of than it is) will be sooner seen by
the want of them, than is now perceived by the having of them; and then
perhaps, will the State lament for the loss of so goodly a profession, when it
will be hardly recovered again, as the children of Israel did for the tribe of
Benjamin, when they had in one dey slain well nigh the whole number of them.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE Principal Matters and Words, contained in this Book.
A
ABbyes erected for good ends. page 183. 184. but subverted for private. 212
Absence from judgment hinders not process. 58 Accessorie when to be
determined where the principal. 157. when not. 232. what things to be
accounted accessories. 233 Acts of appropriations. 202 Actions for things lent
or pawned: Of Ejectment. Of Compensations. Of Passengers, Mariners, Fathers,
Masters. 7. Of Mandate, Society, Bargain, Change, Restitution, Usury. 9.
Popular. 22. Exercitorie. 89. Of Trover. 128; which is prejudicial to the
Ecclesiastical Law. 130. 131. Actiones praejudiciales what. 242. Of
Diffamation where to be tried. 240, 241. Administration, when admitted: in what
order, and when to be taken. 13. Administrators false dealing with Legatories,
and how to be remedyed. vid. Executors. Admiraltie. 128 Pope Adrian
restrains the privilege granted by Paschal. 200 Adoption must be of such as
are younger than the Adoptant. 130 Adultery what. 22. how punished. ibid.
Advocates, the necessity of them. 78. paralleled with soldiers. 101 Advonson
what. 196. how obtained. ib. Aethelstane, his law for Tithes. 138. 139 Aimoine
why silent in Charles Martels Sacrilege. 166 Alcoran allows Tithes. 175
Alienations not to be made for fear of suit. 78 Almes-money what. 139 K.
Alured his grant to Churches. 193. Inventour of Lanthorns 197 Apertura Feudi,
what. 73 Apostles Canons of what authority. 194 Appeals, when admitted, from
whom, by whom, and when to be made. 26. 55. 78. 79. 80 Appearance within what
time to be made. 24 Appropriation. vid. Impropriation. Aquinas censured. 204
Arbitrament, what. 79 Arms, and the cases incident. 99. how gotten. 100. how
to be borne. 101, 102 Armor, by whom to be made. 60 Artificers immunity from
service. 41 Auditors denied that immunity which professors enjoy. 40 Aventines
pains in compiling his Annals. 169 Augustus, why so called. 108. his title to
the Empire. ib. Augustine the Monk. 142 Avocation of causes inconvenient. 131.
132 Aurum glebale, what. 45 Authenticks what. 50. why so called. ib. their
contents. seq.
B
Baptism how primitively administered. 176 A Baptismall Church, what. 177
Barcinius, the Collectour of the first Volume of the Decretals. 75 Barren
ground what. 223. vid. Waste. What ground to be accounted harren. 224. Absolute
and Comparative. 223. how distinguished from Heath. 225. Barren money, what.
224 Bastards by law those that are borne eleven months after the decease of
the woman's husband. 55. several sorts of Bastards. 244. not to bear their
Fathers Arms. 245. nor to inherit. ib. how they might be legitimated. 146
Bastardie, what. 243. the effects thereof. 245. to what jurisdiction the trial
thereof belongs. 246, propounded either incidently. 247. or principally. 248.
General bastardie defined. ib. special defined. 249. refuted. 250. both of
Ecclesiastical cognizance. 251. as is proved by several precedents. 251. 252
Battaill Abbey by whom founded, and how endowed. 190 Bawds how punishable. 53
Benedict the first Founder of cloystered Monks 187 Benefices, how long they
may be vacant. 81. not to be impaired during the vacancie. 82. some
appropriated to, Bishops, and why. 216 Bequests. vid. Legacies. Bertricks Will.
194 Berytus, the privileges thereof. 43 Bigamie. 83 Bishops, why so called.
34. their power and jurisdiction. 35. and degree. 120. 121. place in
Parliament. 159. 160. their power in Ordination of Clerks. 57. in Consecration
of Churches. 191. 192. 193. and seq. and Chapels. 58. in Division of Church
dues. 154. in decision of controversies. 54. in permission or prohibition of
building Churches. 191. and endowing them 194. and filling them. 195. 196. and
seq. their manners. 51. 52. who to be elected. 64. not hunters, nor severe. 85.
to be resident. 58. 65. not to be called before a temporal Judge. 65. nor
deteine the Tithes of any Benefice, by them founded. 206. 207. nor pass them
over to Lay men. 208. in what cases they may hold them in fee. ib. their
primitive endowments. 209. 210. their different right in Tithes and demeanes.
215. they sometime present at Patrons Wills. 194 Bishop of Romes priority. 66
Blasphemy capital. 59 Boniface the 8. Collectour of the second Volume of the
Decretals. 75 Border grounds. 61 Boughs of great trees tytheable. 229. 230.
etc. not accessories to the trees. 233. Bounds of Parishes, of Ecclesiastical
cognizance. 151. vi. Parish. But of Bishoprics, temporal. 155 Brethren of the
whole blood, preferred before others. 60 Briberie how punished. 23, 24
Burglarie how punished. 21 Burners of houses how punished. 19
C
Cacus his fact. 157. applied. 158 Canon Law, what. 73. divided. 74. vid. Law.
Canons of Nice. 153. of Antioch. 154. of the Apostles, questioned. 194
Cardinals original. 152 Captives. 27. feigned by the Law to be dead when they
are taken. 129 Cassiopea's new Star. 170 Castalia. Castle-ward, what. 70
Castellians, who. 47 Censures to be judicially executed. 85 Cessers for what
instituted. 44 Ceremonies used at the dedication of a Church. 191 Chamberlaines
place. 46 Chancellours, what. 115 116. how they differ from Commissaries. ib.
their antiquity. ib. Lord Chancellor why provided of Assessors. 275 Changes of
Church lands. 57 Chapels how to be built. 58 Charles Martel. vid. Martel.
Children not to be punished so severely as men. 85. after divorce how to be
educated. 62. their maintenance how it may be provided for. 263 Chorepiscopi,
their office. 153, 154 Churches affinity with the Commonwealth. 211. their
privileges. 34, 293. Prescription. 62. building. 65, 66, not to be built
without the consent of the Bishop. 193. nor endowed 194. Manner of dedication.
52. 191. their lands not to be alienated. 52. 54. 63. nor goods immovable.
56. nor vessels. 64. yet may they be exchanged. 57. at the Bishops disposal.
193, 194. Churches formerly both few and mean. 197 Church dues how divided.
153, 154 Church peace-breakers how mulcted. 178 Church-robbers curse. 172. 173.
the crime fatal to kingdoms. 175 Church-shot. 138 Circumstances considerable
in punishing. 99 Civilians disrespected. 274 Civil Law. vid. Law. Pope
Clement's sentence for the K. of Sicily. 113. Clementines what. 75 Clergies
orders. 54. most beneficial to the Prince. 186 Clerks, why so called. 34. who
to be admitted. 65. where to pay for admittance. 57. their behavior and
number. 51, 52, 53. strictness of conversation. 184. to be reverenced. 117.
not to hunt. 85. nor to meddle in civil affairs. 82* their immunity. 64. 66.
how to be judged. 60. by whom. 65 Cloistered Monks their original. 187.
Privileges. 188 Clients compared to Sysiphus. 132 Cnutes laws. 140 Code,
what, why so called, why compiled. 31. how distinguished from the Digest. 32.
33. contents s. for whom most useful. 49 Cognizance, Ecclesiastical and
Temporal. 158. vid. Ecclesiastical. Collations, the Sections of the
Authenticks. 50 Collectours of subsidies how to be punished for exacting. 14.
their office. 38 Colors, their dignity in Armory. 102 Combats, permitted by
the Common law. 86 Commissaries, what. 116 Commonwealth allied to the Church.
211. consistes of two parts 271. ruled by peace vid. war. ib. Competency to
be allowed to the Minister. 95. 196 Commutation of Church lands how formerly
tolerated and how in the present age. 210. 211 Confiscation in whole or in
part. 25. goods confiscate how to be disposed. 37 Connexitie of causes not to
be taken away. 148. 157 Consecration of Churches, with what ceremonies
performed. 191 Consent of parents, requisite co the Marriage of Children. 67
Consistories why granted. 117 Constantines great bounty toward the Church.
182. his law concerning Executors. 267 Constantinoples privileges. 43 Consul
what. 45 Contracts Marine. 88. 89 Contribution for ejectments. 92 Controllers
office. 39 Controversies how decided. 9 Corruptions in judgment, how punished.
20 Corses not to be prohibited burial. 6 Cozenage how punished. 21
Councillors. vid. Advocates. Councels decrees as laws. 66. Council of Nice.
153. of Antioch. 154. Lateran, of Gangra. and Antioch make Bishops disposers of
Church goods. 194. as also the Toletan, Bracaran, etc. 195 Courts Spiritual
abbridged of what they formerly have had. 114. 115. 146. 147. why first
granted. 117. Court of Chancerie. 275. of Requests. 276 Crimes extraordinary.
19. 20 Criminal matters triable in Ecclesiastical Courts. 48. 115 Cross,
with what ceremonies set up in Churches. 191. used for want of Churches. 197
Curiosity of Schoolmen prejudicial to the Church. 162. 202 Curse, the More
and the Less. 172. The manner of Cursing. 173. The form of the general Curse
with Bell, Book, and Candle. 174 Customs of tything, of Ecclesiastical
cognizance. 147. 148 Cystercians exempted by the Pope. ^00. but compelled by
the Parliament to pay Tithes 143
D
Damages, why not cessed in cases of consultation. 127. treble damages. 156
Deacons, at what age to be ordained. 65 Dead corses not to be injured. 58 Debts
unknown a pretense used by Executors. 264 Debtors not to be Guardians. 59
Decision of controversies how many ways effected. 9 The Decrees, what 74.
their Authors ibid. Decretalls what. 74 Decurio, his office. 27 Dedication of
Churches. 52. 191 Defects, in what manner they may be legally objected. 238.
defects in the Statute how they may be supplied. 259 Defendants office. 79. 80.
He may choose his Court. 119 Degradation of Clerks. 95. 117 Dice play how
provided against. 6 Diffamation, what. 235 in word, writing or deed. ib. of
crimes. 236. 237. of defects. 238 both of Ecclesiastical cognizance. ib. how
punished. 239. 240 Digests, what. 41. why so called. 4. the division of them.
5. and seq. Difference from the Code 32 Dimissorie letters 26 Diocesans right
in Churches. vid. Bishop. Dionysius his head. 171 Discipline. 98. 99 Divine
service not to be disturbed. 66 Division of Parishes. 152. 153. Of Churches
dues. 154 Divorce, what. 9. for what causes. ibid. 55. 83. children after their
parents divorce how to be educated. 62 Doctors precedencie. 106 Dowry of the
first wife not to be bestowed on the second wifes children 51. 263 preferred
before all debts. 61. plea of Dowry. 118 Duties imposed by the Exchequer. 39
Dupleix the historian excuses Martellus fact. 165. defends it. 168
E
Earl Marshall has authority to give arms. 100 Earth Tythe-free. 222
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 35. equally the Kings, as the Temporal. 147.
severally impeached. 115. by praemunire, and prohibitions. 121. 122. in matters
of Admiraltie. 128. 129. of wills. 134. 135. of Tithes. 146. 147, etc. of
waste ground. 223. in cases of diffamation. 237. 238. of bastardie. 243. and
sequent. Ecclesiastical Law. vid. Law, Ecclesiastical persons immunitie 65
Ecclesiecdici, what. 115. 116 K. Edgar's law. 140 K. Edmunds law. 139 K. Edward
the third heir to the Crown of France. 109. Edward the Confessors Laws.
141. Edward the sixth his statute concerning Tithes. 145. now perverted. 146.
and seq. Ejectments in tempests. 90 (...), what, 71 Election of Bishops. 64.
75. 76. of the Pope. ibid. Q. Elizabeth commended. 109. misguided in one
particular. 210 [Elsewhere] in the statute of praemunire how to be understood.
124 Ambassadors. vid. Legates, Ember days, their original and end. 76. 77.
why so called. ib. Q. Emma acquitted by fire Ordeall. 86 Empire an elective
state. 109 Emulation an occasion of prohibitions. 127 Enhansers of the price of
things. 24 Epistle between Pope Mark and Athanasius questioned. 154 (...),
what. 191 Espousals. 82 Esquires, whence their name and title. 107 Eucherius
his vision. 165. what credit to be given to it. 170. 171 Eunuch. makers how to
be punished 67 Exceptions of several sorts. 17. when alleged. ib. Exchequer,
what. 26. the revenues thereof. 37. 38, duties which it imposes. 39 Executors
delay of paying legacies how provided for by the Civil Law. 265 their duty.
ib. injustice in prizing goods. ib. Constantines Law concerning the same. 269,
the remedy thereof. 270. when the Judge may take bond of the Executor. ib. and
271 Expenses of Law recoverable in Ecclesiastical courts. 260 Exemption from
Tithes to whom first granted. 200. how after restrained. ib. Extraordinary
crimes. 19. 20 Extravagants of John the 22. 15
F
Faires, their privileges. 29 Falcidia lex, what. 12. 51 Farmers privileges.
45 Fathers urged for the morality of Tithes. 163. 164 Feciales. 99 Fee-farme,
what. 45 Fees not to be enhansed. 20. 66 Feuds what, 68. their original and
division. ib. their compilers and Etymon. 69. how they may be lost. 72 Fuel
Tythable. 222 Fiction, what. 128. examples thereof. 129 Fire Ordeall 86 Follis
aurea 45 Fonts their original and progress. 176 Force, and force armed. 15.
public and private. 22 Forfeiture of Feuds. 73 Forgeries of several sorts.
23 Founder of a Church, what power he has. 193. 194. 195 Fruits falling in
another man's ground. 16 Fundi limotrophi. 68
G
Gangra Conncell makes B. to dispose of Church goods. 194. Gentlemen. 106. of
how many ranks. 107 Gifts how challengeable. 14, 15. which to be enrolled. 56
Gods love to his Ministers. 119, 120 Gold preferred before other metals. 219
Goths invasion of Italy. 164 Government of women lawful. 109 but not
convenient. 110 Governors of Cities, their office and power. 29. their
election. 53. Governors of Provinces, their directions. 54. 61 Granges. what.
191 Gratian the compiler of the Decrees. 74 Greevances of the Commonwealth not
provided for by the Common Law. 262, 263. and seq. concerning parents. ib. yet
might have remedy from the Civil. ib. concerning Executors. 264. with the
remedy. 265 Gretsers reprehension of Junius. 191 Guardians office. 10, 59
Gynaecocratie lawful. 109
H
Heath grounds. vid. Waste. Henry 4. his Statute concerning exemption of
Tithes. 200. Henry 8. his Statutes concerning Tithes. 143, 144. now perverted.
146, 147. his act of subversion of Abbeyes wherein deficient. 212. and perhaps
therefore punished. 212, 213 Heralds why called feciales. 99 Heretics. 35, 36.
62 Historians, who most creditable, and why. 166 Homage. 69 Honorable places.
45, 46 Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury brought in the division of Parishes.
152, 153 Hospitals of several kinds. 34 Hospitallers exemption from Tithes.
200 Hunting not permitted to Clerks. 85 Husband men's immunities. 43 Second
Husband, in case he defraud the children of the first, what remedy. 268
I
K. James his care over the Church, 211. 213 Jealousy, how to be remedied. 63
Jests how far lawful. 236 Jews ignominies. 84 Immunity from Tithes, why
first granted to religious houses. 188 Impeachment of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, 122. etc. v. Law. how to be releeved. 255 Impediments of
Matrimony. 83 Impossibilities abhorred by the Law. 130 Impropriations why
first granted to Religious Houses, 188. whether by the authority of the Prince,
or Pope, 290. in them some way tolerable, 213. but not so in Lay men, 214. yet
hard to be remedied, and why. ib. Ina's Law concerning Tithes. 138 Incestuous
marriages. 53 Indowments of Bishops wherein they at first did, and now should
consist. 209, 210 Inseudation of Tithes, when it begun. 164, 165 Injunctions,
why so called, 15. in what cases admitted. 14 Pope Innocents restraint of
privileges granted to Religious Orders. 200 Institution, what, 4. the
necessity thereof. 81, 82 Instruments how to be made, 56. Of Dowry. 58
Intelligence betwixt Kingdoms, preserved by the Civil Law. 273 Interpretation
of Laws belongs to the Judges, but more principally to the King, 257, 258. not
to be often varied. 256. want thereof prejudicial to Ecclesiastics. 255
Investiture what. 71 K. John's unjust usurpation, 112. John of Gants plot. ib.
S. John's of Jerusalem that Order exempted from Tithes. 200 Joyntnres not to be
sold. 58 Judges office. 53. to persuade peace. 78. not confound jurisdictions.
158. Interpreters of the Statutes. 255. their favor implored in that point.
257. they have need of two salts. ib. ought to be obeyed. 58. Ecclesiastical
Judges falsely charged with the rejection of pleas in discharge of Tithes. 181.
182 Judgment, civil, criminal, mixed. 6. public. 22. ecclesiastic. 79, 80
Juglers how to be punished. 21 Ivo Bishop of Carnat, Compiler of the Decrees.
74 Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, wherein impeached 121. 122. 146. not to be
confounded with the temporal. 133. 149. 158 Jury of twelve men not requisite
to determine which is barren ground. 227, 228. say nothing but what the Judge
dictates. ib. mostly partial because possible parties. 229 Jus patronatus
what. 196 Justices of the peace, their office. 41, 59 Justinian, why he
compiled the Code. 31
K
Kingdoms indivisible. 113 Kings, their Titles given by the Law. 103. their
supremacy. 104. Fountains from whence is derived Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
as well as Civil. 123. with whom resideth the prime power to interpret
Statutes. 257, 258 Knights of how many kinds. 105. whether they or Doctors to
have precedencie. 106 Knutes Laws. 140
L
Lands of the Church, in what cases they may be aliened, let, or sold. 63. vid.
Church. what Lands may be given by Will 137 Land-markes not to be removed. 21,
22 Lanternes, upon what occasion invented. 197 Lapses, upon what occasion
induced. 199 Lateran Council, when holden, and with what success. 171, 172
Law, what. 2. public, private, of Nature, of Nations, ib. the object of the
Law. 4, 5. the multitude inconvenient. 32. how to be interpreted. 256. without
penalties, of small force. 259. Canon Law, what. 73. excused. ib. how in use
with us. 114, 115. etc. Civil Law, what. 3. most equitable. ib. Division of
it. 4, 5. and seq. how far in use in this Land. 88. and seq. like a sword in
a scabberd. 97. the necessity thereof. 272. For Marine controversies. ibid.
commerce of Princes. 273. punishment of spiritual disobedience. ibid.
Recoverie of Ministers right. ibid. Wills, Weddings, Burials. 274. Cases in
Chauncerie. 275. in the Court of Requests. 276. severally impeached by the
Common Law. 122. in marine matters, 228. in Wills, 134, 135. in Tithes, 146. in
cases of waste ground, 223. of Diffamation, 237. of Bastardie, 243. how it may
be releeved, 255. Common Law, wherein defective, 262, 264. how it may be
supplied, ib. The word [Law] not still taken for the Common Law, 158. Law
Ecclesiastical, 159. animated by the King, 160. not to be confounded with the
temporal, ib. of what antiquity, ibid. wherein abbridged, 121. how to be
releeved, 255. and seq. Saxon Laws, 138, 139, 140. Salick Law refuted. 109.
Law of Laps. 199 Lawyers, why no fees assigned to them, 30. Temporal and
Ecclesiastical. 159 Laymen may not celebrate divine Service, 66. nor hold
Impropriations, 214. when they began to hold Tithes in fee, 162, 163. their ill
will to the Clergy. 198 Lay-patrons, vid. Patron. Leases for how long to be
let. 45. 63 Legacies, when due, 11. how taken away, 12. when to be paid, 51.
for pious uses, 67. unjustly detained under pretense of debts unknown, 264.
what remedy for that abuse, 265. vid. Testaments. Legataries, how defrauded,
and how they may be releeved. 266 Legates, why so called, 28. 40. their
privileges, ibid. usually Civilians. 96 Legitimation of children, 58. how made
amongst the Romans, 246. how with us. ibid. Leige-men. 72 Lent things if
denied, how recoverable. 7 Letters dimissorie. 26 Libell, what, 19. the
Authors and Concealers how punished. ibid. Liberal Sciences. 29 Like Reason,
like Law. 156, 157 Litigious cases what. 62 Lombards, the first Authors of
Feuds. 71 Lucius, first Christian King of England. 142 Lycurgus his
uprightness. 112
M
Mad persons how provided for by the Law. 11 Magdeburgenses vindicated from
mis-allegation. 169 Magistrates office. 28, 29 Mahomet allows Tithes. 175
Majors election, and office. 53 Maintenance of parents and children, how it
might be provided for. 263, 264. and seq. Manner of Tything, how to be
expounded. 180 Manzeres what. 244 March. grounds. 44 Marianus Scotus imperfect.
171 Marine affairs. 88, 89 Mariners privileges. 42 Marriage, what, 9. 55.
within what degrees forbidden, 53. why to Priests, 253. within the year of
mourning punishable, 55. in the husbands absence, 62. impediments of marriage,
83. second marriage prejudicial to the children of the first. 263, 264. 268
Charles Martel the first in the Christian world that violated the right of
Tithes, 164. his fact related at large. ib. 165. how censured by historians,
ib. why denied by some, omitted by some, 166. related by others, 167. and those
Frenchmen, 168. 170. whence they had the story, ib. his fact imitated in
other Nations, 169, 170. the vision concerning him, 165. whether creditable.
170, 171 Martial causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance. 98 Master of the
Soldiers, 45. of Requests, 53. of the Ship. 89 Mercy triumphoth over
judgment. 275 Mere-balkes not to be removed. 21, 22 Metals tytheable. 217.
arguments to the contrary answered. 219, 220. how they are generated, 218. they
may renew, but seldom do. ib. Micha's Disciples. 198 Military discipline. 48
Minerals. vid. Metal. Ministers, at what age to be ordained, 65. vid.
Clerks. Minors estates how to be disposed of. 59 Miracles not so frequent now
as formerly. 171 Monasteries not to be builded without the license of the
Bishop, 51. their privileges, 184. and the bad use of them, 185. the restraint
thereupon. ibid. Monetaries immunitie from service. 43 Money why used. 224
Monks life and conversation. 51. 184. original of cloystered Monks. 187
Mother Church. 176, 177 Mother-Village. 44 Mort-maine, the original of it,
183. in several Nations, 185. whence the name. ib. now not necessary. ib.
Myners immunitie. 42
N
Names not to be altered. 100 Naturales filii, who 244 Navigation beneficial
to the Commonwealth 271. requires the practice of the Civil Law. ib.
Necessity of the Civil Law in this Land. 271 New Years gifts of ancient use.
38 Nicene Canons urged, 153, 154. hardly escaped the fire of the Arrians, ib.
their authority questioned. ib. what exemplary life they require of Monks.
184 Notaries place. 46 Nothi, who, 244. Nothae febres. ib. Natalia, what. 226
Novelles, what. 50 Nundinae, why so called. 29
O
Oaths, of several kinds, 7. of the deceased, when good, 56. Of women
tumblers of no account. ibid, Obligations, how they may be excepted against,
7. how many sorts of them, 17, 18. by words how released. ib. Offenses, public
and private. 18 Officers, how to be chosen. 41 (...) what. 191 Oratories in
private houses. 57 Ordeall fire and water. 86 Order of succession, 63. who may
not take orders. 77 Orders of Monks tythe-free. 200 Ordination of Ministers.
76 Orphans estates ill provided for by the Common Law, 264, 265. but may find
relief at the Civil. 266
P
Pagans, why so called. 215 Pandects what, 4. the division thereof. 5. and seq.
Parents affection to one child how moderated, 61. greevances how to be
releeved. 263 Parishes, their bounds of Ecclesiastical cognizance, 151. the
original of them, 152. 174. the several acceptions of the word. 153
Parliament, of whom it consists, 159. has sole power to reform the
Statutes. 256 Parricides, how punished. 23 Parts, no accessories, 233. similar
and dissimilar. ib. Pope Paschal his privilege granted to religious orders.
200 Stephen Pasquier censured, 165. 166. 170. his mistake in a quotation. 169
Passage-money. 62 Patricii, who. 45 Patrons may present, not ordain Clerks,
57. their power to erect a Church, 191. 193. depends upon the Bishop, ibid.
to endow and fill it, 194, 195, 196. the abuse of their authority, 198, 199.
taken notice of by several Councels. ib. Peers. 105 Pearls, by whom to be
worn. 42 Perpetual right between passengers. 90 Peter Pence, when first
paid. 139 Philosophers, why no stipend allowed to them. 30 Physicians by
Constantine made Earls. 47 Pipin buried with his face downwards. 165 Piracie,
what, 94. only punishable by the Admiral Law. 273 Pirates. 95 Plaintifes
office. 79, 80 Plea of Tenements and of Dowry have been of Ecclesiastical
cognizance. 118 Plough-almes what. 140, 141 Pluralities in what case tolerated,
85. the abuse of plurality of Executors, 269. with the remedy. 270 Poets
denied the privilege of other professors. 40 Popes precedencie, 66. whether
first granters of Impropriations. 190 Popular Actions. 22 Possessorie right
what. 94 Posthorses. 49 Postulation of Bishops, what. 76 Practice of the
Civil Law necessary in this Land, 272. of such cases as are not provided for
by the Common. 262, 263 Prayer and Preaching conferred. 188, 189 Preaching
preferred. ib. Precedencie of States, 104, 105. of Knights and Doctors, 106. of
the Pope. 66 Priests, why called Sacerdotes, 34. why Presbyters, ibid. why
prohibited marriage 253 Prelates excesses. 86 Praemunire what, 122. the
original of it, ib. 125. the little use of it, 123. the Statute expounded, 124.
wrested by our Common Lawyers, ib. in force against Priests and Jesuits. 125
Prenotary, his place. 46 Prescriptions, the kinds and effects of them, 17. for
Laymen to hold Tithes in fee, how ancient, 163. prescription supposes
possession, 216. lies not against a man's self. ib. Presentation originally
the Bishops right, 196, 197. why devolved to lay-patrons, ibid. how abused by
them, 198, 199. and therefore a resumption attempted by the Bishops. ib.
Praetor, who. 45 Primicerius whence. 46 Princes not to be traduced, 85. their
name to be put in all Instruments, 56. their titles and supremacy, 103, 104.
they should befriend the Church, 211. whether the first granters of
Impropriations. 190 Principal what, and what Accessorie. 233 Prison-breakers
how punished. 21 Privileges what, 182. of Religious Persons. 188 Prizing of
goods oft-times partial. 266 Probates of Wills how far effectual. 137 Process
in Ecclesiastical Courts, 78, 79. by Accusation, Denunciation, or Inquisition.
84 Prodigals estates, how provided for by the Civil Law, 268. who so
accounted. 11 Professors excused from services, 40. made Earls, 47 their
stipends. 29 Promises to be kept. 29 Promoters office. 37 Property of things
what, 93. how got. ib. Protocols what. 56 Public works, by whom to be made.
29 Punishment by death fourfold, 25. of soldiers. 99 Pupils estates how to
be ordered during their minority. 9. 10. Purgations Canonical and Vulgar. 86
Purple, a wear peculiar to Princes. 42 Purser of a ship. 90
Q
Queen next in rank to the King. 104 Quotitie of Tithes Moral, 203. not
Judicial. 205
R
Racking, when to be used. 25 Ranks of the Nobility. 104, 105 Receivers of
Thieves how punished. 20, 21 Reformation at the first wherein defective. 212.
Refutatio feodi what. 73 Reliefes of the Civil Law proposed. 255. and seq.
Religious persons of what life they should be. 184 Reprisals whether lawful.
56. how differenced from piracie. 95 Residencie required, 81. except in case of
sickness. ib. Retractation of sentence, within what time it may be made. 37
Rhodians ancient mariners. 90 Right, what, 2. to any thing how gotten. 15
Rolls what they comprehended. 47 Rulers of Provinces, their office. 54
S
Sabbath partly natural, partly positive. 204, 205 Sacraments by whom not to
be administered. 85 Sacred Mysteries not to be celebrated in private. 57 Salick
Law. 109 Salomons Temple. 219 Sanctuary to whom advantageous. 36 Sarum Church,
by whom and how endowed. 190 Satisdation what. 94 Saxon Laws. 138, 139
Schools for Henchmen what. 48 School-mens curiosity, wherein prejudicial to
the Clergy. 162. 202 Sea-affaires determinable by the Civil Law, 88. Sea
common. ibid. Secretaries place. 46 Secundocerius what. 46 Senate of Rome, why
they refused to admit Christ into the number of their Gods. 235 Senators who.
46. 48 Seperatorum seperata est ratio. 222 Sepulchers violated, the punishment.
20 Services of the Commonwealth of three sorts, 28. exemption from them how
procured, ib. services to the Exchequer, 39. who exempted from personal
services, 40. Divine Service not to be disturbed, 66. not celebrated by Laymen.
ib. Soldiers, privileges, wages, discipline, etc. 48, 49. they only permitted
to carry weapons, 54. their diet and apparel, 98. their faults. ib. and
punishments. 99 Son not to succeed the Father in Spirituals. 76, 77 Spousals
what. 9. Spurii who. 244 Stage Players incapable of some immunities. 43 Star
in Cassiopea prodigious. 170 Statute of Praemunire expounded. ^24. those
concerning matters Ecclesiastical imperfect, 127. of Henry 8. and Edw. 6. how
to be interpreted, 256. how supplied, 258, 259. The word [Statute] does not
infer Temporal cognizance, 158. Statute of Mortmaine, why made, and by whom.
183 Stealing before the Will be proved, how punished, 21. of Children or men,
24. of women. 67 Stellionatus crimen. 21 Stipends for liberal Sciences, 29.
none for Lawyers, nor Philosophers. 30 Strangers how to be entreated. 60
Students excused from personal services. 40 Subjects of how many sorts. 27
Subsidies. 38 Successions, 63. 71. in Spirituals 76. of great personages, 109.
whether the Son borne before his Father was King, ought to succeed in the
Kingdom, 111. whether the Grandchild or second brother be to succeed. 112
Suerties not to be sued before the principal. 51 Suertiship of women how to be
releeved. 7 Suing out ones Liverie. 71 Superimpositions when used. 38
Supervisors of Wills whereto useful. 270 Surveyors office. 44 Swearing,
capital, 59 Sylva caedua in the Statute canvassed. 229, 230 Symonie. 64. 84.
T
Templars exempted from Tyth-paying. 200 Tenth Number, the perfection of the
rest, 203. whether a Figure of Christ. 204 Tenure, vid. Feud. For term of life
or years, 70. perpetual. ib. Testaments by whom they may be made, 11. a
privilege granted by Princes, 265. The kinds, proof, and publication of them.
11. if doubtful, how to be understood, 12. though imperfect, yet stand good
for Children, 61. how much may be bequeathed, 12. how many witnessesrequired
to the making. 135. when lands are devised. 137. a part of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, 134. but in part rent from it. 135 Testimony of one witness
dangerous. 136 Theft, the definition, division, and punishment of it. 18
Theodosius, Author of the Statute of Mortmaine, 183. and therefore disliked by
^erome and Ambrose. ib. Tiberius requesteth that Christ might be admitted into
the number of the Roman Gods. 235 Timber by nature Tytheable, but exempted by
Statute. 230 Titles which have been triable in Ecclesiastical Courts, 114.
115. 116. etc. Title of lands varieth not with the accidents. 227 Titulus what.
152 Treason, what. 22 Treasure found, to whom it belongs 38 Treasurer of the
Chamber. 47 Treaties betwixt Princes to be made by Civilians. 96 Treble damage,
of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 156 Toll-gatherers exacting how to be
punished. 14 Trees, when and why they may be lopped by another than the owner,
16. loppings of great trees tythable. 229. cutting of another man's, how to be
punished. 19. 231. Tribonian, a famous Lawyer. 32 Tribute. 31 Actions of
Trover, what. 128 Truce at sometimes more especially to be observed. 78 Tumult
how punished. 19 Turves tythable, 221. arguments to the contrary answered. 222
Tutelage, the several kinds thereof. 9 Tutors, 9. how distinguished from
Guardians. 10. what required of them. ibid. and 59 Tithes, matters of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, 138. 143. 148. and real composition for them, 201,
202. by the Laws of our Saxon Kings, 138, 139, 140. etc. How they stood after
the Conquest, 142, 143. in what case triable in a Temporal Court, 144. the
forfeitures for non-payment; 156, 157, the curse therefore, 172, 173. their
different State under the Law and Gospel, 161. with the causes thereof, 162.
and seq. when they came in use among Christians, 161. part of the Moral Law,
163. 203. and how far. 205. the ground of the precept, 180. first invaded by
Charles Martell, 164. and in imitation of him by others, 169, 170. allowed by
Mahomet, 175. and strictly exacted in Primitive times, 173. 174. to be paid
to the Baptismall Church, 176. 214. 215. the contrary, why not reformed in the
Lateran Council, 178, 179. not to be detained by a Bishop though Founder of a
B^nefice, 206. nor were his Primitive Endowments, 209. of Mineralls due, 217.
of Turves, 221. of boughs of great trees, 229. If in no Parish, to whom they
belong, 208. manner of tything, how to be understood, 180. prescriptions
against tithes, 179. 206. 207. Immunitte from tithes, why first granted to
Religious Houses, 188. wherein Religious Orders were exempted from paying
tithes, and of what things. 200. many Lands pretended tyth-free by that
exemption, which are not. 201
V
In the Vacancy, who anciently had the fruits. 217 Valvasores majores, and
minores, who. 73 Vassailes of of how many kinds. 72. 73 Villages converted
after Cities. 215 S. Vincents Crow. 170 Universities permitted the use of the
Civil Law. 87, 88 Pope Urbans legantine. 193 Use of money 224 Usurers infamous
42 Usury, the kinds of it. 8. how much to be taken of a husbandman. 55.
cease when it has doubled the principal. 64. is an accessorie to the
principal, 233. Sea usurie, 62. greater then Land usurie, and why, 9
W
Waste ground of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. 223. 224. and seq. Water courses
not to be altered. 16 Widows how to distribute their goods, 51. such as live
riotously, how provided for by the Civil Law. 269 Wills, vid. Testaments.
William the Conqueror, his care for Church right. 141. 142 Winchester Church,
how anciently endowed. 199 Witnesses, what manner of men, 61. may be compelled
to appear, 79. how many required to a Will, 134, 135. of one man dangerous,
136. false witnesses. 24 Wives, in what cases they may be beaten 62 Women in
case of suretyship, how to be releived, 7. not endowed 57. may be Tutors. 61
Wood taken for all kind of fuel, 223. great woods in what cases tyth-free,
229. 230. and why, 231. wood and timber how distinct. ibid. Words diffamatory,
how punishable. 236. vid. Diffamation, Wrackes what, and how to be disposed of.
92, 93.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 36. lin. ult. for, read from. p. 38. (...) p. 107. l. 8. (...). r.
(...), r. that. p. 177. l. 24. capellas, r. capella. p. 191. l. ult. in r. an.
(...) 4. (...). r. (...). p. 212. l. 1. is r. it. p. 224. l. 15. (...) r. out
in these. p. 231. l. 8. other, secundum. r. other, but secundum. p. ibid l. 9.
but in that r. in that. p. 233. l. 30. (...). r. (...).


