THE DOVE-LIKE SOVLE.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE PRINCE'S HIGHNESS AT WHITE HALL, Febr. 19. 1618.

BY I. R. D. D. and one of his MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

BERN. epist. 341. Nonne and aviculas levat, non onerat pennarum, sive plumarum
numerositas ipsa? Toll eas, and reliquum corpus pondere suo fertur ad ima.

THE TEXT.
PSALM 55.6. Quis det, or, Quis dabit mihi pennas, sicut columbael tunc
volabo, and requiescam.

Oh that I had, (or, who will give me) wings like unto a dove! then would I
fly away, and be at rest.


KIng David, though for innocence not only a Dove, PRAEFACE.
but the Phaenix of Doves, and so a notable Type of Christ, upon whom the Holy
Ghost descended in the shape of a Dove; Matt: 3: 16.
() yet was his whole life nothing else, but Bellum sine inducijs, a perpetual
persecution without intermission.

Such was also the portion of Christ the Lord of David: And such, to the
world's end, will ever be the lot of those that are the heritage of Christ.

My Text import's no less; which, taken Historically, is the voice of David
pursued by his enemies; Prophetically, the voice of Christ, at his passion;
Mystically, the voice of that Mystical Dove, the innocent Soul, surrounded and
environed with the snares of Death; Even Generalis quaedam querela, ( says
Pelican) a general complaint of the malice of the wicked persecuting the
righteous. Pelican: in loc:


For (ahlas that so it should be! yet so it is)

Non rete accipitri tenditur, Ter: Ph^^.
neque miluio, Qui male faciunt nobis; illis qui nil faciunt, tenditur. The net
is not pitched for ravenous birds, as are the hawk, and the kyte, but for
poor harmeles birds, that never meditate mischief. And,

Dat veniam corvis, Iuvenal:
vexat censura columbas. The Dove shall surely be shot at, when the carrion
Crow shall go shot-free.

It will then be no news unto you, that here the faithful Soul, the Spouse,
the Love, the Dove of Christ, when trouble and heavines take hold upon her,
and the floods of Belial compass her about, Tanquam avis e cave a liberari
cupit, Austin: de opere Monach:
( as St Austin speaks of the cloistered Monks in his time) Desires like a
Bird to be loosed out of her cage. Or, that, as Jonas ( by interpretation a
Dove) after three days and three nights imprisonment in the whales belly,
could not but long after his enlargement; Ion: 1: 17:
() So the Doue-like Soul of man, when not three, but many days, and months,
and years, she has been imprisoned in the body, has a longing desire to be
enlarged, and to fly unto God that made her; And so mourning like a Dove in
devoute supplication, and mounting like a Dove in divine speculation, breake's
forth into these sad elegies; Oh that I had wings! and, Ahlas, that I have not
wings! Woe is me, Psalm: 120: 4.
that I am constrein'd to dwell with Mesech, and to have mine habitation among
the tents of Kedar. Psalm: 42: 1.
Like as the Heart desires the water-brooke, so longs my soul to be with
thee, O God. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Phil: 1: 23.


Who will give me wings, etc.

Which is, as if the poor distressed Soul; PARAPHRASE
pathetically bemoaning her forlorn estate of pilgrimage, should thus more
plentifully enlarge herself. My Spouse is already ascended higher than the
winds, than the clouds, than the highest heavens; and I (poor Soul!) as a
husbandles widow, as a tutorles Orphan, as a comfortles exile, am left desolate
and disconsolate in this valley of tears; none to care for me, none to
comfort me, till I have regained him whom I love, and in whom I live. Nay,
(which worse is) this mine own familiar friend, this nearest and dearest
companion of mine, my body, is even a burden unto me. The weight of it, and of
the sins that hang so fast on it, does so clogg and shackle me, so glue and
nail me to the earth, that I cannot raise, or rear up my self toward
heaven. Or let him therefore descend to relieve me, being Filia, Sponsa,
Scror, his Daughter, and Spouse, and Sister; Or let him give me wings,
wherewith I may ascend to him, Psalm. 91: 4.
under the shadow of whose wings I shall surely rest in safety.

I must confess, it was the very bitterness of extremity that first compelled me
to love him, though of himself no less lovely than Love it self. It was the
sharp sauce of afflictions that gave edge to mine affections, and sharpened
mine appetite to that sweet meat that endures to everlasting life. But now,
having had some little fore-taste of him, I am even in an holy ecstasy, Plaut:
so ravished, so transported with a fervent desire of him, and of his presence,
that, Vbi sum, ibi non sum; vbi non sum, ibi animus est, Where I am, there I am
not; and where I am not, there am I. For, Anima est vbi amat, non vbi animat,
Erasm:
The soul is where it loves, not where it lives. Now sigh I not so much for
the praesent dangers I would decline, as because of my absent Love, whom I most
desire.

Who will give me wings! etc.

In the scanning of which verse, ye will observe with me

1 The Efficient, PARTITION.
or Author of these wings, God. Who will give me? Who? that is, who but God? 2
The Matter of the wish; Wings. Who will give me wings? 3 The Form of those
wings; Doue-like. Who will give me wings like unto a Dove? 4 The End Mediate;
Flying. Then would I fly away. 5 The End Vltimate; Resting. And be at rest. 1
Who will give me? There Is Christian Humility. 2 Who will give me wings?
There Is prudent Celerity. 3 Wings like unto a Done? There Is innocent
Simplicity. 4 Then would I fly away. There Is devoute Sublimity. 5 And be at
rest. There Is permanent Security.

1 Who will give me?) Rogat potius, quam interrogat, 1 Quis det For, Quia
dabit mihi*
It Is rather a Request, than a Quaestion; an Optatiue, than an Interrogatiue
phrase of speech. A phrase very frequent in the Old Testament. But I will not
load you with instances. I will quote you only two. The one, Exodus: 16: 3.
out of Exodus 16.3. Quis det mortui essemus! say the Israelites, murmuring
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. Where the Septuagint read it (...),
vtinam! 2 Samuel: 18: 33.
Oh that we had dyed by the hand of the Lord, in the land of Egypt! The other,
out of 2 Samuel 18.33. where David lamenting the death of his son Absolon, cries
out, Quis det mihi, ut pro te moriar! Oh that I had been so happy, as to die for
thee!

1 First then for his phrase, (Quis det!) It Is worth the observing, that he
speaks of God with a Quis. Not with a Quis of curious inquisition after his
Essence, which is unsearchable; but with a Quis of pious admiration, in reguard
of his Power, which is unspeakable. And because there is nothing that he
cannot; but he can whatsoever he will, therefore my Prophet says not, Who can?
but who will give? God, whose Name is WONDERIVL, () Admiratione, Esa: 9: 6.
non ratione excipiendus est: His Essence, and his Power would be admired,
rather than inquired; adored, rather than discussed; lest soaring too-buisily
into so high mysteries with the wings of praesumption, it fare with us, as with
the fly about the cup, or the moath about the candle; the fate of the one being
to be drowned; of the other, to be burned.

2ly, If any shall ask me, Quis est Quis? Who is this Who? Job: 21: 15.
which is all one with that Atheistical demand, Quis est Omnipotens? who is
the Almighty? I will turn him to Dauid's Psalm of Qui's for his answer. Qui
facit mirabilia magna solus. Qui fecit caelos in intellectu. Qui firmavit
terram super aquas; with a number of Qui's besides. Psalm: 135. Chrysostom: in
Psalm: 53.
() That Qui is the Quis that is here meant. St Chrysostom writing upon those
words, Psalm: 53: Quis exurget mecum contra iniustos? says, it is Quasi
perlustrasset omnes creaturas, as if my Prophet had taken a diligent survey of
all the creatures of the world, and finding among them all, none to assist him,
is thereupon feign to fly unto God under the name of Quis.

And in like sort does Ruffinus paraphrase my Text (though applying it to the
resurrection of Christ) O father (says he) raise me up again by thine
almighty power; Ruffin: in l^c:
Nam quis alius praeter te, etc. For who but thou alone is able to give me
wings?

3ly. My Prophet, in this Option, or wish, (Quis det!) reade's us an excellent
Lecture of Humility; to learn us whence these wings are to be had; that they
are not Natiuae, but Donatiuae; we have them not of our selves, but are to beg
them of God by prayer, from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift
comes. Iac: 1: 17: Aust: l: de vit: innocent:
() Semper enim petitur, quod semper optatur; For a Christian wish ( says
Austin) does ever include a prayer. And, Incassum laborat, qui aliunde virtutes
acquirendas putet, quam a domino virtutum, Gregor:
He loses his labor ( says Gregory) who thinks to have the wings of
virtues, unless he have them from the Lord of hosts, the Lord of all virtues.
He it was, that when the Dragon stood before the woman, ready to devour her
child, so soon as she should be delivered, gave wings to the woman to fly
from him into the wilderness. Apoc: 12: 14:
() The fowls of the aer (I grant) are by an Hebraisme called Domini alarm,
Masters of the wings; Ecclesiastes 10: vlt:
() But Dominus alarm, dominus exercituum, the true Lord and Master of the
wings, is the Lord of hosts; Psalm: 60: 10.
() Our winged hosts. For, armies also are said to have Alas, wings; because
the side-parts thereof were so marshalled of old, Vt similitudinem volantis
tota acies haberet, that the whole army had the resemblance of a flying bird.
Insomuch that the Prophet Esaias, Esa: 8: 8:
() speaking of the mighty army of the Kings of Assyria, describes it by this
metaphor, Extensio alarm, the stretching out of his wings shall fill the
breadth of thy land, o Immanuel; that is, the breadth of the land of Judah. He
(I say) that is the Lord of hosts, and so of the wings of hosts, he it is, and
none but he, that is the Lord of the wings, the Doue-like wings of the Soul.
Nay more, Idem dator, and redditor, he is both the giver, and the restorer of
them. St Austin will make it plain; () Quia, si desunt, dat: si ligatae sunt,
soluit: because if the soul want wings, he giue's her wings: Aust: in Psalm:
if her wings he tied, he loses her wings. For, he that loses the wings of
a bird, that are tied; Aut dat, aut reddit illi pennas suas, He either giue's,
or restore's her wings. For, albeit she had wings, yet after a sort she had
them not, while she could not command the use of them. But wings (I am sure)
the Soul has none, nor none can have, either fast, or loose, unless they be
first given her by this Quis, the Lord of the wings. And so, from the Author of
the wings, (God) I come to the Matter of the wish, wings. Who will give me
wings?

The righteous man being in a wonderful straight, 2 PENNAS.
not knowing how, or which way to turn himself, what does he? Does he grow so
malcontent within himself, as in a desperate mood to say, Who will give me
a knife, and I will stab my self? Or, so furiously enraged against his
enemies, as in a bitter pang of impatience, to cry out, Who will give me the
horn of an Unicorn, that I may goare them? Or, the teeth of a Tygre, that I
may tear them? Or, the paws of a Lion, that I may rend them? Or, the Ey of a
Basiliske, that I may slay them? Or, the Head of a Serpent, that I may
maliciously plott against them? No such matter. But, who will give me wings
like a Dove, wherewith I may rid and expedite my self from them?

For, Laert: l: 6: in vit: Diogen:
albeit Plato defined Man, to be Animal bipes, implume, () a two-footed
creature, without feathers; yet may we truly affirm of the devout man, that
he is Animal bipes, bipenne, a two-footed, and a two-winged creature:
Two-footed, in respect of his body; two-winged, in respect of his soul. And in
this sense does Theodorite term him Animal alatum, Theodorie:
a winged creature; Quia quum in terris vt animal versetur, vt avis tamen in
sublime volat, because though his body soiourne here on earth, yet does his
soul, Pie: Mirandul: Orat:
like a bird, soar up to heaven. So does Zoroastes ( in Picus Mirandula)
instruct his Scholars, Animam esse alatam, that the Soul of man is winged; and
that, when those wings fall off, Praeceps fertur in corpus, then she pitcheth
down headlong into the body: but Illis succrescentibus, ad superos revolat:
when they grow out again, then she flies up again. And for the better growth
of their wings, he wishes them, to water them with the waters of life, which
(he tell's them) must be drawn out of the four rivers in Paradise; Pishon,
Gihon, Hiddekel, and Perath, Gen: 2: 11.
by his interpretation, Rectum, Expiatio, Lumen, Pietas: Rectitude of will,
Expiation of work, Light of knowledge, and Piety of devotion.

Mons Dei, mons excelsus; Psalt 68: 15.
() The mount of heaven is a high mount. Vel scalis, vel alis opus est, The
soul must either mount up a Jacob's ladder, Gen: 28: 12.
or else she must have wings to mount her up thither. Wings; whose extension
must be in the longitude of hope; whose expansion in the latitude of love;
whose elevation in the altitude of faith. Wings; ad erigendum, to raise her up
to take her flight: and Ad dirigendum, to direct her flight to the mark: and
lastly, Ad regendum, to steer and guide her course in the way to the mark.

But I shall tell you a wonder. The soul has not 1 pare of wings only, as
have birds; nor 3 pare as have the Seraphins; but 6 pare, Esa: 6.2:
if we will believe the learned.

1 One pare I find in Viegas, () to be Praeteritorum Dolor, and Cautio
futurorum: Viegas in Apoc: 12.
a godly sorrow for sins past, and a wise praevention of future sins; the
two parts of Repentance, which cover the nakedness of the soul, as wings do the
nakedness of a bird's body.

2 Another pare I find in Gerson () to be Spes, Gerson. ser. 58.
and Timor; Hope, and Fear. The right wing, Hope; because of the mercy, and
favor, and bounty of God: the left wing, Fear; because of the misery, and
frailty, and necessity of man. And as a bird (says he) by her wings is kept
from falling to the ground: so the soul, while with these two wings she is
lifted aloft in prayer, is kept from falling into sin.

3 A third pare I find in ( that great Platonic, Marsil. Fici^. l. de
Christian. Relig. praefat, sub i^^^t.
) Ficinus, to be Intellectus voluntatem illuminans, and voluntas intellectum
accendens: Understanding, or Reason illightening the will; and will inflaming
the understanding: Bernard. de verb. Esa. Proph. ser. 4.
Which by devoute Bernard, ( the Father of devotion,) are otherwise termed
Agnitio, and Devotio, Knowledge, and Devotion: Neither of them can sublimate
the soul without the other. Devotion, without Knowledge, being but blind
zeal: and Knowledge, without Devotion, but learned impiety. Both therefore must
Pari gressis in Deum tendere, be yoake-fellowes as it were in the way to God.
For, where the light of intellect is quite put out, as in the Romish Liturgy,
which (forsooth) must be read in an unknown tongue, there what warmth of zeal
can be imparted to the cold affection of the ignorant Idiot? And on the other
side, where there is knowledge without zeal, ( which is not the least blemish
of our English Professors) there may that old taunt be fitly taken up;
Praevolat intellectus, and sequitur tardus, aut nullus affectus: The
understanding flies before, but the affection comes limping a long way after,
if at all.

4 A fourth pare I find in Parisiensis, Gul: Paris: ser: in Aseens: Dom:
() to be Contemptus Mundi, and Amor Caelestis regni: a contempt of the world,
and worldly things, and a desire of heaven, and heavenly things. For, neither
can we be fully weaned from this world, unless we be truly enamoured with that
other world, nor truly enamoured with that other world, unless we be fully
weaned from this world.

5 A sift pare I find in Hugo de S to Victore, Hug: de S: Vict: Iustit:
Monast: ser: 97:
() to be Gemina Charitas, a twofold Love; In Deum: In Proximum, the one,
toward God: the other, toward our Neighbor: because, as a bird is covered
with her wings, so does Love cover a multitude of sins. Iac: 5: 20: Aust:
praefat: in Psalm: 140:
() But, Haec charitas non qualiscunque est, ( says Austin) It Is not every
sick feather of love, that is fit to be stuck in these wings. For first, our
love to God must be such as is God's to us; Voluntary, not Mercenary: and then,
our love to our Neighbors, such as we would wish our Neighbor's should be to
us; sincere, without hypocrisy: Permanent, without uncertainty: and (which must
be the ground of both) Religious, without impiety. For, even the wicked are
leagued and linked together in the streightest bonds of a streined conscience:
and they are said entirely to love one another, impatiently to bear the
absence one of another, exceedingly to delight in the company and conference
one of another. But, Amor iste Tartareus est, This love ( says Austin) is a
hellish, divelish love. Aust: ibid:
Viscum habet, quo deijciat in profundum, non pennas, quibus levet in caelum:
It has in it bird-lime, to catch and cast us into hell, not wings, wherewith
to elevate and lift us up to heaven.

6 The sixth and last pare I find in Petrus Blesensis, Petr: Blesens: ser. 51.
() to be Actio, and Contemplatio, Action, and Contemplations. For, in both
these must a Christian man enterchangeably buisy himself. His whole life must
be as a Jacob's Ladder: Gen: 28:12.
() The foot of it fixed on the earth by Action, but the top reaching up to
heaven by Contemplation. One while he must be Angelus ascendens, an Angel
ascending to the service of God by Contemplation: An other while, Angelus
descendens, an Angel descending to the help of his Neighbor by Action.

The two Maister-feathers, in the wing of Action, are; Obedience in the heart,
to obey what God commands; Psalm: 57: 8.
() and Execution in the hand, to perform what he enioyneth. Psalm: 40: 10.
()

The two Maister-feathers, in the wing of Contemplation, are; A Persuasion of
God's Power, to make us (...), Luc: 20: 36. 1 Timothy: 2: 4.
aequall with the Angels: and a Confidence in his Mercy, that he will have all
men to be saved. ()

Lo; the soul of the righteous has six pare of wings. The first pare, A
godly sorrow for sins past, and a wise praevention of future sins. The
second, Hope, and Fear. The third, Knowledge, and Devotion. The fourth, a
Contempt of the world, and worldly things; and a Desire of heaven, and heavenly
things. The fifth, the Love of God, and the Love of our Neighbor. The sixth, and
last, Action, and Contemplation.

Do ye wonder at this? Aust: in Psalm:
St Austin make's this wonder yet more wonderful. For he says plainly, that
Pennae sunt virtutes, the wings of the soul, are the virtues of the Soul; and
so consequently, the soul has so many wings, as she has virtues. For, it is
not with the soul, as with other winged creatures; of which the Naturalists
observe, that Volatilia imperfecta plures habent alas, quam perfecta: Such as
are imperfit have more wings than the perfect; as, we see, there are certain
imperfit insect flies, that have four, or six wings, whereas birds which are
perfect creatures, have but two. No; the multiplicity of the soul's wings is no
argument of the imperfection, but rather of the perfection of the soul, which
the more virtuous it is, the more perfect it is, and the more perfect it is, the
more eager it is to atteine to the highest pitch of perfection,

But, because Properanti etiam celerit as mora est: He that hasteneth, think's
quicknes it self to be but slacknes; therefore the devoute soul hying and
hastening forward in the way to God, content's not herself with legs; hardly
with wings. For, it is not every wing that will serve her turn: but she must
have either Pennas aurorae, the wings of the morning; Psalm: 139.8.
() whose winged light flies from East to West in an instant, and fills the
whole Hemispheare with her brightness: or else Fennas Columbae, the wings of a
Dove; which are Pernicissimae, vt eam accipiter assequi non possit; () so
admirably swift, Pellicaa: and Emman: Sa:
that she infinitely out-flye's the hawke. So, she summe's not up her wish
with wings; but ( in the third place) she must have wings like unto a Dove. 3
SICVT COLVMBAE.
)

As God, of all the fowls of Heaven, has chosen to himself but one Dove; ()
so the faithful soul, 2 Esdr: 5: 26.
of all the fowls wings, has chosen only the Doves wings. For, not birds of
every feather can reach so high, as Heaven. The soul that will fly thither,
must have not only Pennas, wings; but Pennas, Sicut Columbae, Doue-like wings:
And Sicut, not only Similitudinis, but Aequiparantiae, like them not for show
only, but for use too.

There Is a great family of Sicut's in the world. Many that are only Sicut
collum Columbae, like the Dove in nothing, but in her neck. As that has in it
Colores Iridis, all the colors of the rainbow: so have they colores
veritatis, all the colors of truth and honesty that may be. But, veritas sine
fuco est, true honesty, as it fears, so it loves no colors; because the
more colors, the less honesty.

Said I, in nothing like her, but in her neek? Yes, in her voice too. For, so
is the Church of Rome; having vocem columbinam, but vitam corvinam; Numfred:
confut: Campian: rat: 3.
() the voice of a Dove, praetending nothing but simplicity but the life of a
crow, vivens cadaveribus, living by the death, and downfall of Princes.

Again, There are many that have Pennas, and Pennas Sicut, wings, and wings
like: hut like to what? Not Sicut columbae, like unto a Dove: but

1 Sicut Cicadae, like unto a Grasshopper: Pennas, quibus a terra elevari non
possunt, Gerson: medit: 70: circa Ascens: Dam:
() Wings that cannot lift them up from the earth. Or, if they do, it is but
Per saltum, not Per volatum; they only serve them to hop, not to fly with. No
sooner up from the earth, but by and by down again. Such are they, whose
devotion is soon hott, soon cold again. They could like it well, to go to
heaven Per saltum, as it were at one iump, without more adoo: but Per volatum,
by flying, (by a constant course of well-doing), that is too-laborious for them:
they cannot, they will not endure it.

2 Or, Sicut Milui, like unto a Kyte, Quisursum volat, ut praedam in terra
commodius despiciat; Which mount's high, that he may the better espy a prey
below; upon which he praesently dismount's again, and liue's upon spoil and
rapine, either of live pullen, or of dead carrion. Such are they that make a
goodly show of mortification, of holiness, of retirednes from the world, even as
if they were rapt up into St Paul's third heaven; Yet none, whose Ey, and whose
heart is more firmly fixed upon the world, than theirs.

3 Or, Sicut Falconis, like unto a Falcon; which can find no rest for his
wings, because he is ever buisy in pursuit of a prey. Such are they that
greedily rise by others ruin; of whom the Lord complains, Ier: 2: 34: by a
metaphor taken from birds that steine their wings with prey; Ier: 2: 34:
In alis tuis inventus est sanguis: In thy wings is found the blood of the
souls of the poor innocents.

Or, Sicut Struthionis, like unto an Ostrich, which is a bird-beast; () half a
bird of the aer, Calvin: in Job: 39: 16: and Aquin 12a: q. 102: art: 6.
and half a beast of the earth: and he has such a weighty body, that he
cannot mount up to fly aloft; but flickereth in such-wise, as he cannot be out
gone. Such are those holy-vnholy worldlings, that will needs mingle heaven and
earth together; that will seem to have their conversation in heaven, when yet
their affections weigh them down to the earth; that (contrary to the Apostle's
rule, 2 Timothy: 2: 4:
2 Timothy: 2:) will Deo militare, and saeculo se implicare: be God's soldiers,
and the world's solicitours. Nay, Matt: 6: 24.
( contrary to our Sauiour's rule, Mat. 6: will Deo and Mammonae servire,
divide their service betwint God and Mammon.

5 Or, Sicut Pavonis, like unto a Peacock, whose pleasant wings, Job: 39: 16.
( as the holy man Job call's them) more pleasant to others, than profitable to
himself, are more for ostentation, than for use. Et dumpluma^ ostentat,
Fulgent: Mythol:
posteriora turpiter nudaet, says Fulgentius; and whiles he spreade's out his
gaudy plumes, he displaye's the ouglines of his hinder-parts. Such are our
Angelical Gospellers at this day; who yet differ from the Peacock in this,
that whereas the Peacock is said to houe Argus his Eyes in his tail, they (it
should seem) have them in their heads. Else, how could they espy so many
superstitious obliquities in our Church, where our Eagle-eyed Praelates can see
none? These men, while they spread out their gay plumes, (Iactantiam in
verbis, arrogantiam in factis) while they simper it devoutly, and yet rail
Iesuitically against Church, and State; while they hear Sermons, pray, give
alms, make a sour Lenten-face ( all, to be seen of men, Matt: 6: 5.
Matt: 6: only, they love not to be seen to fast, but with full bellies) what
do they but show the ouglines of their hinder-parts? bewray the fearefulnes of
their later end?

6 Or, Sicut Sturni, like unto a Stare; which first suck's up the pigeon's
eggs, and then flies away. Such were the thieuish Monks in St Austin's time,
whom he thus derideth; () O si illis Dominus pennas daret, Austin: de opere
Monach: c: 23.
vt tanqua^ sturni fugarentur! O that they had wings, that they might be chased
away like stares! And such are the thieuish Jesuits and Seminaries at this
day, who creep into widow's housen, and lead captive simple women laden with
sin, as the Apostle speake's, 2 Timothy: 3: 6.
2 Timothy: 3: and when they have so done, they are gone; like that old Seminary (
even the Father of Seminaries) the Devil, Qui super seminavit, and abijt: ()
who, Matt: 13: 25.
when he had sowed tares among the good corn, went his way. Of them I will not
say, as St Austin of the Monks, O si illis Dominus pennas daret! but, Praised
be the Lord: for he has heard the voice of my humble petitions, Psa: 28: 7.
Iunij 14: 1624.
O si illi Domino Regi paenas darent, ut tanquam sturni fugarentur! O that my
Lord the King would give yet (if it may be) some stricter order, for the
banishing of these egg-sucking stares out of the Doue-coate of our Church!
otherwise likely, within a while, to become a Cage of unclean birds; a place
for Zijm and Ohim, Apoc: 18.2. Esa: 34: 11.
the Satyrs, and the Scritche-owles of Rome to lodge in.

7 Or, Sicut Anseris, like unto a Goose; whose wings are but of little use, save
only to make pens with. Such are that rabulous rabble of Romish Rabsakehs:
(Stapleton, Parsons, Becanus, Tortus, and other birds of the same feather) set
to keep the Capitol of the Church of Rome, and with the gaggling noise of
their scribbling Goose-quills, to give warning of whatsoever hostile
impressions. With them they daily make flying books; like Zacharie's Volumen
volans; his flying book of curses, Zach: 5.) Flying? Zach: 5: 1.
I might have said, Lying books, that spare neither King, nor Kaesar, that is
against them.

8 Or, Sicut Vespertilionis, like unto a Batt; which ( with the adulterous ey,
Prou: 7: 9:
Prou: 7:) watches for the twilight. Such are our Aequivocal Protestants, who
love the twilight of truth, better than the noone-light; whose Religion may
well enough be declined with the article (Hoc) for it is of the Neuter gender;
Pli: l: 35: 6: 9.
Not much unlike him ( in Pliny) whose picture was so ambiguously drawn by
Polygnotus Thasius a c^nning Painter, that it was doubted, Ascendentemne
cumclypeo depinxisset, an descendentem: whither he had painted him climbing
upward, or going downward with his shield. For, so cunningly do these
Vtrinquet aries carry their shield of faith, ( as the Apostle call's it, Ephesians:
6.16:
Ephesians: 6:) that it justly may be doubted, whither it be to defend Us, or our
Adversaries. They have one foot within thy gates, O Jerusalem! another within
the gates of Babylon: One, within thy Church, O England! another within the
Church of Rome: One wing to fly to us: and another, to fly from us.

9 Or, lastly, Sicut Icari, like unto Icarus in the Fable; who for want of
better, got him Alas cereas, wexen wings, which so soon as they were melted
with the heat of the Sun,

Icarus Icareis nomina fecit aquis; Ovid.
Down come's Icarus into the Icarean Sea, and becomes (if I may so speak) a
Godfather to the Sea that Christened him. Such are those Mountebanke- Divines,
who sometimes fly aloft to high place, not Alis scientiarum, with the wings of
knowledge; but, Alis diuitiarum, with the wexen wings of their riches: For, as
riches make themselves wings, and fly away, ^rou: 23: 5.
() so do they also make wings for those that have them (Icarean, wexen wings;
even of the wexe of the King's Broad Seal) wherewith they mount them aloft to
praeferment.

But, (beloved) it is none of these SICVT'S will serve the turn; Nor Sicut
Cicadae, wings like a Grass-hopper; or like a Kyte; or like a Falcon; or like
an Ostritch; or like a Peacock; or like a Stare; or like a Goose; or like
Icarus; ( these are Ala malae, sorry wings to soar with;) but Sicut Columbae,
wings like an innocent Dove, wherewith to fly from such wings as these. They,
they be the wings, which the righteous soul so much desires. For, wisdom (
with her retinue of graces and virtues) will not enter In malevolam animam;
into any but an innocent soul. () It Is therefore our Sauiour's advise to his
Disciples, Sap: 1: 4: Matt: 10: 16.
() Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves: Wise as Serpents, Vt antiquo
Serpenti resistatis; that ye may be able to resist that old Serpent, the
Devil, and innocent as Doves, Vt Columbae, spiritui Sancto, placeatis; that ye
may please the holy Ghost, who came down in the form of a Dove. He would have
them to be Vt Columbae sine fell, Matt: 3: 16:
as Doves without gall or bitterness; but not like Ephraim, Ruffin: in loc: Ose:
7: 11.
Ose: 7: Vt Columba sine cord: as a Dove deceived, without heart. The Devil is
a winged Serpent, swift to make after you. It is then but needful, that ye be
winged Doves, swift to fly from him. (...): The wings of the Dove ( says
Suidas) are the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost; the wings, Suidas.
that make the godly ( yea, though they have lain among the potts, as being
black with afflictions) to be Sicut pennae Columbae deargentatae, Psalm. 68.13:
Psalm: 68: as the wings of a Dove that is covered with silver, and whose
feathers are like yelow gold; that is, right dear and precious in the sight of
God. These wings till we have obtained of God by prayer, fly we cannot: but
when once we have obtained them, then we may, and must fly; which is my fourth
point. 4 TVNC VOLABO.
TVNC VOLABO, then would I fly away.

No sooner were the creples legs restored unto him by Peter, Act: 3: 8.
but he walked; () So; no sooner must we have wings given us by God, but we
must fly. For, what are we the better to have wings, if we use them not? Or,
how do we use them, if we fly not with them? For, a wing, ( say the Greeks) is
called (...), quasi (...), of (...), to fly. And (...), Plato.
says Plato, the use and office of a wing, is to heave up that which is heavy
toward heaven.

The Soul then that wilbee Avis Paradisi a bird of that heavenly Paradise,
must be not only Pennata, but Volatilis too, she must not only have wings,
but she must fly. So shall she be sure to have the comfortable gale of God's
Spirit to further her, as birds fly best, when they have the wind with them. I
say, she must have wings, not only Ad velandum, to cover her nakedness, but Ad
volandum too, to lift up her sin-bred weightines; Wings, Quibus levet se supra
se ( as Bernard speake's) wherewith she may lift up her self above her self;
Bern: Austin: de verb: Apost: ser. 24.
Wings, Quas dum portat, portatur: which while she carries here on earth,
herself is by them carried up to heaven; Wings; that she may Volare, not
Conniti; (...), not (...), fly, not flicker, and flutter to no purpose; like
young calow chickens, whose wings are not yet grown. And again; She must
Volare, not Humi reptare: fly, not creep upon the ground, by setting her heart
upon earthly things; like worms, and serpents, which go upon their breast and
belly. Gen: 3: 14.
()

But, as our wings are not material wings: so neither must our flight be a
bodily flight; lest it fare with us, as with King Bladud the builder of Bath,
who (as our English Chronicler report's) after many years study at Athens,
St^nw Chronic:
and 20 years reign here in England, brake his neck, Egesup: l: 3: destr:
Hieros: c: 2.
while ( Simon Magus-like) he attempted to fly in the aer.

No; our flight must be a spiritual, not a bodily flight. But, whence? and
whither must we fly? Whence? but a solicitudine saeculi? from the turbulent
cares of this world? Whither? but Ad solitudinem cali? to the sweet repose of
a better world? Whence? but Ab hominibus abhominabilibus? Psalm: 57: 5. Psalm:
18: 2.
from men that are abominable in their doings? Whither? but unto God, who is
fugientibus refugium? a refuge for all them that fly unto him? And wisdom it
shall be for us to fly unto him, since from him fly we cannot, Psalm: 139: 8:
whithersoeuer we fly.

This (beloved) should teach us sublimity in our flight; not to fly low and
close to the ground, like swallows against a storm; but to raise our flight to
a high pitch, even as high, as the most High; as did Moses when he saw him who
is invisible. For, Heb: 11: 17.
Men's quavis ave levior, cum Deus pennas aptarit, praetervolat montes, Chrisest.
says Chrysostom: The soul, when God has once furnished her with wings,
flye's, lighter than any bird, over the highest mountains. Idem hom: 16: in
ep: ad Heb:
And so (as the same Father sweetly elsewhere) Vt Deus in caelo dicitur, and
tamen est in terris; ita nos in terra, and tamen in caelo sumus: As God is
said to be in heaven, and yet is also here on earth; so we that are here on
earth, are yet also in heaven.

But, as the Fowler has many wiles, wherewith he beguile's the seely bird: so
the Devil, who is Aueeps, and proditor animae; a cunning fowler, and a
pestilent traitor to the soul, has many means to hinder her flight to
heaven.

1 Now he raises up a tempest of tribulation against her, which so clott's,
and clogg's, and praegravate's her wings, that she becomes (as Gerson
speake's) Similis passerculo compluto; Gerson.
like a weather-beaten sparow, whose wings are so wett, he cannot fly.

2 Now he lure's her unto him, with the sweet baits of the flesh.

3 Now he seeke's to catch her in the pitfall of concupiscence.

4 Now to entangle her with the curious networke of pride.

5 Now to inviscate her with the bird-lime of covetousness. For, Amor rerum
terrenarum, viscum est spiritualium pennarum: The love of earthly things (says
Austin) is as bird-lime to our spiritual wings. Aust: de verb: Dom: ser: 33.
Behold, no sooner can thou covet, but thou art caught. Ibid:
Quando volabis, vbi vere requiescas, quando hic, vbi male haesisti,
requiescere voluisti? O when will thou fly thither, where thou may rest
indeed, seeing thou desire to rest here, where thy feathers are thy fetters?
For, Ligatae pennae onus faciunt, as the same Austin elsewhere; Aust: in Psalm:
Though as good no wings, as lame wings, yet as good lame wings, as limed
wings; because the wings of a bird, when they are bird-limed, are even a burden
unto her; which yet, otherwise, serve Ad elevandum, ad alleviandum; not only:
to lift her up, but to lighten her.

6 Now he lett's fly at her with his feathered bird-bolts of vanity; and with
them indeed, most commonly, he kill's the bird in the Ey. Ier: 9: 21.


7 Now he privily shoote's at her with the hand-gun of: Atheism; and so, Tit:
1: 16. Psalm: 14: 1.
plott's as it were a powder treason against her, and against her Maker, to
blow them up (if it might be) at one blow.

8 Now he compasses her about with the snares of death; and laye's them so
thick, Psalm; 18: 3.
she can hardly escape them. snares of prosperity, and snares of adversity;
snares by foes, and snares by friends; snares in bed, and snares at board;
snares at home, and snares abroad; as if the whole world were nothing but
snares.

Pighius in Themide.
9 Nay, what will ye say, if as the Romans painted (...), victory without
wings; () so the Devil would have (...), the soul to be without wings? If, as
they clipped the wings of victory, that she might never fly from them to their
enemies; so he clip the wings of the soul, that she may never fly from him to
God, his greatest enemy?

All these (ye will grant me) are strong impediments to our flying. Yet from
all these shall we easily fly, if we pray, Quis det! who will give me wings,
that I may fly! Or, if, being ensnared, we pray again, Quis det! that is, Quis
reddat! Who will loose me! who will render me my wings, that I may fly! Fly,
and exercise my self in flying! because ( as the Proverb is) Avis volans non
timet retia: The flying bird feare's not the net. It Is neither ginne, nor
gunne, nor bird-bolt can reach us, if we fly so high as heaven: Which, what is
it, but to fly from danger to safety? from dolor to joy? from labor to rest?
To REST; which is my fifth, and last point; being the end of the former end of
our wings, which was flying; and shall be the end and vp-shot of my praesent
discourse. 5 ET REQVIESCAM.
And that both you, and I may the sooner be at rest, ye shall seem make such
haste to fly over it, as if I were Alipes, wing-footed, with Mercury; nay, as
if I had Mercury, or quick-syluer in my wings. Et requiescam, and be at rest.

1 The Method (ye see) is; first VOLABO, and then REQVIESCAM; Flying, first;
and then Resting; the labor of flying being the highway to rest; and rest the
undoubted reward of that labor. For, as in Natural Philosophy; Motus meta,
quies; Rest is the end of motion; And, in Civil affairs; Motion, the way to
promotion: So, in Divinity, St Paul must Sequi, before he can Assequi; follow,
before he can comprehend, Phil. 3. And here, Phil: 3: 12.
we must Volare, before Requiescere; fly, Austin.
before we can rest. For, ( as St Austin says well) Cum audis Deum requievisse
post opera, frustra speras requiem, nisi post labores: Seeing ye hear, that
God rested not, till after his six days works, in vain shall ye hope for
rest, but after labor.

Here then must we have (...) poenitentiae, our six-dayes work of Repentance,
which is our flying to God, if hereafter we will have (...), a Sabbath of rest.
() Nay, here must we have our Quadragesima, Hebr: 4: 9,
our Lent of Sorrow for our sins, if hereafter we will have a Quinquagesima, a
Pentecost, a Iubilee of joy, and rest. To be short; here must we have, as has
the Dove, and as had Doue-like Ezechias, Esa: 38: 14.
() Gemitum pro cantu, mourning in sted of singing, if hereafter we will have,
as have the Seraphins, () Cantum pro gemitu, Esa: 6: 3.
singing in sted of mourning.

2 Again; In that the afflicted soul here prays unto God, for wings,
wherewith she may fly unto him, and rest; we are taught, that there is no true
rest, but in God. It Is a lesson, which our Savior himself teaches; Io.
16.33. In me pacem, in mundo pressuram; Io: 16: 33.
In me ye shall have peace, in the world ye shall have affliction: There is
Tempestas in imo, tranquillitas in summo; All storm here beneath, all calm
there above. Whither then (think yel) is better, or more optable, to live in
perpetual storms here beneaths or in a perpetual calm there above? To rest in
continual fear of manifold dangers and distresses? or, to rest secure under
the wings of God's protection, under which there is health? Malach: 4: 2. In a
word, Malach: 4: 2.
with Noah's crow, to glutt our selves with the carrion-delightes of the flesh,
floating in the deluge of this world, even till we drown our selves in
perdition, never caring to return again to the Arc? Or, with Noah's Dove,
Gen: 8: 8.
tired with fluttering abroad ou^ of the Arc, and finding no rest for the sole
of h^^ foot elsewhere, to retire back into the Arc of heaven? Fly we then to
the windows of heaven, as did Noah's Dove to the window of the Arc; the God,
the true Noah ( which signifies Rest) may put forth his hand to take us in:
And, with the Dove (...) Cant: 2: frequent we Poramina petrae, Cant: 2: 14.
the hoale^ (...) the rock, by the frequent meditation of the bleeding wounds
of our blessed Savior, the Rock of our sal^^tion. Then may we sweetly sing
with our Princl^ Prophet, Psalm: 124: 6.
Psalm: 124: Our soul is escaped, even as a bi^^ out of the snare of the
fowler; the snare is broken as we are delivered. Yea, then, and never till then
(...) we merrily sing a Requiem to our soul, Psalm: 116: 7.
Psalm: 116: (...) vertere in requiem tuam, anima mea; Turn again t^ thy rest,
o my soul, for the Lord has rewarded the^ He has already in part rewarded
thee with a spir^tual rest, by giving thee wings to fly from sorrow (...)
heavines, and shall hereafter reward thee to the (...) with an aeternal Rest,
Matt: 8: 11.
when thou shall (...) sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the ^^dome
of God; where sorrow and heaviness shall fly from thee; and where thou shall for
ever celebrate a Sa^bath of rest; Esa: 66: 23.
even Sabbathum ex Sabbatho () Sabbath after Sabbath, Sabbath upon Sabbath, to
the Lord (...) that Sabbath, Even to God the Father, God the Son and God the
holy Ghost, one thrice holy, blesse^ and undivided Trinity, To whom in persons
(...) in essence one, be a scribed all Might, Majesty; and Dominion both now
and for evermore, AMEN

FINIS.

