A Confutation Of the ten great plagues, Prognosticated by JOHN DOLETA from
the Country of Calabria, to happen in the year of our Lord, 1587.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre.

The Epistle to the Reader.
NO marvel (friendly Reader) though predictions Astrologicall are at these
times and seasons, so little esteemed or nothing regarded, considering that the
impudency of most writers herein is such, that to gain them a credit, or get
them a name by writing, they force not what they put in print, as appeared by
the publication of a work, a few years last past, concerning this matter and
is at this present especially to be seen, by the late jest of Doleta, sent
from Calabria: so far from any grounds Astrologicall, as the same seems
merely prophetical, and therefore doubt not but that the Author will prove
himself Ex numero Prophetarum Achab: whose follies and fantasies, if I happily
disprove (as the fruits of an imaginary head and idle brain) I trust you will
somewhat bear with me therein, for that coming lately Ex Anglia, and holding
of S: George, I could not but encounter with the Dragon of Calabria, hoping
that the only mighty will give the victory to the verity.

Thine to use, T. R.

A Confutation of the ten great Plagues and Calamities prognosticated by JOHN
DOLETA, from the Country of Calabria.
FOr as much as this matter touching the end and consummation of the world
shortly to happen, has been not long since amply handled, and sufficiently
debated: and of other thoroughly answered and confuted: I think it needless to
spend any time upon Doleta, concerning the same, and so much the rather for
that he neither shows reason of his own, or auethoritie of others, for ye
maintenance thereof, but barely says (if you please to credit him) that ye best
Astronomers of Alexandria, Spain, Italy, and Grecia, are of the same mind and
opinion with him using the writers of the said places like Mummers in a mask
rather to make a show, then to speak a word, in that he neither names the
said Authors who they are, nor quoteth their testimony what it is: but they
that are hitherto known to have written thereof, utterly disagree and descent
from Doleta, in the determination of the said fatal or Climactericall year,
they accompting the same to be in 1588. but he in 1587. and neither of them
with any great reason for the maintaining thereof, for when their reasons are
at the best, they are but Sortilegious, Arithmeticall, and Pithagoricall:
rather then Natural, Philosophical, or Astronomicall, depending Ex septenario
and nouenario numero, and ex numerorum paritate and imparitate, wherein some of
the fonder sort, have reposed such confidence, that they thought it very
material (having occasion to use Physic) rather to take five pills then
four, seven then six, and think that the foure-leaued grass, ratione
numerorum, should be good for the quartaine ague, or as a three-leaued grass
for a tertian, and sic de caeteris: which opinions for that they are most
childishe and ridiculous in the judgment of the learned, I need no longer
refutation thereof, but will proceed to the answering of Doleta his fatal
predictions, as touching the ten great plagues, or calamities like to happen
(as he says) in the said year, foreshowen by a Star (as he says) seen
in Calabria: which how true it was, the man and matter will sufficiently
declare. For admitting it to be the fourth Star by him seen, then must it
of necessitye follow, that either there were three other therewith, or seen
before the same, which doubtless were of such small light and bigness, as they
could not hitherto be discerned of any except of Doleta who happily saw
further into a millstone then an other man, else was it the fourth of the nine
sorts of Comets (if so be there were any) remembered of the learned in their
works whose names are these following, Veris Cenaculum Partica, Miles, Dominus
Asconae, Matutina, Argentum, Rosea and Nigra, the fourth whereof being Miles
(construing his meaning to the best) could not be of much less biggenes then
the Moon, as Guido alleging Ptholomy, thus writes thereof, Cometa illa, que
dicitur Miles, est de natura veneris, and est magna, admodum Lunae, and habet
radium longum and crines similiter, etc. And therefore of sufficient lighr and
biggenes to be seen of other men as well as of Doleta, and to other Countries
as well as to Calabria, had there any such appearance been. And before the
prediction thereof, it had been first requisite he should have mentioned when
it first began to appear, in what Asterisme and constellation was his apparent
and true place, with what sign and degree it made his reuolucion, what his
Altitude Meridian, his right Assention, what Paralax it had, what Circle it
described, what distaunce it had from the earth, the bigness of his Diameter,
the content of the Solid, the length of the Tail, which way it was extended:
and lastly how long it was seen, and when it went out, which if he had done (as
other learned men have heretofore upon ye sight of a Comet) the^ would I have
said that he had proceeded orderly and like a scholar, and have been ready to
have given the better credit to the rest.

But to the first where he says, In the year 87. when the Moon shall be in a
watery sign, that the world is like to be in danger etc. And the Sun shall be
covered with a Dragon, from five a clock in the morning, till nine, and will
appear like fire, therefore it is not good for any to behold the same, least
unhappily he may lose his sight.

The Moon to be in a watrie sign is nothing marvelous, since that in each
Lunation, which is the space of twenty eight-daies, she thrice passes
thorough watrie signs, making in the same no Deluge, nor working no such
effect, when as the rest of the Planets were placed in the like signs with
her, a thing happening not long since, considering that the watrye Trigon or
triplicitie is worn, his force decayed, and ready to make an end, and
begins to yield over to the fiery triplicitie, at hand to enter etc. And to
the rest, that the Sun shall be covered with a Dragon, if he understand by the
Dragon, Caput, or Caudam Draconis Lunae, the learned know that it is but an
imagined intersection of two Circles or lines, the one called Circulus
eccentricus, the other Linea ecliptica noni Orbis, without any bodily
substance, and therefore can neither darken the sun, or turn him into fiery
color, having in it self neither quality to heat or to cool the same. But
in case his meaning be rather that Iunonius Draco shall leave his seat between
the two bears, and cross the Eclipticke, in Via solis. That in reason is more
absurd, unless he prove unto us, that the Dragon must come down from the 8.
Sphere to the fourth, where the place of the Sun is, or the Sun clyme above
the starrie firmament, whereas the said Asterisme is, which well he cannot
before Assention day, which is long after the 25. day of March, or else the said
Asterisme cannot possiblye ouer-shadowe the Sun, obscuring his light. And it
is no way to be feared, that a terrestrial Dragon (were there any, as
Gelnerus makes great doubt) shall fly so high, or bear a body of that
breadth and bigness, that it should ouer-shadowe the whole body of the Sun
the space of four hours, the said body of the Sun being more then 160.
times bigger then the whole earth: for in what part of the earth should first
be fostered a Dragon of the said bigness, not in Alexandria, Graecia, or
Arabia, nor else where, unless in the dizards of Calabria, from whence only
such marueiles do come.

To the second, touching The marvelous great water-floodes, upon our Lady day
in Lent, the 25. day of March, by fear whereof many people shall die. Being no
reason showed hereof, it may be thought, that Doleta thorough the ouer-muche
moistnes of his brain, dreameth of inundations and floods, unless the Moon,
being then Prope vrnam aquarij and effusionem aquae, he infers the same.
And the same Floods to exceed, especially, in Calabria, where no doubt, then
Calaber-furres will be dear, for that the Calaber-skinns will be most drowned,
which may cause some lamentation in the Budge-row in the VVinter following.

To the third, which is, There shall arise a marvelous great wind, for fear
whereof, many shall be consumed, or distraught of their wits. This prediction is
very general, he tells us not what wind it shall be, nor out of what
quarter it shall come, it is not like to be the sweet Zephirus or Subsolanus,
nor yet the blustering Boreas, that can blow from Calabria, over all the
world, or cause these inconveniences by him resited, wherefore he doubtless
means, these winds engendered in Microcosmo, as Colica passio, Vteri ac
Ventriculi inflatio, capitis vertigo, and such like which may mar and consume
many a good stomach, and dull, amaze, or distract the wits and senses of the
Parties troubled therewith, either else he means, the wind caused thorough
the continual motion and agitation, of the wings of the Calabrian Dragon so
much mentioned.

To the fourth which is, The 12. day of May, will arise an other wonderful
great Flood, and so great, as none the like since Noys-Floud, and continue
three days and three nights, and many Cities and Towns standing on sandy
grounds will be in great danger. Two great floudes within two months, that
goes hard, but if they be general, and throw down Cities and Towns in
Calabria and elsewhere: Sheperton-Church, must needs be in great peril, for
it is built upon sandye ground, and already in hazard. The best is, it must
last no longer then Jonas was in ye whales belly, three days, and three
nights, the reason of which prediction, happily is, for that the Sun
principal Luminary obscured with his Dragon, at the same time will be in
Longitudine cum Orione, which Orion, as the Poets affirm, was made Ex vrina
deorum, and therefore so much wet and moisture to abound: either else for that
the beginning of the Rain in the time of the Deluge happened in the said
month, now threatening the like.

To the fifth, which is, Infidels and heretics for fear will fly and gather
together, and a great part of Christendom in danger to be overthrown. That
Infidels and Heretics fear, it is no harm, that they will willingly fly, it
is not like: I am sorry he has no better grounds to build his judgment on
in this point. But the overthrow of a great part of Christendom is far
unlike, for God has promised to save his own, although he chasten like a
loving father, and toward the end of the world the number of the elect are
promised to increase, and the Gospel to be plentifully preached throughout all
nations, and joyfully of them received.

To the sixth, which is: After the great waters in the said year, on S.
Margarets day in the Dog days, will be a great and fearful death, for the
pestilence will be in such force, that few places in Christendom will be
free. And how is that like, insomuch that so great plenty of water going
before, and cleansing and washing away the filthy sliminesse, and uncleanness
of the earth, the causes of vnhealthfulnes and infection, as also his great and
mighty winds dispersing the unwholesome clouds and ill vapors, and thereby
clearing and preserving the air from putrefaction and corruption, the especial
causes of pestilence, and like contagion, the heavens and heavenly influences
threatening no such thing unless that he feared that this day through the
virtue of the Saint, whose name it bears, might end and destroy his
Calabrian Dragon, for that S. Margaret is written to have destroyed the Dragon,
and by reason hereof, such pestilent and corrupt vapors to euaporate and breath
out of the said Drago^s body so wounded and corrupted, which may fill and
infect the air therewith, which dogtricke of his happening in the Dog days,
as it may cause (when it happens) death and mortality, so will it again
cause Sanguis Draconis to be very plenty, good tidings and joyful news to
the Apothecarie.

To the seventh, which is: There will be through the world great change of
Religion, and wonderful strange news unto all people as touching the same.
This of all the rest is a most unlikely thing. For that toward the end of the
world, Christ has promised to increase the number of his elect, as also that
his truth shall persevere unto the end and in the end. Unless he mean the
infidels shall be converted to christianity, and the heretics to recant their
heresies, and acknowledge the gospel and verity, as by the prediction
following it seems he means no less, in that he says, The Infidels shall
fly unto the christians, and the Turk shall lose his scepter. Which thing,
although it seems strange, yet has it been long of the faithful hoped,
and is of all true Christians heartily to be wished,

To the eight, which is. The Turk with his Mahomes shall lose his Scepter, and
a great change in his regiment thorough hunger and wars, so that most will
rather seek help of the Christians, then at his hands. This is as ye would
say, to good to be true. For how is it like that an Empire which has been so
long establishing, in one year to be overthrown. Well may it decrease,
Peditentim as it were, but not suddenly overthrown (although God at his
pleasure can destroy it) it follows not that he will do the same: for he is
called omnipotent, Non quia ommia vult, sed quia omnia potest, and a posse ad
esse non valet argumentum, And means and not by again, he works by
miracles in this age, I rather would wish that the Turk might be converted to
the faith of Christ, then lose his scepter. For in case he lose the same, and
an egg harcht of the same bird succeed him therein, what avails it to the
profit of the Church, or comfort of the congregation of the faithful? And
herein M. Doleta greatly forgets himself, where he says that the Turks
shall seek help at the christians, and before that the greatest part of
Christendom shall be overthrown. But happily he cares not what he says, be
it never so contrary, so he may seem to say somewhat at all.

To the ninth, which is: There will also arise great Earthquakes, and the fruit
of trees will be very strange and hollow within. This is a thing possible,
though not likely, and very hard for any to prognosticate, were he of much more
sufficiency then John Doleta, declares himself to be. For were he thoroughly
apposed, I doubt he would hardly show the causes Philosophical and Natural of
Earthquakes, and whereof the said Earthquakes are caused and engendered, in
that his doctrine has been so gross and palpable in the rest. And as for the
fruits which shall be hollow within. I am persuaded he is moved so to think,
for that (further reason see I none) because he sees people so hollow hearted
at these days, thinking that other fruits of the earth would produe
accordingly. Either else that much fruit the said year will prove
worme-eaten, and consequently hollow within, which thing is nothing strange.

Lastly to the tenth, which is: On saint Bartholomews day, will be great
mouinges of the earth, both on hills and valleys, for fear whereof few shall
remain alive. This prediction of all other is most strange and unlikely,
unless Doleta be of opinion with other some, that the Sun stands still and
the earth moves about, and hills, and valleys as part thereof follow the
same, and so fall or stumble into some of those degrees, termed of the
Astronomers, gradus puteales, and to prove this conceit and opinion
aforesaid, he may happily make so good a Demonstration, as I knew a young
gentleman of like opinton, who sailing from London to Graues-end, imagined
himself and the vessel to stand still, and the trees and firm land to move
and depart from him: this ye see the force and fruit of a strong imagination,
which with the rest I refer to your deliberate judgment, and good
consideration. Else does he happily mean the moving up of the earth,
thorough the rooting of swine or casting of moles, which in truth may do much
hurt, especially to the husbandman: I hope none other mouings shall be seen in
this our Country, no more then any of the rest of his ten plagues presaged, and
before mentioned: which as they were prognosticated without Art or learning, so
shall they come to pass, Nusquam and Nunquam, and all men say,

Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus. Thus having thoroughly viewed these
news from Calabria, I wish all men to be resolved that as they are rashely
published by the Author (a fellow of Brazenface College) and not like to come
to effect, so would they not worse esteem of good Arts (whose commodities are
great, and conclusions most profitable) when they are published by those that
are (in truth) learned therein, and of zeal and good meaning deliver them to
the worker, the rather when they see these predictions which the blind-Baiards
and the unlearned in Astronomye set forth altogether with out effect, as has of
late (too often) been seen, which I pray God almighty at his pleasure to amend
and long to continue the happy and prosperous estate of our dread and soueraign
Lady the Queens Majesty, granting her to have such loyal, and obedient
subjects as may joyfully, and willingly follow and observe all such wholesome,
and profitable Laws as her Majesty and her honorable Counsel shall direct
and appoint them, whereby it may be justly verified. Quod corpora inferiora
reguntur a superioribus corumque sequuntur motum.

He that shall live in the year 85.
And in 86. no hinderance sustain:
But in 87. remains alive,
And in 88. is unhurt and unslain:
If in 89. no loss make him sad,
Has he not cause think you to be glad?
The Conclusion.
THus (Christian Reader) having sufficiently disprooued these frivolous news,
I would not have any man to think that it is my meaning to persuade the world
to sleep in security, and that we have no need to be vigilant to vvatch and
to pray with all humility: Either else, that there is no tokens of Gods wrath
threatened for sin, the contrary whereof, would evidently appear, if we
did but look into the common manners of the people. For never was there seen
such excess in apparel, chiefly in the meaner sort, never such pride in all
degrees, never such coue tousnes in the rich, such extortion in the vvealthie,
such vsery, cruelty, disloyalty, whoredom, theft, idleness, envy, malice.
So that a man may boldly say, the weather is not at this season so cold, but
Charity is twice so cold. All which are manifest tokens of Gods heavy
displeasure even at hand which partly we feel by this bitter dearth without
need, through out all the land. A fatherly scourge surely for our iniquities,
especially for neglecting our duty to God and our Soueraign, whose health is
our safty. Therefore it is high time that we fall to hearty repentance, the
only salve against sin, after the example of the great city Niniuie. And
then undoubtedly God will turn from us all those plagues which the signs of
heaven shall at any time forevvarne us of, being the sure tokens of his love
and favor toward his Chuch and chosen, as well as of his wrath and vengeance
against the wicked, whereof the greatest Cities, and mightiest Nations in all
ages can bear witness: Which well may put us in mind of his almighty
wisdom and eternal providence, which in the beginning established the
heavens, causing them to move with such harmonye and constant regularitie,
that from time to time, they might foresheey not only the natures and
inclinations of men, but also the great mutations of times and the subuersions
of Countries, wars depopulations deuastations plague, Pestilence, famine, and
infinite other miseries which he keeps in store (against all such as either
vvilfully, or negligently forget him, or oppose themselves against his word
and will) to whom be all honor and glory, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

