TO THE WORSHIPFVL AND MY VERY GOOD FRIENDS, Mr. JOHN VPTON Esquire, and to his
virtuous and religious wife, Mistress Dorothy Vpton, all prosperous welfare
tending to eternal safety.
AS one not ambitious, but desirous to set forth the glory of God, to declare
his truth and publish his mercies, I have presumed to present this small
Treatise to your view, wherein is handled the shortness and fewness of man's
days, the frailty and uncertainty thereof, how he is mortal, every day
dying, because every day life shortneth, and the rather because it was preached
at the Funeral of your dear Father. I know Solomon finds fault with
writing many books, saying, there is no end in writing many books, but
Eccles. 12. 12, Tenet insanabile multos scribends cacoethes.
they are such do defend false doctrine, and vain opinions which he taxes,
such as set forth the glory of God he commends. This inconsiderate age of
ours, is more willing to entertain idle Pamphlets and vain toys, with fond
inventions have excogitated, then to embrace such laudable enterprises which
further the kingdom of God, or persuade the truth of Religion among the sons
of men. I know some will not spare to bark at this, but I will pass by the
S^^llean dogs. and stop my ears, as Jerome speaks, esteming ^
Zoilus, nothing at all, nor much regarding (...) as carpe at each monument of
piety, and in a prejudi^^e (...) reject and discharge their pains who shall
(...) cross the watch of their wicked delights. I doubt not (...) with you and
with all good Christians it will find acceptance.) It is unworthy the worlds
view, being the fruits of a short conception, the effect of a distracted study,
often hindered and perturbed by sinister courses. Thus thankefully remembering my
self, do commend your ways to the Lord, that they may be prosperous, your
sorrows easy, your comforts many, your virtues eminent, your consciences
quiet, your lives holy, your deaths comfortable, your election sure, and your
salvation certain, remaining.

Yours in all Christian affection, JOHN PRESTON.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF ARTHVR VPTON Esquire in Denon.
PSALM. 103. 15. 16. Man's days are as an herb, as a flower of the field so
florisheth he.

For the wind goes over it, and it is not, and the place thereof shall know it
no more.


THis Psalm is laudatiue, wherein Epainetix^s.
David does praise God for diverse benefits partly in particular bestowed on
him, partly on all man kind, and partly on the people of Israel. The first
part of praise he propounds under the form of an ex ortation, in the first
and second verse. The benefits bes^^^ed on him he sets down to be five, 1.
remission of sins, 2. regeneration, 3. deliverance from dangers, 4. giving
victuals, and necessary food, 5. strength of body, all which are contained in
the 3. 4. 5. verses. The benefit bestowed on the people of Israel were these,
the opening of his word, the remission of sins, and the moderation of
chastisements, from the 7. to the 13. then he amplifieth this moderation, from
the fragilitie of human nature, saying, God knows whereof we are made, he
made us, therefore he knows us, he made us of dust, Genesis 2. 7. and he
remembers that we are but dust, thou art Genesis 2. 7.
dust, Genesis 3. 14. and dust shall return to the earth, as it Genesis 3. 19.
was, Eccles. 12. 7. And so every man shall become no Eccles. 12. 7.

Puluis in pulne^ena: Humus in humum.

N^scimur vt^ moriamur.


man, for that which is taken from the earth shall return to the earth, dust
shall return to dust, and earth to earth: we are borne that we might die, and
we must die that we may live, by dying to revive, by leesing life to win the
goal of eternal felicity. There is little cause either to love life, or to
fear death: and motives to persuade us to mourning, that our inhabitancels
prolonged, and our decease adiourned. As all rivers go into the sea; Eccles.
1. 7. So all men must go Eccles. 1. 7.
into the grave. Death is the tribute of all, the prison of all, the mistress
of all, and the receptacle of all. Man's days are as an herb, as a flower of
the field, so flourishes he. For the wind goes over it, and it is not, and
the place thereof shall know it no more, in which words, 2. things are
remarkable, 1. The fragilitie of human nature in the 15. v. 2. A reason at
the 16. v.

The fragilitie of human nature is expressed by a twofold comparison.

1. Compairing man's days to an herb, man's days are as an herb. 2. To a
flower of the field, as a flower of the field so florisheth he.
It is as much as if the Prophet had said, though The metaphrase.
man be an excellent creature little inferior to the Angels, yet he is a frail
creature, soon come and soon gone, his days are like the herb which is the
life of the earth, and a flower of the field, which is the glory of the herb
as the herb grows, and as the flower florisheth, so now grows and
florisheth, and as the herb and flower soon wither, so man soon fades
away, if the wind blow on the herb or grass it is gone, and it comes not
to his place again: so if death blow, or deprive man of breath, he is dead,
he is gone, and the place wherein he lived, he shall live no more, and the
eye which has seen him, shall see him no more.

Man's dayes] The word is Enosh man, which is a Text.

Pagin.


common name, and sometimes particular. As Homo is a common name to all men in
one tongue: so Enosh is Lingua Hebraica Adam ab adamach terra madida apta ad
formas recipiendas, Merce.
a common name of all men in the holy tongue. God named the first man Adam, let
us make man, Genesis 1. 26. Let us make Adam that is man, Adam from Adamah, which
is moist earth, fit to receive forms and impressions, he was so named that he
might keep in memory, that he was but earth. Our first Parents called their
second son Habel, Genesis 4. 2. or Hebel, which is Gen 4. 2.
vanity, vanity is a matter which is nothing, or that which soon vanishes
away as the breath which goes forth from the mouth. Man is vanity, Psalm. 39.
5. Like to vanity, Psalm. 144. 4. The children of men are vanity, Psalm. 39. 5.

Psalm. 144. 4.


the chief men are lies, to lay them upon a balance they are altogether
lighter then vanity, Psalm. 62. 4. The Psalm. 62. 4.

Hommes sunt (...)


sense is, if men should be put in one scale of the balance, and vanity in
the other scale, men would ascend, vanity descend, that is, men would be found
lighter then vanity: men are vainer then vanity it self. He was so named
that he might keep in mind the vanity of his human condition. Zeth named
his son Enosh, Genesis 4. 26. which is to be weak or frail, that Genesis 4. 26.
he might keep in memory the frailty and infirmity of human condition,
and so it is a common name of man.

That all men both by name and by nature, are frail and Doct. 1.
weak, man's name does bring so much to man's remembrance. Man brought nothing
with him into the world, 1. Tim. 6. 7. In his infancy he cannot help himself,
1. Tim. 6. 7.
in his old age he must be helped, the helper of other creatures, must have his
help from God the Creator. Other creatures can shift for themselves, but man
is so weak that he must be fed, warmed, nurced and nourished by others. He
is subject to sicknesses, to diseases, to troubles, to sorrows, to the famine,
to the plague, to war, and to many more miseries, man is borne unto travail,
Job. 5. 7. This life is full of the Job. 5. 7.
grief of things past, of labor and pain of things present, and of fear of
things to come. The ingresse into life is lamentable, because an infant begins
his life with tears, as it were foreseeing the evils to come, the progress
weak, because many diseases afflict us, and many woes vex us, and the egresse
fearful if we be not in Christ, and have put him on, Romans 13. 14. man
begins his race with crying, and ends it Romans 13. 14.
with grieuing, nay all man's days are sorrows, Eccles. 2. 23. it is. It is,
full of sorrows both of body and mind. Eccles. 2. 23.
Abraham had in the land of Canaan no ground of his own to dwell in, but only
the inheritance of a sepulcher: so man shall have no more in this life after a
few years, nay months, it may be days but a plot of lodging. This life is
rather a death because every day we die, seeing every day we consume somewhat
of our lives. The entrance into life is straight ways the beginning of death.
This life is an expectation of death. for every day we look for death a scene
of mockeries, a Sea of miseries one only vial of blood which every light fall
breaks, every light ague corrupts.

Though man be frail and weak, yet God loves Use. ^^
him dearly, and does regard him, and does respect him, hence is it that David
says Lord what is man that thou regardest him, Psalm. 144. 4. Man is the slave
of Psalm. 144. 4.
death, a traveler that passes away, for here we have no abiding city,
Heb. 12. 14. We are strangers and pilgrims, Heb. 13. 14.
1. Pet. 2. 11. Soiourners as all our fathers were, 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Psalm. 39. 12. Lighter then a bubble, shorter then a moment, Psalm. 39. 12.
vainer then an image, frailer then a venice glass which is soon broken, more
changeable then the wind, more inconstant then a shadow, and more deceivable
then a dream. God does also provide for man food and raiment: What is here in
man to move God to love him, he is conceived in sin, and borne ininiquitie,
Psalm. 51. 5. and unless he be borne again, he cannot Psalm. 51. 5.
enter into the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. His heart is Ioh. 3. 5.
deceitful and wicked above all things, Ier. 17. 9. And the imaginations of
the heart evil, Genesis 8. 21. The eyes are Ier. 17. 9.

Genesis 8. 21.


casements of Lust, as to David, 2. Sam. 11. 2. The throat is an open
sepulcher, Psalm. 5. 9. The mouth is full of cursing 2. Sam. 11. 2.

Psalm. 5. 4.


and deceit, Psalm. 10. 7. The feet swift to shed blood, Esa. 59. 7. The hands
are extended to all unmercifulness. Psalm. 10. 7.

Esa. 59. 7.


He does break the yoke, and burst the bonds, Ier. 5. 5. Hating to be
reformed, Psalm. 15. 17. Saying, The Ier. 5. 5.

Psalm 50 17.

Psalm 94. 7.

Mala. 3. 17.


Lord shall not see, Psalm. 94. 7. It is in vain to serve God, and what profit
is it if we keep his commandments, Malach. 3. 14. By nature man is the child
of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. Ephesians. 2. 3.
The son of disobedience, Collos. 3. 6. Nay, a beast by his own knowledge
Ier. 51. 17. Yet God loves man, and Col. 3* 6.
will make him coheire with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Yet not Ier. 51. 17.

Romans 8. 17.


all but the Elect God does give to us, we can give nothing to him, nothing
does come to him, if we stay in him, nor nothing does depart if we stay not in
him, on either side he is our profit, whether he stay in us, or we in him. To
the sick and weak he is a keeper, turning their bed in their sickness, Psalm.
41. 3. To the man Psalm. 41. 3.
of the Palsy, he was health, Mat. 9. 2. To Lazarus that Mat. 9. 2.
was dead he was life, Ioh. 11. 44. To the blind he was Ioh. 11. 44.
sight, Ioh. 9. 9. To the lost sheep he was salvation, Luke 15. 4. 5. 6. Luke
15. 4. 5. 6.
To such as go astray he is the way home, Ioh. 14. 6. Ioh. 14. 6.


The second use may justly reprove such as never mind their weak and frail
condition. We should Use. 2.
meditate on death in life, then death would not be so ghastly and fearful.
In the morning we should think this may be the last day of our life, and in
the evening often we go to bed, we should think this may be our last night on
earth, so thinking on death at all times. In all our actions we should consider
with our selves, would we do such and such like things if we were to die
instantly, and then come to judgment. We should consider our lives are but lent
us, they are no freehold. We came into the world upon this condition that we
should go out again, yielding up all into the Lords hand: most men never
think on death, but put that day far from them, when there is nothing nearer
life then death, it always dogs a man at the heels. As the shadow follows
the body: so does death follow life. If we die to our selves in life, we shall
live in death to God. Before we die, sin must die in us. Let us leave sin,
before sin leave us. God will never forgive, that we will not forgive. Let
the old man die in us in this life, then Christ will live in us in death: none
are exempted from death of what estate or condition soever. Solomon for all his
wisdom died, 1. King. 11. 43. Sampson for all his 1. Kin. 11. 43.
strength, Judge. 16. 30. Absalom for all his beauty, 2. Sam. 18. 11. Judge. 16.
30.

2. Sam. 18, 11: 2, Sam. 17. 23. 2, Sam. 12. 18.


Ahitophel for all his craft, 2. Sam. 17. 23. David's child for all his youth,
2. Sam. 12. 18. Methushelah for all his age, Genesis 5. 27. Lazarus the beggar
died, Genesis 5. 27.

Luke 16. 22.

Luke 12. 20.

2. Kin. 9. 33.


Luke 16. 22. And the rich covetous cormorant died, Luke 12. 20. Proud Iezabel
died, 2. King. 9. 33. and Sarah which was full of modest humility, and
humblemodesty died, Genesis 23. 2. Kin. are not exempted, from death, for Saul,
David, Josiah died, Preachers are not exempted, Genesis 23. 2.
for Paul, Peter, and many such like have died. Physicians which kill many,
though cure some, die themselves as sick. Soldiers the cause of many men's
deaths, die themselves as Cornelius. As it is most true some of all sorts shall
be saved: so it is no less true that all of all sorts shall die. Death is a
port or haven whereunto we all must sail through the troubles of this world,
whereunto the sooner we come, the sooner we shall be delivered. It is appointed
all shall die, Heb. 9. 27. decreed in Hebr. 9. 27.
the Parliament in heaven, and Gods decrees are unchangeable. It is but a
minute of time which we live, and somewhat less then a minute, we are in this
world as in another man's house, and therefore we should always mind death.
If means could free men from deaths arrest. Kings, Potentates and rich men
would not die, for they would give more then half their goods to live. If
ignorance babbling in an unknown tongue might serve the Papists would not, if
strength, the strong would not: if skill, the Physician would not: if mirth,
the bone companion would not: if smoke, the bewitching vanity of this time,
the^ the greatest part of men would not, in a word if any thing would serve
turn, then death arrest were not strong enough. Death is such a Purseuant,
that he will take no bail, no bond, no day for appearance, but the party
arrested must presently appear before the tribunal seat of God, 2. Cor. 5.
10. 2. Cor. 5. 10.


As an hearbe] Or as some read it, as grass or hay. This similitude of grass
is used in diverse Scriptures to Ic^^.
this end. The Prophet says, all flesh is grass, Esa. 40. 6. Not by nature,
not by making, not by condition, but by similitude of fragilitie. The holy
ghost uses this simily to show the imbecility of our nature and of our times.
And the Apostle says, All flesh is as grass, 1. Pet. 1. 24. Esa. 4. 6.
The world of men may be resembled to a ^. Pet. 1. 14.
field of grass.

That man is like grass for the brevity of his life, and Doct. 3.
suddenness of his death. The grass is soon come, and soon gone: so is man
soon come, and many times soon gone, as Jonah his gourd was, Ion. 4. 6. The
grass Ion. 4. 6.
when it is green is beautiful bearing flowers, but being cut down
withers: so man being young has the greenesse of life, then beauty and
comeliness, but being dead withers. As the grass is to day, and to morrow
cast into the oven: so man lives to day and to morrow cast into the grave.
There is difference in grass a thousand forms in one field, yet all are alike
in this that they must wither: so there is difference in men's places in the
world, but no difference at all in death. As dies the beggar: so dies the King.
It is granted he may have better attendance, and he may have more cost
bestowed on him. Healthy bodies must wither, as well as sick bodies. The
strongest must stoop as well as the weakest. The godly must die as well as the
wicked, and the longest liver must pack along, as well as the untimely birth.
As the mower can with few strokes cut down thousands of grass: so God can
easily with the since of his judgments cut down a multitude of men. This
grass may be brought to wither many ways, if it be eaten by the beasts, or
troaden by the foot of man, or burnt with fire, or cut down with sith or
sickle: so man may be brought, to his end many ways, by fire or water, or
strangling, or murdering, or the like. When the grass is cut and dried, it is
meat and fodder for the beasts of the field: so when the flesh of man is laid
in the grave, it is meat for the worms. I shall say to corruption, thou art my
father, and to the worm thou art my mother, and my sister, Job 17. 4. Man
shall sleep in the dust, and the worms Job. 17. 4.
shall cover him, Job 21. 26. The moath shall eat within us Job. 21. 26.
like a garment, and the worms shall eat them like wool, Esa. 51. 8. Herod
was eaten of worms, Act. 12. 23. As a Esa. 51. 8. Act. 12. 13. Ion., 6.
worm did eat Jonah his gourd, Ion. 4. 6. So worms shall eat our flesh. The
grass will perish if it be never cut down: so man will become as a rotten
leaf if he live long. This life is as a short misery. Man that is borne of
woman is of short continuance, Job 14. 1. I would Job 141.
have no man say, I have so many years to lives, years are not thine, they
are but lent thee. This answer was made to one saying, I have fourteen years
to live, thou do mention fourteen years which thou have not, nor may not
have, but thou forgettest the many years which thou have had. Jacob said,
few and evil have the days of my life been, Genesis 47. 9. The time of our
Genesis 47. 9.
life is threescore years and ten, if a man come to fourscore, then there is
nothing but weakness, Psalm. 90. 10. Psalm. 90 10.
All come not to seventy years, or to eighty, and some live an hundred, but
most die before they come to seuenthty. Some die in their youth, some in their
old age. God has ordained to every living creature his appointed time wherein
to live, grow, and increase, so to decrease and die, and as it pleases him to
prolong or abridge their lives, so does he dispose of the second causes and
means whereby he will have it brought to pass, and so every one has his
certain bonds and term of life set him, yet none but God only can attain to
the knowledge thereof. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth, and
are not his days as the days of an hireling, Job 7. 1. Are not man's Job. 7. 1.
days determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed
his bounds, which (if he would) he cannot pass, Job. 14. 5. All the days of
my appointed time Job. 14. 5.
will I wait till my changing shall come, Job. 14. 14. God Job. 14. 14.
has appointed how long every man shall live, though fourscore years be no
long course, yet there are but few that hold out to the uttermost end thereof
in regard of them that stay by the way. Some are cut off even before they have
begun their course, and some in the midde way, and that through so many sorts
of sicknesses with other inconveniences and accidents, that a man cannot
possibly comprehend or conceive them all.

The first use reproves such as know their flesh is as Use. 1.
grass, yet they seek things for this life only, they wallow Luke 16. 19.
in wealth, and have all things at their wills, they are clothed in fine silk
and purple, they glitted and glister with gold and pearls, their faces are
covered with fatness, Job. 15. 27. they beat the people to pieces, and grind
the faces of the poor, Esa. 3. 15. They swallow up the poor. Job. 15. 27.

Esa. 3. 15.


Amo. 8. 4. They eat the flesh of the people, and flay off their Amo. 8. 4.
skin, Mich. 3. 3. They are attended with great trains Mich. 3. 3.
and troops of men, they lead mighty Armies, and are carried in Coaches like
Princes, for abundance of all things, they are as mortal Gods upon earth, yet
are soon bereft of all their riches and glory, and perish as the grass, what
foolishness has wrapped up their understanding, what blindness has possessed
their hearts, what vanity has bewitched and ravished their minds, what mist
of error has compassed them and ouershadowed the light of their knowledge,
that they seeing the frailty of their own estate and condition. Can any thing
in this life, be either durable or very delightsome, when life it self is so
frail and tickle a thing. The Apostle says, The world vanishes and the lust
thereof. 1. Ioh. 2. 17. Solomon concludes all 1. Ioh. 2. 17.
worldly things under a most uncertain, frail and brittle condition,
censuring them all with one judgment: vanity of vanities, all is vanity,
Eccles. 1. 2. Came not Eccles. 1. 2.
Craesus the rich Prince to misery for all his wealth. Xerxes the King of
Persia for all his pomp and glory discomfited. Did not Dionisius the King of
Siracuse fall from a King to be a schoolemaister. Did not Bellisarius fall from
a giver to be a receiver, from a rich man to be a beggar. Came not Job from
great riches to Job. 1. 21.
miserable poverty for a time. Do not many flourish to day in wealth, and to
morrow come to extreme poverty. Are we all as grass and worms meat, why
then do we make so much of the flesh which shall perish, and do not adorn
and deck the soul with virtues which shall be presented to God in the day of
judgment. We do not regard our souls, but prefer Domin^n ancillari, et
ancillam dominari magna ^^t abusis
our bodies before them. It is a great abuse when the mistress shall become an
handmaide, and the handmaide mistress: so it is a great abuse when the soul
is not regarded, and the body preferred before the soul.

Seeing our bodies shall perish as grass, let us say, Christ is to me in life
and death advantage. Phil. 1. 21. When we die we shall be delivered out of two
prisons at once, the one so much worse then the other, as it is worse to be
withheld from perfect bliss, then from the liberty of a most painful and
tedious pilgrimage. We now live to die, but then we shall die to live for
ever: now living we are continually dying, but then once dying never to die
more. We shall leave a ruinous and base cottage, and pass to a most glorious
and blessed palace, whose pauement is pure gold, and whose gates are pearls,
Revel. 21. 21. By this we may guess Revel. 21. 21.
what rooms we are like to find, where our Savior prepares the place,,
Ioh. 14. 2. Had the Prodigal son John. 14. 2.
cause to sorrow when he was to depart from this dirtie village, and the
company of swine to his fathers Luke 15. 17. 18.
house. Who would not be able to cast off a sack of dunge to receive long
white robes, Revel. 7. 14. I hope we shall have neither oxen to try, nor farm
to see, nor Revel. 7. 14.
wives to withold us from going, Luke 14. 18. 19. 20. Luke 14. 18. 19. 20.
We have had toil enough in the servitude of Egypt, we have wandered long
enough in the desert in continual battle with Gods and our enemies, and in
death the time is come to take our repose, and enjoy the felicity of the land
of promise. We have been in the mount Sinai with Moses, when thundrings began
to be heard, lightnings to flash, and a thick dark cloud to cover the mount,
but we shall come to enjoy his glory, whose terror we have already sustained.

This may reprove such as fear death, The sting of death is taken away, O
death where is thy sting, 1. Corint. 15. 55. 1. Cor. 15. 55.
Some would die, but they would not die a violent death. What cause have we to
fear death, we have but one life, and but one can we loose. Goliath was as
much hurt by David's little stone, 1. Sam. 17. 50. as 1. Sam. 17. 50.
Sampson by the weight of a whole house, Judge. 16. 30. Judge. 16. 30.
Ely had as much harm by falling backward in his chair, 1. Sam. 4. 18. as
Iezabel by being thrown down 1. Sam. 4. 18.
from a high window, 2. King. 9. 33. All they that stoned 2. Kin. 9. 33.
Stephan to death, took no more from him, Act. 7. 59. Act. 7. 59.
then an ordinary sickness did from Lazarus, Luke Luke 16. 19.
16. 19. One death is no more death then another, and as well the easiest, as
the hardest, takes our life from us. Let us be willing to leave this sinful
world, desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23. Philip.
1. 23.
Why should we fear that which cannot be avoided. The very necessity of
death should make us not unwilling to die, and the remembrance of our
mortality should make us little fear, when experience shows us, that we are
mortal. Live well, and die well we may, if please God, but live long, and not
die, we cannot. We should not think our life shortened, when it is well ended.
He dies old enough, that dies good: and life is better well lost, then evil
kept. We go but that way, the which all the world before us has gone, and
all that come after us shall follow and bear us company.

4 If we be not warned, neither will take it for a warning, that we are as
grass, death may come before we are aware, and surprise us, when we shall not
have time to learn to die. We must be prepared, Luke 12. 40. Luke 12. 40.
We must watch, Mark. 13. 37. How soon is the grass Mark. 13. 37.
cut down, and so, how soon does man die. The day of death will come
suddenly, as thief in the night, 2. Pet. 3. 10. ^. Pet. 3. 10.
A thief gives no warning when he will come, but comes when men are
asleep: so the day of the Lord comes suddenly, when men are altogether
unprovided. Before a ruinous house fall, the rafters crack and give warning.
At a strangers coming, the dog barks and gives warning: before a storm the
clouds give warning, and the trumpet bids men prepare to battle: but the
day of death comes suddenly, all the time from the birth to death, is a time
of preparation. When the bird thinks her self safe, then is she nearest to
death, when the shipmaster is in sight of land, he may be in greatest danger,
for commonly in the range or harbor is the Ship lost, the want of care
drowneth the Ship, the want of skill is the ruin of the soldiers, the want
of food starueth the sheep, and the want of preparation to die casts
thousands into perdition.

As a flower of the field so florisheth he.] Man's life is Text.
compared in the Scripture to a span for the shortness thereof, Psalm. 39. 5.
To a shadow, Psalm. 102. 11. First, for Psalm. 39. 5.

Psalm. 102. 11.


the cause, for as the shadow is formed oflight and a body, so is man of an
intellectual soul, and a human body. Secondly for the figure and likeness,
as the shadow is sometimes long, and sometimes short: so some men live long,
some but a short time. Thirdly, for the flight, the shadow is changed with the
moving of the body: so is the life. The shadow in the morning is not as it was
at night, and the health of the body in the morning is not as it was at night.
The shadow flies from a man following it, and it follows a man flying from
it: he that loses his life shall save it, and he that will save his life
shall loose it. Fourthly, for the measure, the longer the day, the shorter the
shadow: and the shorter the day, the longer the shadow: so the higher the day
of prosperity, the shorter the life: and the shorter prosperity is, the
longer man's life seems to be; Jobs prosperity was short, therefore his life
seemed long, I will (says he) speak in the bitterness of my soul, Job 10.
1. For he was even weary of Job. 10. 1.
his life, to smoke that vanishes, Hos. 13. 3. To a bubble Hos. 13. 3.
that is dissolved. To a weaueers shuttle for swiftness, Job. 7. 6. Job. 7. 6.
To a cloud that is driven with the wind, Job. 7. 9. Job. 7. 9.
To a vapor which is soon dispersed, Iam. 4. 14. And here Iam. 4. 14.
to grass which withers, and to a fading flower.

That the whole outward glory of man is but as a fading Doa. 3.
flower. Though a flower may be fair in sight, sweet for smell, curious in
color, and glorious for beauty, yet it will fade: so man may be great in
place, noble in birth, mighty in strength, valiant in courage, wise in
ordering and disposing, careful in providing, and excellent in knowledge and
gifts, yet all will fade and fall away. A flower grows speedily, but being
cut down, turns as speedily to its former matter: so man quickly grows up
from the earth, and as soon turns to earth again. Do not thou glory, do
not thou praise, do not thou admire, at outward things, for they will fade
away, they are as a reed of Egypt. That which men most glory in they are
soonest deprived off, I speak of worldly things. Some glory in their birth,
nobility, and house from whence they same, all these are Gods gifts, but not
much to be stood upon, The God of heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power and
strength, and glory, Dan. 2. 37. Some glory in their Dam. 2. 37.
riches, why do thou so, either they will leave thee, or thou must leave
them, all riches have their wings as an Eagle, and fly into the heaven, Prou.
23. 5. The Apostle Prou. 23. 5.
says, trust not in uncertain riches, 1. Tim. 6. 17. Riches 1. Tim. 6. 17.
are uncertain, because they have wings, and because they avail not in the
day of wrath, Prou. 11. 4. Silver and Prou. 11. 4.
gold cannot deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, Ezechi: 7. 19.
That which our Savior calls thorns, Ezechi. 7. 19.
Matthew. 13. 7. Paul calls uncertain riches. Do Mat. 13. 7.
riches content, no, the more men have, the more men crave, and commonly they
are the greatest beggars, which have the greatest portion, he that loves
silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5. 9. A covetous Eccles.
5. 9.
man is not satisfied with riches, for the more he gathers together, the
more he desires, the grave and destruction can never be full, so the eyes of
man can never be satisfied, Prou. 27. 20. The covetous man desires Pro. 27.
20.
all that his eye sees. The covetous says, What shall I do because I have no
room, Luke 12. 27. Some Luke 12. 17.
glory in pleasure, pleasure is like lightning, sweet but short, much cost and
care for a little sport, nay one hours sport, may be recompensed with eternal
punishments. Some glory in the world, and worldly things, notwithstanding this
I must tell thee, either thou will fail in pursusing them, or else when thou
have caught them, they will be so vain that they will give no contentment.
Some glory in beauty, beauty will vanish with a sickness, or consume in
time. Some glory in their strength, man's strength is but weakness. Some in
honor, man shall not continue in honor, He is like the beasts that die,
Psalm. 49. 12. It is an evil Psalm. 49. 12.
sickness, and a great vanity, when a man shall have riches, and treasure,
and honor: and want grace to joy in them. Eccles. 6. 2. Some in the praise of
men, which indeed Eccles. 6. 2.
is but wind, No man knows whether it comes, and whether it goes, John.
3. 8. As the childs love, so the Ioh. 3. 8.
peoples commendation is gotten and forgotten in an hour The Prophetsaith, Let
not the wise man glory in Ier. 4. 23.
his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man
glory in his riches. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, Iere. 9. 23. 24. Let not the wise man glory in
his wisdom, for wisdom shall not deliver the wise from death, nor strength
the strong, nor riches the rich: but faith in Christ, and good conscience in
all things shall deliver the godly from the second death.

Is it so, that glory, pomp, honor, and beauty are as a fading flower, then
let not us affect these things Use. 1.
too much, let them not steal away our hearts. We should set our affections
on things above, Col. 3. 2. It is not simply unlawful to use the world, but it
is needful Colos. 3. 2.
that we be jealous of our selves, to watch our own hearts, that our affections
be not set on the world. Outward glory, pomp, honor, and beauty are but
transitory things, so are riches, and the world. A man cannot serve God and
mammon, Math. 6. 24. It is an axiom Mat. 6. 24.
in the Bible, that amity with the world, is enmity with God, Iam. 4. 4.
Either men must forsake God and Iam. 4. 4.
love the world, or bid the world farewell and cleave to God. We are taught
not to love the world, 1. John. 2. 15. For we see the daily mutabilitie, and
inconstancy of I. Ioh. 2. 15.
the world and worldly things. Do not human affairs imitate the sea, are
not men tossed on earth, more then on the sea, one takes away this man's
ground, another that man's field, another desires his neighbors wife, another
takes away his servants. One strives with his neighbor about water, another
about the air. He that is poor is reproached, he that is rich is sought to be
ensnared. He that rules is subject to conspiracy, the Magistrate to envy, and
he that is of power to hatred. There are continual wars, continual
slaughters, and insatiable desire does exercise tyranny, covetousness rules,
and lying is preferred. Trust has taken her flight, truth is a stranger, and
salutations are full of suspicion, and so all wallow in vices, for every man is
vanity, Psalm. 39. 11. Psalm. 39. 11.


2. This may reprove the seekers of these vanities, who plod and study to
attain to them, but being gotten, they profit not much, they cannot save, they
may destroy, they cannot help at the last, they may hurt. How greedy are men
after honor, how do they covet promotions, how do they hunt after riches.
They care not who are poor, so they be rich: who sick, so they be whole, who
cold, so they be warm, who sink, so they swim. The loathsome luke-warmnesse
of the most is to be reproved, Revel. 3. 19. And the dangerous Revel. 3. 16.
loss of first love in too many to be lamented, Revel. 2. 4. Revel. 2. 4.
Let men seek the Lord, whiles he may be found, Esa. 55. 6. Esa. 55. 6.
Good and not evil, Amo. 5. 14. The Kingdom of God, Amo. 5. 14.
Math. 6. 33. Peace, Psalm. 34. 14. The time will come when Mat 6. 33.

Psalm 34. 14.


the Scepter and sepulcher will be all one, when the Prince and peasant shall
be fellows, when there shall be no difference between the ashes of velvet,
and course canuasse. What can the belley return which consumes most part of
men's riches but dunge and corruption, what vain pomp and glory, but malice
and envy, what unchastity but hell and the worm of conscience. Let men and
women be never so richly attired without Christ they are naked, with what
jewels and ornaments soever they are set forth, without Christ's beauty they
are deformed, howsoever their faces are painted, and their beauty blazed,
without grace they are ugly and monstrous, nay they carry about them their own
funeral, while their body is a filthy tomb of a more filthy soul, not only
dead, but almost rotten in sin. Noah must not follow the fashions of the old
world. Lot must not follow the fashions of Sodom. Job must not follow the
fashions of Vz. We must not follow the fashions of our corrupt age, but as
Paul exhorts, in the mids of a crooked and naughty generation, we must be,
pure and blameless, shining even as lights in the world, Philip. 2. 15.
Shining euermoreto Philip. 2. 15.
walk in the narrow path, and enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. Luke
13. 24.


We must account spiritual things our chiefest glory. This spiritual glory
is either in the world to come, or in this world, that in the world to come is
the greatest. Rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2. Romans 5. 2.
When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory, Coloss. 3. 4. The glory Col. 3. 4.
which shall be conferred may be considered either on the bodies or on the
souls of the godly. The glory which shall be given to the bodies of the
Saints is threefold, first the bodies of the Saints shall be immortal, they
shall die no more, for mortality shall put on immortality, 1. Corinthians. 15.
53. Secondly, they shall I. Cor. 15. 53.
be incorruptible, they shall rot and putrify no more, they shall be free from
infirmity and deformity, It is sown in weakness, and shall be raised in
power, 1. Cor. 15. 43. 1. Cor. 15. 43.
Thirdly, they shall be spiritual, 1. Cor. 15. 44. 1. Cor. 15. 44.
The glory upon the soul shall be the perfection of Gods image in all the
faculties of it, then shall the memory, will and affection be made conformable
unto God. The glory in this world is first Christ, He is the King of glory,
Psalm. 24. 7. We must be much in the duties Psalm. 24. 7.
of mortification, before we can enter into the kingdom of glory, for no
unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Revel. 21. 27. We are
unclean Revel. 21. 27.
till we be washed in the blood of Christ by justification, and bathed in
tears of true repentance by mortification. Secondly, the spirit of adoption is
the spirit of glory, if this rest upon men they cannot be miserable, 1. Pet.
4. 14. Thirdly, our souls are our glory. 1. Pet. 4. 14.
Fourthly, the testimony of a good conscience is our glory, 2. Corinthians. 1. 12.
In a word, God is our glory, 2. Cor. 1. 12.
Psalm. 3. 3. Psalm. 3. 3.


For the wind goes over it, and it is not.] The word Text.
is taken for wind, for the sperit, for the intellectual soul, for the will,
and for the air, but most expositers read it, the wind goes over it. The
Prophet does not say, it is burned with the heat of the Sun, or destroyed
with the cold of the winter, or cut down with the hand of the mower, but the
wind goes over it, and it is not, that is, the wind goes over the flower,
and it is not, for it is withered. As a flower is destroyed by the passing of
some wind: so man's life does fail with a light occasion.

That man's life and glory are soon gone. First, man's life Doct. ^.
is soon gone, how many at unawares have been burnt up in their own houses,
how many slain by beasts in the field, how many devoured by the same, how
many consumed in common pestilences, murdered by thieues, slain by their
enemies, killed by the fall of an house, as those on whom the tower in Siloam
fell, Luke 13. 4. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly Luke 13. 4.
they go down to the grave, Job 21. 13. Sodom was Job. 21. 13.
destroyed in a moment, Lam. 4. 6. Sisera soon slain by Sam. 4. 6.
Joel, Judge 4. 21. The Philistims by Sampson, Judge. 16. 30. Judge. 4. 21.

Judge. 16. 30.

Esa. 37. 38.


Saneherib by Adramelech and Sharezer, Esa. 37. 38. Man can take life away, but
he cannot give life. There is great pains and paiments bestowed before one
come to man's estate, and then a small thing takes away his life. As when a
bladder is blown great with great pain, a prick of a pin will give vent
for all the wind: so when man is grown up, a little thing will deprive him of
life, a stab with dagger or knife will take from him his life, because life it
self is frail, brittle, unstable, and of all things most uncertain. As the
Spiders web which is long time spinning, is swept away and destroyed upon a
sudden: so man's life which has continued many months and years in a moment
cease, I have cut off like a weauer my life, Esa. 38. 12. One is choakt with
an hair in milk, another strangled Es 138. 12.

Fabius Senator Anacreon.

Adrianus Papa. ^anat. in 27.

Proverb, Johan. stow 44. ann. Elr^a.


with the stone of a grape, another with a fly some crushed and trodden to
death. Man continues not in one stay, he is of few days in his body, and
full of trouble in his estate. Secondly, man's glory is soon gone. The Prophet
says, the glory of Epraim shall fly away like a bird, from the birth, and
from the womb, and from the conception. Hos. 9. 11. By glory is meant riches,
Hos. 9. 11.
power, honor, and renown. As a bird does not long stay in a place: so
glory, as riches, and such like do not long continue. The smoke ascending
upward from the chimney at the first is great and thick, but it is quickly
scattered and out of sight: so the glory of the men of this world, by little and
little is obscured, and vanishes clean away.

The first use we must remember our end, how ^e. 2.
frail and fickle a thing our life is, hence is it, that David says, Lord let
me know my end, and the measure of my days, what it is, let me know how
long I have to live, Psalm 39. 4.
Psalm. 39. 4. Thy life is as the palm of thy hand, if it be compared with
eternity, and it may be more truly called the shadow of death then life. It
is decreed that the death of all is a certain hour, but the hour of death
uncertain. It is better the hour of death be unknown, then known. Moses
says, Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. That we may have the fewness of our Psalm. 90. ^^.
days in memory, that we promise to our selves no great things in this
world, but that our minds be set wholy on the study of heavenly wisdom.
Let us consider how many years we have lived in the world, how many of them
we have spent in sleep, and eating, how many in childhood and vanities, how
many in vvorldlinesse and wickedness, and how few in piety and godliness,
why do I speak of years, I may speak of months, nay of days, nay of
hours: we need not the Art of Arithmeticke to number the hours that many of
us have spent in reading, praying, meditating, examining, hearing, and
practicing holy and Christian duties. Let us now return to the Lord, Iere. 4.
1. Let us hear his writ, while it is to day, Iere. 4. ^.
Heb. 3. 13. Let us arise and depart for this is not our rest. Heb. 3. 1^.
Mich. 2. 10. Let us be more frequent in prayer, more Mica. 2. 1^.
careful in hearing, more conversant in meditation, more painful in seeking,
more diligent in examining, and more studious in doing. Let not God, the author
of time, have the least part of time spent in his service. Let us redeem the
time, Coloss. 4. 5. Buy it with repentance, Colloss. 4. 5.
watching, fasting, praying, and with strong cries, let us make our peace, and
fly from the anger to come, Math. 3. 7. Let us remember our Creator in the
days of Math. 3. 7.
our youth, Eccles. 12. 1. God will have the first fruits, Eccles. 12. 1.
and the first borne are due to him. Let us consider our latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.
29. and how quickly our life will Deuteronomy. 32. I.
be gone. Our sinees cleave so fast unto us, that we do not remember our
latter end, Lament. 1. 9. We are careless Lament. 1. 9.
in making our calling and election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10. 2. Pet. 1, 10.
It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of our lives after
the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in
gluttonies, drinkings, and in abominable idolatries, 1. Pet. 4. 3. Our gray
hairs, 1. Pet. 4. 3.
our sickly bodies, our weaknesses, and infirmities, the shortness of our
lives, the judgments of God on others, and his mercies toward us, should make
us always abundant in the works of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 58. 1. Cor. 15. 58.
That is, we must prove our constancy in faith, and our love to God and our
neighbor, by earnest study, endeavor, and zeal, not that our works can be
superogatory, and more then due, but that we ought to excel in the things that
are due. Let us double our imploiment in reading the Scripture. Prayer must be
sent before, understanding desired, the continuance of meditation given, that
the Scripture might transform us into it self after a sort. In reading the
Scripture, the guide often to be the grace of God, study and diligence must be
given, that all may be referred to edification. In meditation, which puts
life and strength into all other duties. We must meditate on Gods majesty
above us, on our nature within us, on the vanity of the world without us, on
the shortness of life behind us, and on heaven which is set before us. In
hearing of the word preached, which is the means of knowledge, and faith, and
of all grace, with the blessed and prosperous grouth and increase thereof. In
conference, in mortification, and in mercy. The (...) sapien^ium vita est (...)
medita^^^.
life of all wise men is the meditation of death.

Is outward glory soon gone, I for the glory of man ends with the life of
man. It is hard to be gotten, short of continuance, and sorrowful to be left.
It is given to men, not that they should give themselves to it, or to affect it
too much. Be not thou afraid, (says the Prophet) when one is made rich, and
when the glory of his house is increased. For he shall take nothing away when
he dies, neither shall his pomp descend after him, Psalm. 49. 16. 17.
Salomons glory ended with his life, so did Psalm. 49. 16. 17.
Hamans, Herodes, and Neroes. The affecting of outward glory does cause many
to fall from God. The love of the world made Demas for sake Christ, 2. Tim. 4.
10. The 2. Tim. 4. 10.
love of money made Judas sell Christ, Math. 26. 15. The Mat. 26. 15.
love of riches, made the covetous man loose Christ, Luke 12. 20. And the
seeking of vain glory, makes Luke 12. 20.
many men neglect Christ. Seek Christ and ye shall live, Amo. 5. 6. Seek him
while he may be found, Esa. 55. 6. Amo. 5. 5.

Esa. 55. 6.

Genesis 49. 14.

Luke 5. 6.


He that has I sachar his burden must needs couch, Genesis 49. 14. He that has
rent his net, will take nothing, Luke 5. 5. They which are laden with thick
clay cannot mount up before the Lord, Habak. 2. 6. They can never be Haba. 2.
6.
faithful disposers, that are faithless workers, 1. Cor. 4. 2. They will say
and do not, Math 23. 3. So they which labor 1. Cor. 4. 2.

Mat, 23. 3.


much for vain glory, will hardly attain to true glory.

And the place thereof shall know it no more.] When Text.
the flower is cut off, or withers, the root is green in the earth, but man
when he is once dead shall live no more here, he shall live no more upon
earth. He shall be seen no more here, he shall live no more in this world.
The place where a flower has grown shall know it no more: so the place shall
know no more where man has lived.

That man being onee dead shall live no more on earth. Doct. 5.
Who of all our fathers departed this life have lived again a natural life,
we shall go to them, they shall not com to us, they triumph, we fight, they
at their iourneyes end, we travailing, they in the haven, we on the sea,
they at rest, we in trouble. Remember that my life is but wind, and that mine
eyes shall not return to see pleasure. The eye that has seen me shall see me
no more, thine eyes are upon me, and I shall be no longer. As the cloud
vanishes, and goes away: so he that goes down to the grave shall come up
no more. He shall no more return to his house, neither shall his place know
him any more. Job. 7. 7. 8. 9. 10. As if Job had said, after death I Job. 7. 7.
8. 9. 10.
shall not live here on earth, enjoying my riches, my dignities, and power, I
shall not come again to eat and drink, to have children, and to be restored
to my former estate, I shall not command servants, nor be commanded by any
higher power on earth, my life shall be a communion with the blessed Trinity,
my joy the presence of the lamb, my exercise singing, my dittie praise ye the
Lord, my consorts Saints and Angels, the place the heaven of heavens, 1. Kin.
8. 27. The Paradise, 1. Kin. 8. 27.
Luke 23. 43. The bridegromes chamber, Psalm. 19. 5. They which now see me,
shall see me no more on earth my Luke 23. 43.

Psalm. 19. 5.


soul at the time of dissolution shall return to God that gave it, Eccles.
12. 7. and my body to the dust, dust I am, Eccles. 12. 7.
concerning my body, Genesis 3. 19. There is hope of a tree Genesis 3. 19.
if it be cut down, that it will yet sprout, and the branches thereof will not
cease. Though the root of it wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof be
dead in the ground. Yet by the sent of the water it will bud and bring forth
houghes like a plant. But man is sick and dies, and man perishes, and where
is he, Job 14. 7. 8. 9. 10. He that is once dead naturally cannot be repaired
again, he Job 14 7. 8. 9. 10.
cannot return to live on earth. An house that is fallen may be built again,
a tree that is fallen may be underpropped and stayed up again: but man being
dead can return to his natural life no more. My days are swifter then a
vveauers shittle, and they are spent without hope, Job 7. 6. A weauers shittle
is soon from Job 7 6.
one end to another: so we are soon from the day of birth, to the day of
death: and our days are spent without hope ever to live a natural life. If a
man die, shall he live again, Job 14. 14. When the soul is separated Io 1 14.
14.
from the body, the body lies as a stock or block terrible to behold: if it
lie a while unburied it will putrify and stincke. We love no man so much in
his life, as we loath him after death: for then we cannot see him dead, whom
we were never weary beholding when he was alive. To desire or wish him living
that is dead, is in vain. The living shall go to the dead, but the dead not
come to the living.

First, it may warn and admonish men to do good Use. 10
whiles they live, and to set all things in order before they die. If thou have
wronged, make restitution in thy life time, for thou shall not come again to
restore. If thou will give, do it in thy life time, for thou shall not come
again. No doubt the rich man would have been more pitiful and merciful if
he had lived again on earth. Merciful giuers shall be the children of the
highest, Luke 6. 35. And be like God their Luke 6. 35.
father, who is the father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1. 3. They 2. Cor. 1. 3.
shall be his Stewards to dispose his goods, Luke 16. 2. Luke 16. 2.
And his hands to distribute his alms. All that thy hand shall find to do,
do it with all thy power, for there is neither work nor invention, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave vvhither thou go, Eccles. 9. 10. Here
we Eccles. 9. 10.
must repent, here we must give, for after death these actions shall have no
place. In this life do good, after ^^ccrris actio in calis contemplatio.
this life receive good: here labor, hereafter rest. In earth action, in
heaven contemplation. The dead ^^^monles.
are said to rest from their labors, Revel. 14. 13. Revel. 14. 13.
And although the soul thorough death does not loose his faculties,
notwithstanding she does not exercise her operations. The action of the godly
after this life is a perpetual fruition of eternal happiness, put in the
contemplation of divine glory. Our Savior says, I must do the works of him
that sent me, while it is day, the night comes when no man can work, Ioh.
9. 4. Work while ye have have light, Ioh. 12. 35. Ioh 9 4.

Ioh. 12. 35.

Gal. 6. 10.

Nallus poenitentiae ln us, nullus satisfaclionis effetlus.

Cypria ad de^^ctr.


While we have time, let us do good to all men, Gal 6. 10. As all time is not
fit to sow and plant: so all time is not to do good, for after death there is
no place of repentance, nor no effect of satisfaction. Hard dealing men give
gifts to the poor after death but too late. Funeral beneficences is not free
but formal, not cheerful, but extorted. Because the time of repentance,
satisfaction, Perk.
restitution, and such like will not long last and continue, let us now repent
and turn to the Lord, to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts, Hebr. 3. 7. 8. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to Hebr. 3.
7. 8. Quotidie est ho. he. Heb. 3. 13.
day, Hebr. 3. 13. Make satisfaction to those men whom thou have wronged, and
restore such goods, lands, and possessions as thou do detain from any man,
there can be no true repentance while the treasures of wickedness are in the
houses of the wicked, Mica. 6. 10. Mica. 6. 10.


Secondly, it may reprove many who affirm that they have seen and heard dead
men to walk and talk, to frequent their promises, and to say, I am the soul
of this man, or of that woman, I am tormented grievously in Purgatory, for this
or that which I have done, I might be delivered, if so many Masses were said
for me. If they be not popish which make such false apparitions for gains
sake, they are certain evil spirits, Satan can transform himself into an
Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11. 14. Why not into a soul. He entered 2. Cor. 11. 14.

Ioh. 13. 27.

Act. 5. 3.

Ephesians. 2. 1.


into Judas, Ioh. 13. 27. He filled Ananias heart, Act. 5. 3. He works
mightily in the sons of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. Hence it is that they are
called the children of the devil, as Paul said to Elimas, and full of all
subtlety and all mischief, the child of the devil, and enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord,
Act. 13. 10. Such were the Jews to Act. 13. 10.
whom Christ spoke, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do. Ioh. 8. 44. Hence is Ioh. 8. 44.
that the holy Ghost says, Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the
sea, for the devil is come down unto you, which has grtat wrath, knowing
that he has but a short time, Revel. 12. 12. He is a deceiuer of the people,
Revel. 12. 12.
Revel. 20. 3. 8. And his sleights and deceits are called Revel. 20. 3. 8.
the deepenesse of Satan, Revel. 2. 24. The devils perloaps Revel 2. 24.
cannot assume dead men's bodies, for they are more unfit for motion, then dead
instruments that never had life. It is a peculiar work of Gods power to raise
the bodies of men out of the grave. The Scripture does not mention that ever
evil spirits did appear with true bodies.

Seeing, man's days are few, frail and fickle, few, for fourscore years is a
long time now, though four hundred were not much in time past, frail, for the
strongest man is but weak, and fickle, for we are speedily from the womb our
living mothers, to the womb of our dead mother earth. Man's days are not only
few, frail, and fickle, but short, and so his living death is changed to an
everlasting life, and the end of a temporal is the beginning of an eternal
life. Man's days are not only short, but also full of trouble, notwithstanding
the sorrows of a bitter life shall be recompensed with a blessed death, and
the going out of a bad, is the beginning of a better world. Man's days, pomp,
glory, birth, blood, are but as vanishing flowers, this world is transitory,
and when man dies he shall leave all behind him, he shall carry no more with
him going, then he brought coming: no more out of the world, then he brought
into the world, whereof he shall have any use: and when a man is dead he shall
return no more. If a man wrong, or deceive, oppress and go beyond the seas
at his return he may right those he has wronged, and relieve those he has
oppressed: but man that wrongeth, oppresses, and iniureth in this life, and
dies in the sin, shall not return to live on earth, to repent for it,
neither to satisfy for it, therefore while we live, let us so live, that we
may live in death.

I have hitherto spoken of life and death, now I must speak something of the
life and death of this Worshipful Gentleman whose body stands before us
ready to be interred.

To live well is the ready way to die well, as men live: so they for the most
part die. A blessed life, shall have a blessed death. Such as expect for
comfort in death, must be obedient to God in life. If men will live till they
be dead, they must die while they live, a good life here, brings a good death
hereafter. That his life was godly appeared by his hospitality how many of the
Saints has he fed, and lodged, insomuch as if he was a Gaius for them, how did
he relieve the poor daily at his doors and in time of sickness how provident
was he for them. He was a peacemaker among his neighbors, composing
controversies, and ending many needless suites, which either pride, or
tyranny, or selfewill, or envy had begun. He had a great love to the means of
his own salvation, I mean the preaching of the word, frequenting it often if
his health did serve him, countenancing and supporting the Lecture where he was
a continual hearer. How kind and affable he was to Gods Ministers they will
be ready to witness. In his sickness he was very penitent and sorrowful,
confessed his sin, desiring God to forgive him: nay, assuring himself that
all his sins were pardoned and forgiven for Christ's sake. In his sickness he
was patient, weary of the world, desirous to go home, forgiving and forgetting
all wrongs and injuries done him. His talk for the most part in his sickness
was of heavenly matters, and such as came to comfort him, might receive comfort
from him. He did often pray, and join in prayer, and which was worthy
observance did pray for a blessing on Physic before he would use it. He used
all lawful means commending the success to God. So lived he, and thus died
he, leaving an earthly possession, and a house of clay, but now enjoying an
heavenly inheritance, a mansion, a resting place of eternal glory, leaving
loving friends: but now enjoying such as are more lovely, leaving children, and
yet gone to his children. All did not speak well of Christ, some said he was
a deceiuer, some a glutton, some a wine-bibber, some a company keeper of wicked
men; so all may not speak well of this Gentleman, there be cursing Shimeries,
and railing Rabshakethes, some that will speak good of none. As the red dragon
cast out water after the woman that had brought forth a man child to drown
it; so such as are the dragons young will cast out slanders, lies, false
reports, and cursed speeches after those which die in the Lord to disgrace
them. The lives of such men as love to disgrace the dead we mayknow, their
death God knows.

FINIS.

