A book of Christian Questions and answers. Wherein are set forth the cheef
points of the Chris^^^^ ^^ligion in manner of an ^dgment. A work right
necessary and profitable for all such as s^al have to deal with the captious
quarelinges of the wrangling adversaries of Gods truth.

Written in Latin by the learned clerk Theodore Beza Vezelius, and newly
translated into English by Arthur Golding.

Imprinted at London, by William How, for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the Lamb. Ano. 1574.

To the Right honorable and his singular good Lord Henry Earl of Huntingdon,
Baron Hastinges, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter etc. Arthur
Golding wissheth abundance of Gods grace, increase of honor, and long
continuance of life in health and prosperity.
MY very good Lord, it is daily and in manner commonly to beseene, (and I pray
God that our unthankfulness cause us no more to feel it) that the perverse and
through settled Papists, the professed enemies of God and all goodness, linking
themselves in league with worldlinges, Epicures, Athiestes, and Neuters, birds
of their own brood, do even yet after so great light of the Gospel and so
manifest conuictio^ of their Gross errors, still boldly persist in their
wilful wickedness: not only hardening their own stubborn hearts against the
apparent truth, but also (as much as in the^ lies) steali^g away the kie of
knowledge from others that would fain enter into the kingdom of heaven if they
let the^ not and casting stumbling blocks in the ways of the weak and
uncircumspect, of whose souls they make merchandise by their deceiuable and
inuenimed speech. But certesse although long impunity have made the^ over
bold, both to prate and to Practice, in manner what they list: ^et not
withstanding for as much as the general brightness of Christ's Gospel
discovers their grosser sort of ^ealinges unto mostmen: they assault us
not now so much with open and manifest untruths, (which were ordinary
weapons of their warfare when they had the swoorde of souereintie and the law
of cruelty in their own hand) as with secret invasions of sophistical
reasons and crabbed questions, specially where they find hope of victory, by
means of other men's simplicity and want of learning to withstand them. And
truly in that art, no folk are so cunning, as the children of darkness. For
worldly wisdom having bent her self to maintain error, is a fruiteful moother
of all sorts of quiddities: and the old serpent is both sly and vnslothfull
in tra^sforminge himself and his impes into all shapes to do mischief. For
as much therefore as there be many godly and welminded persons who having not
yet mounted above the short reach of natural reason, do still measure Gods
mysteries (howbecit with a single meaning mind) by their slender capacity of
their small understanding, dealinge in likewise as if a man that were
iorneying by the first dawning of the day should trip his foot against some
stone which he would eschew at the coming of the clear and open light:
whose faith is often times shaken, yea and now and then crased also, either by
such as standing upon the reputacion of their own skill, hunt for vainglory by
russhinge unadvisedly into the discourse of Gods deepest mysteries, which
ought not to be spoken of without great reverence and modesty: or by such as
being wilfully blind, diffame the things that they know not: or by such as
being given up too a hardened mind, blaspheme the known truth through
malicious spitefulnes: or by such as being given wholly to their belly and
their bed, cannot abide to hecre of any thing that might make them goodmen: or
else by such as have learned in Lucians school to scoff at all things that
like not their fantastical folly: too the intent that the godly persos might
always have at hand, as well wherewith to satisfy themselves and other well
disposed persons in doubtful cases, as also to stop the slau^derous mouths of
the quarelinge adversaries, or at leastwise wherewith to answer their captious
cauelinges in the chief points of our religion: I have translaied this
Christen treatise of the learned writer Theodore Beza, who by a certain modest
questioninge and answering there unto, does in dialogwise briefly set forth
unto us the true knowing of God and our selves, and the right use and end of
the same. For taking his beginning at the intent of our creation, he declares
that God must be worshipped and served in none otherwise, than he himself
has taught us by his word written. The authority whereof being avouched by
many profes, he sets down what the same teaches us to believe, concerning
the Godhead and the three persons thereof. Then showing us what we ought to
consider chiefly in God he unfolds the mystery of the vnio^ of the two
natures in the one person of Christ, (whereby he confuteth the heresy of the
Manichees,) and lays forth the order of our salvation by Christ's incarnation,
death, resurrection and Ascentio^. Here upon he takes occasion to show the
manner of Christ's being present and absent, and thereby condemns the errors of
popish transsubstantiation, and of the vbiquitie or every where being of
Christ's ma^hod maintained by Brentius and certain others. After this he
passes forth to Christ's mediation and intercession, where he disproueth the
heresy of Arrius, the opinion of surmising three Gods, the dotages of
Samosatene, and the forgeries of the Papists in praying unto saints. From
thence he descends to the last judgment: and answering by the way to an
objection of the foreiudgeme^t that each several person receives at his
departure out of this life, he proceeds to the general rising again of the
flesh, and to the rewards of the godly, and the punishment of the wicked:
whereby he takes occasion too inquire of the way to eternal life, which is
Christ taken hold on by faith. There shows he what faith is and whence it
comes: and so discoursinge largely of man's corruption, he disproueth the
Pelagians freewyll, and declares in what wise man's natural will woorketh
together with Gods preuentinge grace, and how the continuance of Gods graces
insewinge, is the cause of the effectual working of the former graces, whereby
he utterly ouerthro weth the merit or deserving of men's own works. Afterward
having first showed the manner of the spreding of original sin into al mankind:
he returns to the ^emedie thereof by being greffed into Christ: the manner
whereof he describes at large. and there agein confuteth the heresy of
Transsubstantiation, and declares faith to be the free gift of god through
christ by whom we obtain wisdom, Rightuosnes, Holiness, and Redemption,
which are the fruits of being greffed into him: by the benefit whereof we
begin also in part to understand aright, to will aright, and to work a right,
which is as much as to live after the spirit. In the layinge forth of these
things, he rippeth up the feeblenes of man's natural reason, and wassheth away
the excuse of his vnhablenes to fulfill Gods law because he cannot but sin, and
disfeateth him of challendging any piece of righteousness to himself. Here upon
is brought in an exposition of the rewarding or recompencinge of good works,
together with a declaration from whence they spring, and of the difference in
punishements and rewards By occasion whereof he disproueth the fond objection of
such as hold opinion that Christ has abolished but the merits of the
ceremonial la we, and defaceth the works of Papisticall preparation, showing
wherefore works be called good. And so he concludes that all things needful to
salvation, are found in Christ alone to whom we cleave by faith, so as there
is no dampnation for them that be greffed in Christ: and that the sam knowledge
is the only knowledge of Salvation, and that the said faith or knowledge is the
free gifie of God, put into us by Gods mere grace, and not bred in us by
nature, or purchased by our own power or deserving. By ^his means he leads
us to the headspringes of Gods eternal providence and predestination: in the
discourse whereof, after he has answered to all objections, and modestly and
learnedly showed what a Christen man ought to think or speak in that behalf
with reverence of Gods majesty: last of all, he sets forth a godly and
necessary remedy, against the perlous temptation of particular predestination,
for such as are desirous to know whither they be ordained to salvation or no.
And thus your L. Wisdom perceives that although this book be but small in
volume: yet contains it right profounde mysteries: and great store of matter
very necessary to be perfectly known, and to be had at the fingers ends of
all men, specially which shall have occasion to encounter with the impes of the
old serpent, namely with the adders brood of the Romish Antechrist, and with
the children of this world, who be much more politic, wily and forecasting
in their kind, then the children of light be. Wherefore I thought it not an
unmeet piece of work whereby to testify some manner of remembrance of your L*
most honorable courtesy to wards me: according whereunto it may please you too
give this my labor leave to pass forth under your favorable acceptance, as a
hansel^ of some greater work her after too the more benefit of my native
country, and the further commendation of your L. goodness who are right well
known to be an earnest fauorer of Gods glory and a diligent furtherer of the
welfare of his church written at London the. 12. of June. 1572.

Your good Lordships most humble to command Arthur Golding.

A book of christen questions and aunswers.
Question.

WHo has set us in this world?

Answer. God, of his own singular goodness.

Quest. To what end.

Ans. To the end that we should serve him: and that he should be glorified
by giving eternal life unto us.

Quest. Which is the way to woorship him a right, and consequently to attaiue
eternal life, and to glorify him dewly.

Ans. To know and acknowledge him Romans 1. 21. John. 17. 3
after the same manner that he has disclosed himself unto us in his word.

Quest. What call thou the word of God.

Ans. That which the Prophets and Gods word Ephe. 2. 20.
Apostles have received by gods spirit, and committed to writing: which book
we term by the name of the old and new Testament.

Quest. Who then is the author of those books?

Ans. God him self. And the writers or Romans 10. 8 2. tim. 3. 16 2. Pet. 1. 20.
penners thereof were the Prophets and Apostles.

Quest. How know thou that? Acts. 2. 11. 1. Cor. 1. 17 18. 19. 20 21. 22.
23. 24. Luke. 21. 15 Acts. 6. 10 John 5. 30 Acts. 17. 11 2. Cor. 4. 3


Ans. The things themselves that are treated of those in writings: the majesty
of god shyning forth in that homelynesse of speech: the heavenly pureness
and singular holiness that utters it self every where in them: the most sure
stedfastnes of the principles whereupon that doctrine is grounded: and the
laying together of the foresayings and of their fallings out: do enough and
more then enough show these writings to be altogether divine and heavenly, and
that the same is the most perfect doctrine of truth, though all the world
should say never so much to the contrary. To the confirmation hereof makes
also the orderlye success of things done, and the record of godly men
delivered from hand to hand. And John. 6. 45 Acts. 13. 48 Phil. 1. 29 Acts.
^6. 14
that I know these things in such wise, as I fully agree to matters which men
are wont partly to despise and laughe to scorn, and partly so to embrace, as
yet notwithstanding they wot not at all what they believe: I impute it wholly
to the holy Ghost, who has opened my heart that I might both here and
understand these secrets. 2 timothy 3. 17.


Quest. Is all that we must believe to salvation, comprehended in those writing?

Ans. Altogether.

Quest. What is it then that the writings of the prophets and Apostles do
teach us cheefely to believe concerning God himself?

Ans. That the Essence of God is one, Being or substance Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Mat. 28.
19 what the essence or substance of god is.
and the persons three: the father, the sun and the holy Ghost.

Quest. What meanest thou by Essence?

An. I mean the nature that is common to those three persons.

Quest. What meanest thou by persons?

Ans. I mean the very parties themselves what the persons of the godhead be.
that have their being in that nature.

Quest. These three persons then, are they three gods: like as there be so many
men, as there be persons endued with human nature?

Ans. No, not so. For these three several persons, are all but one self same
God.

Quest. Why so?

Ans. For in as much as gods Essence is The distinction of the persons in the
godhed
most single, infinite, and unable to be parted: therefore these three
parsons are not separated one from another, but only distinguished: so as the
father is not the son or the holy Ghost, but the father only: nor the son
the father or the holy Ghost, but the son only: nor the holy Ghost the
father or the son, but the holy Ghost only: and yet all those three
several persons be one self same perfect God, of one euerlastingnesse, of one
Essence, and of one equality, howbeit that in order (though not in degree)
the Father is first, who is of none: the Son is second, who is of the
Father: and the holy Ghost is third, who is of the father and of the son,
both of them unspeakably by the everlasting communion of the whole Essence of
the godhead: the Son begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeding.

Quest. Truly as far as I see, the depth of this mystery is impossible to be
uttered.

Ans. It is so in deed, if a man will seek Reverence to be given to gods
mysteries.
a reason how that should come to pass. But we be sure it is so, by the
express word of God. And therefore we must believe and reverence the mystery
that god has opened unto us, and not search for the thing that he has hidden
from us, and which we be not able to conceive.

Quest. Does this knowledge of Gods Essence, suffice to save a man.

Ans. No. For besides many other Knowledge of God.
things, whereby Gods nature is after a sort painted out unto us: least we
might surmise him to be like the things Romans 8. 15. 16. 17. etc. ^bm 38. 39
Gal. 4. 6. 7 John. 16. 17. etc.
that are created, it stands us chiefly on hand to know, how he is minded
toward us.

Quest. That thou may know this, what considerest thou chiefly in God.

Ans. Perfect justice, and perfect mercy.

Quest. What call thou justice, and Exo 20. 5. 6 Ex. 34. 6. 7. What gods
justice is.
what call thou mercy?

Ans. These things are not in God, as qualities. But by gods justice, I mean
that Gods nature is so pure and sound of it self, that he utterly hates and
most severely punishes all unrighteousness.

And by the name of perfect mercy, I What gods mercy ^^.
mean that whatsoever he bestows upon us, (and specially the benefit of
everlasting life) proceeds wholly of his mere free gift and grace.

Quest. But these things agree not together. How justice and mercy may match
For how is he a most sore punisher for those things which he gives of his
mere grace?

Ans. That these things do very well agree, the father has well showed in
his son, who has made full satisfaction for our sins, and is given unto us
freely by the father.

Quest. Did not the father then, or the holy ghost aby the death for us?

Ans. No truly, none of them both: but John. 1. 14 and. 16. 13 and 17. 3. Romans
8. 14. 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
alonely the son whom the father sent, and whom the holy Ghost teaches and
seals fast in us.

Quest. Is not the Son very God by nature, and consequently the immortality
it self, as well as the father and the holy Ghost?

Ans. Yes. Neither were he our savior, Math. 1. 21. Mark 2. 7
if he were not God.

Quest. How then could he die?

Ans. Where as by his godhead he was Gal. 4. 45 Heb. 2. 9 14. 15 Christ's
Incarnation
the eternal life it self: he became man, that he might die in the flesh.

Quest. But the son is god unchangeable: how then is he become man?

Ans. Not by minglyng the natures or properties together, nor by any chaungynge
John. 1. 14 Heb. 2. 16 1. John 1. 7
of God into man, or of man into God, of which things none of both is
possible: but by so strait and familiar knittyng of the Sons Godhead to the
nature of man taken unto it, that the Son of God being very God and very
man, is henceforth one person Jesus Christ.

Quest. And what manner of union is this? Union


Ans. In greek it is called hipostaticall, and in English Personal: and so it
is in deed.

Quest. I pray thee describe it, that it may be understood, at least wise
after a sort?

Ans. The things are said to be united A Discriptio^ of union or vnitinge of
two things into one
in nature, which come together into one nature, whether the same be done
without any growyng together, mixyng together, or turnynge one into another,
like as the three persons of the Godhead are one most single substance: or
whether it be don by only knitting together, like as the soul and body meet
together, as essential parts in making that which is man: or whether it be by
means of some mixture or turnynge of the one into the other, like as befalls
in the interchange of ye elements and in things that be mixed. And things are
said to be united personally, which are joined in such wise, as there ryseth
thereof, but one selfsame person: like as the body and soul are so united to
make the one nature of man, that they close together into one person or
particular. Of this sort is also the union The union of the two natures in
Christ.
of the two natures in christ, which join together, (not to make some one
third thing as Eutiches misweened, but) to make both one person, without any
confusion, either of the natures themselves, or of the essential properties.
And I said an union of natures, but not of persons, least it might be surmised,
that two persons were grown into one, whereas in Christ there is one nature
which a man may see is peculiar to the word it self, and in that nature
rests also the other nature that was taken to it, that is to with the nature
of man. For the person of god took not to it the person of man: but the divine
nature, (and that in the only person of the son) that is to say, in
respect that the same godhed was the son, and not in respect that it was
either the father or the holy ghost) took unto it man's nature destitute of it
own ^ersonship as I might term it. Therefore to be short, like as in the
Godhead ^here be three persons coming together ^n one selfsame nature: even
so in christ ^here be two natures joined together in the one person of the
Son: so as the ^hree persons are not three gods, but one God, by reason of
the most single uniting of the three persons into one selfsame nature: neither
are there two Christ's, but ^ne Christ, by reason, not of two perfect persons,
but of two perfect natures joined together, not to make some one third nature,
but united into the person of the ^onne, in which person both the natures ^re
vphilde.

Quest. Neither comprehend I this secret.

Ans. Then yet again reverence thou Reverence of heavenly mysteries.
the thing that thou comprehendest not. For all the whole Scripture cries out,
that it is most true. And if it were not so, he should not be a Jesus (that
is to say, a savior) to us, nor yet Christ, that ^s to say anointed, as our
Sovereign and everlasting King, Prophet, and Preeste.

Quest. But could not God have saved man by some other mean less removed from
our capacities?

Ans. Certesse he could. But this was the most convenient mean for him to
show, as well his singular justice, as his singular mercy.

Quect. How so?

Ans. Because that if he had either saved The orderly proceeding of gods just.
us without full satisfaction, or exacted the same satisfaction of any other
than of the nature that was indetted: he might have seemed to have been
unmindful of his justice, and therefore it was requisite that Heb. 2. 14 15.
16. 17 Rom, 8. 3
our savior should be a man. But had he ben but only man, he should never
have discharged gods wrath, and so consequently he should not have been able to
wind himself out of it, and much less to deliver us. And therefore it
behooued, ^ Cor. 5. 19
that the flesh which was taken, should be sustained and borne up by the
nature of the godhead, most perfectly united unto it. Furthermore as concerning
mercy Romans 5. 8
could there be given any surer, euidenter yea or more divine assurance of most
perfect mercifulness, tha^ that the father has even his own only son for
his enemies, and the son likewise given his ^wne life willyngly for us that
are most ^nworthy?

Quest. It is even so. But was not Christ Christ's ma^hod most pure without
sin, Math. 1. 20 Rom 8. 3 1. Pet. 3. 18
^imselfe giltlesse?

An* Yes forsoothe. And therefore he was ^onceiued by the holy Ghost in the
virgin ^ary, not only without any spot of vn^eannesse, but also endewed with
most ^ingular sowndnesse and pureness in his ^eash. For otherwise he himself
should ^aue had need of an other to be his saui^ur: neither could his
oblation have plea^^d God, neither truly could God have ^ounde in his heart to
have united himself ^o so unclean a nature.

Quest. Could it then stand with the nature Christ suffered as a borow or
sue^tie, and not as an offender
of the sovereign Justice, to exact ^unishme^t for other folks sins, at the
^ands of a man that was most giltlesse, ^ea and also most holy?

An. In deed the father might have see^ed to do his son wrong, if he had
pu^ished him as an offender. He struck 2. Cor. 5. 21
^im therefore, not as an offender, but as ^ne that of his own accord was
willing ^o yield himself as a borowe or surety for the unrighteous: and
therefore the father did nothing that might not w^ stand with his justice.

Quest. But why was he condemned ^^ the bar before the Judge, and also
ex^cuted by the death of the Cross, seyn^ he could have dyed otherwise also
for us?

Ans. To the end it might thereby the better appear, that he became accurse^
for our sakes, and that he took upon hy^ the whole wrath of his father against
our sins, to set us at full liberty.

Quest. But death is incident to the body Objection against christ's full
redeeming of the whole man by his death
only: and therefore by this death o^ his, he seems to have discharged bu^
only our bodies. And yet notwithstanding, all of us dye still: VVhereupon i^
seems to follow, that he saves neither body nor soul.

Ans. It was requisite that Christ should take unto him both soul and body
togeether: that he might both die, (for the fyrs^ death is the separation of
the soul from the body) and also that being become perfect man, he might
deliver men whole ^ perfect.

Quest. Meanest thou then that he suffered also the pains whereunto our souls
^e subject?

^ns. Yea verily, for it is even the chiest Gal. 3. 13. Christ suffers the
whole dew for our sins.
part of Christ's sufferinges, that be^es the extreme torments of most cru^l
death, he also endured for our sakes ^e most horrible weight of gods wrath, ^an
the which nothing can be more ^eadfull: during which time, his Godhead did
as it were rest in him all ^e while, to the intent that the man^de which he
had taken unto him, al^houghe it quite quayled not under the ^urden, (which
otherwise had been vn^llerable to the very Angels,) might ^otwithstanding most
sharply feel, and ^^nally bear out, gods whole wrath vn^tterably inflamed
against all the sins ^f all the chosen: even till satisfaction were made to
the full. Therefore at what ^ime he hung upon the Cross, he was ^lso in the
mids of the torments of hell that he might fully deliver us from both the
deaths.

Quest. But I pray you, if he came to de^iuer Why Christ delivered us by dying.
us from death, why did he himself dye.

Ans. Because that else the said sovereign justice of god, which it beehooued
to be satisfied, Heb. 2, 14 Esaias. 53. 8 etc. Ose 13. 14
should not appear in our redemption. And therefore the more glorious is
Christ's victory even in this respect, that he overcame death by diyng.

Quest. Why then do the chosen sort why the chosen die still
die, seeing Christ has vanquished death for them?

Ans. Because Christ is not come, to restore Romans 5. 15 etc.
us into the same state of this world, which we have lost in Adam: but to
remove us into far better immortality, which thing cannot be done, except
we depart out of this world. Therefore albeit 1. cor* 15. 35
that this separation of the soul and body, which is called the first
death, sprange of sin, the remnantes whereof are even in the holiest men: yet
notwithstanding if ye mark well the purpose and drift of God, he strikes not
the chosen with it properly as a judge, but sendes it to them as a most loving
father that calls away his children home to himself: and therefore it not
only frayeth not the believers, but also refreshes and cheereth How the power
of christ vttred tselfe.
them.

Quest. Why then did not that power of his utter it self out of hand against
death?

Ans. Verily it uttered it self out of hand Math. 28. 2. 3. etc. Acts, 2. 24.
in as much as his body suffered not any corruption. Nevertheless, it was his
will to have it lie buried for a space: both to the intent that his being dead
in deed, and his death being confirmed also by the seals of his enemies,
might prove his resurrection which was to insew anon after: and also to the
intent he might like a conqueror pursew death fleeyng away before him into his
innermoste dungeon and consequently perfume our graves with Romans 6. 4 what
Christ's Resurrection witnesses unto us. Romans 6. 10. 1. Cor. 15. 3. 4. etc.
The cause of Christ's Assention, and how be is absent from us. Ephe. 4. 8. 9.
10. 1. cor. 15 20
the quickening sent of his own death.

Quest. Is his resurrection then a witness that he undertook to die willyngly,
to purchase immortality for us?

Ans. It is so. For he is risen by his own power, never to die any more, to
the end that we also should be quickened in him for evermore.

Quest. But why went he up into heaven and not rather tarried still with us?

Ans. In body he is verily and in deed gone away from us among whom he was,
and is mounted above all heavens, where he was not before in body: both to the
intent that he being the first that is risen from death, might first take
possession of the heavenly kingdom, triumphing over his vanquished enemies:
and also to teach us to hye us thitherwarde, where he has prepared a place
for us.

And yet is he all the while present with John. 14. 2 Col. 3. 1
us by his spirit, governing his Church as the head governs the members
that be joined unto it.

Quest. Then has he shifted his place, to go thither where as is no place.

Ans. It is so, he has changed place, Mat. 28. 20
according as the thing done witnesses and according as the verynesse of a
body (yea though it be glorified) requires. But his changing of place is
according to that nature which is bounded: and that is done, not to forsake us
(for in as much as Christ is one person, God and man together, he is
nevertheless still present with his servants by his whole power, because he
is very God) but t^ wythdrawe us from the earth, and to teach us to seek
heavenly things. And where as thou say there is no plac^ whether as he is
ascended: it is a fond^ imagination. Let this suffice thee, namely that the
godhead only is infinite, an^ that all other things either in heaven or above
heaven, or in earth, or in the bottomless deepes, and consequently his body
(which though it be a glorified body is notwithstanding still a man's body,)
are according to the nature of them, finite and bownded with place. And how
they be contained in that eternal glory, we shall then perceive, when we
come thither ourselves.

Quest. Thou seem then to divide Christ, or to make two Christ's, of who^ the
one is present and the other is away.

Ans. When I say that Christ is absent as concerning his flesh, and yet auouche
him to be verily present, both as concerning his godhead, and also if he be
considered as a whole thing, that is to say, as one person God and man: I
divide him not, but take away the confoundyng of his natures.

Quest. What is meant by his sitting at Christ fitting at the right hand of the
father.
the right hand of the father?

Ans. That he having laid aside, not the verines of his flesh, but all
infirmity and frailty of the flesh, is now advanced to such state of glory,
as surmounteth all name: That is to wit, that his flesh is Phi. 2. 9
already fully glorified by the godhead which dwells bodily in it without
bereeuing Col. 2. 9.
it of the own essence or esse^tiall properties, and y^ it orders and rules
all things in heaven and earth with full Mat. 28. 18. Phil 2 ^ 0. Heb. 2. 8. 9
1. cor. 15. 17 Essential properties Luke 24. 39
power, sauinge him that has made all things subject unto it.

Quest. what meanest thou by essential properties.

An. That which being taken away, the thing must of necessity no more be that
which it was before. As for example, if a body be bereft of quantity, it must
of necessity cease to be a body.

Quest. But God is almighty.

An. Who denies that?

Qu. Ergo, he can bring to pass, that one selfsa^e A right papistical
objection, whereon they build their deuilish mass
body may either be in many places at once, or somwhere as in a place, and
other somwher not as in a place, but after some other incomprehensible manner.

An. That god can cause a thing y^ is, not to be any more, as well as he has
caused the thing to be, which was not, no man doubts except he be stark mad:
and therefore a much les likelihod is it, yt he should not be able to alter the
shapes and qualities of things at his pleasure. But to bring to pass, y^ a
thing should at once both be and not be, or at once be of such sort and not
of such sort, god cannot do, because he cannot lie. And not to be able to lie,
is not a sign of weakness, but of unvariable mightines.

Quest. Then do you conclude that Christ is now absent from us as concerning
his madhod.

Ans. Yea, and so far of from us, as the Colo. 3. 1
earth where we be, is distant from that place which is above all the heavens,
whither that flesh of his is carried up.

Q. Yet has he himself said, that he was Ihon. 3. 13.
then in heaven, when he talked with Ni codemus upon earth.

An. This and such other things are meant by communicating of proprieties.

Quest. What call thou propriety? what property is


A That which logicians call propre after the fourth manner: As for example, to
be infinite is a propriety in the nature of the godhead, and quantity is a
propriety in all things created, and specially in That is to say partaking,
made apertaining to the one as well as to the other, made common or indiffere^^
to both.
bodily things.

Quest. Then is this communicating false, for as much as such manner of
propriety cease to be propre or peculiar as soon as it becomes common.

An. This later part I simplye grant unto, but not unto the other.

Quest. But these two things seem to stick inseperably together.

An. Then take you the case to stand thus. How each of christ's natures
communicate their properties unto other.
Either of christ's natures, y^ is to say his godhead and his manhod, keep
still their essential properties to themselves, with out communicating them
the one to the other, according as I have said already which thing unless we
grant: infinite and utterly wicked absurdities will insew. For if his godhead
should receive into it self y^ properties of his manhod, it should be
tra^sformed into ma^hod: and contrariwise, if his manhod should admit into it
self y^ properties of his godhead, it should become a certain counterfeit
godhead, so as christ might be said to be neither very god nor very man, and
so consequently he should not be our savior, And therefore there is not any
intercommuning either of natures or of essential properties. For look how
false and wicked are these propositions, flesh is the godhead, and the godhead
is flesh: even so false and wicked are these also, Christ's flesh is every where
or Christ is every where as touching his flesh: and christ's godhead is not
every where or christ is not eueri where as touching his godhead: most false of
al the^ are these. The godhead was crucified or died: and christ's flesh is
infinite. Now although these two natures, together with their essential
properties, cannot communicate each with other as I said before: yet are they
united in such sort, as they make but one selfsame party, or one person
only. Therefore look how false are these said speches, the godhead is flesh,
and flesh is the godhead* so true and catholyke are these, god (that is to wit
the word) is a man, and a man is god. And that is by reason of the unity of y^
persons which springs, not of the comunicating of natures (for as I told you,
there is no such thing, unless ye take communicating for union, which were
to improper) but of the uniting of natures. For god is not a man in that he is
god, (which thing must notwithstanding needs follow, if the natures of the very
essences that is to say of the godhed and of the manhod communicated each with
other, that is to wit, were the one as well as y^ other) but in another respect
that is to wit, in y^ he has united a man unto him. Neither is a man god, in
y^ he is a man: but in another respect, namely in that he is united unto god.
And look what I have said concerning the natures, the same must also be
understood concerning the essential properties, which are vnco^municable as
well as y^ other. Most true therefore are these speeches, and they must be laid
forth in former wise: god (y^ is to wit y^ word) was conceived, borne,
suffered, was crucified, died, was buried, and rose again, namely in that he
united a man unto him, and not in that he is god. So also are these speeches. A
man is y^ eternal, infinite, and invisible son of god, filling al things etc.
not as in himself, y^ is to say, not in y^ he is a man nor by any
communicating of properties, but in y^ he is taken into one person by the son
of god.

Quest. But these manner of speeches seem The great force of the union of
natures.
hard and very strange.

Ans. Nay truly. If you would cast away thy misconceiued and prejudicial
opinion: you sholdest find the^ to be exceeding fit to let forth the union of y^
natures: which is so great, y^ look what thing cannot be said of the
several, y^ is to wit of the godhead by it self, or of the manhod by it self:
The same may very well be attributed to either of both jointly* y^ is to wit,
either to god or to the man: and that is because y^ of the two natures, their
is not made one nature, but one person. And therefore we auouche, that in the
natures there is an union and not an unity: and ye the unite is of the person
only. Whereupon it cummeth to pass that the whole person, not only is
signified by the name of ye whole person, (y^ is to say by Jesus, which
comprehends both y^ natures united together): but also is meant by the name of
either of both the natures, that is to say, by the son of god, and the son
of man howbeit as considered ioyntlye and not severally. So also whereas ye name
Christ (that is to say anointed) agrees properly but to the manhod only (for
the godhead was not anointed, but did anoint) yet does it betoke^ y^ whole
person. And it is a common ordinary matter in all things to speak of persons
after ye like manner, to show y^ uniting of the parts of which the unity of y^
person consists, So this manner of speech Peter is an apostle: is as proper
as may be, agreing to Peter's whole person, and to ye several parts thereof, y^
is to wit both to his soul and his body, but this manner of speech* Peter is
the so^ of Jonas, agrees to him as he is whole together, and as he is
considered to be some hole thing, y^ is to wete as he is considered, by unity
of person: and not to both the several parts of him, saving in respect of
the one part only, namelye of the body: except perhaps thou think that the
soul also is begotten. It is a like form of speech, when we term any man a
mortal creature or a reasonable creature* which term doubtless do fitly
agree to the whole man as he is whole, by reason of the unite of his person:
and yet that is but in respect of some one of his parts only. Yea truly, the
force of this personal union is so great, that a man may speak of it in the
same phrases of spech still, eue^ after it is dissolved: as if a man should
say: Peter lies buried at Rome (for we will put the case to be so:) the
proposition shall be true, and yet but in respect of his body only, albeit that
Peter (that is to what is me^t by communic^tinge of properties
say the whole person) be named.

Quest. Wherefore do thou then term it a comunicating of properties, if there
be no comunicating of natures and essential properties in deed?

An. By communicating of properties, we mean not the very personal union or
the manner of the union, but the report that is made by reason of the personal
^nion of the two natures: in which re^ort the essential property, or the
ope^ation, that agrees to some one of the na^ures, is attributed to the person
in joint ^esse and not in seueralnesse. And for^smuch as this report is true:
there must ^eedes also be truth contained under it. Howbeit in the aforesaid
respect, that is ^o say, of the whole person considered ^oyntly together.

Quest. Then co^cludest thou again, that Christ, as concerning his flesh, is
departed verily and in deed out of the earth, up above all the heavens, and
therefore is absent from us that are upon earth.

An. So is it. And yet I grant, that How christ is present with us
Christ being man, is still present with us, howbeit in another respect than of
his manhod, that is to wete, in that the self same Christ which is man, is God
also. yea, and if thou will, I grant thee thus much more, that Christ's
manhood also is present, howbeit in other respect, that is to wit, not in it
self or in it own substance, but in respect that it cleaves by personal
union unto the word which is every where, and therefore also is in very deed
in his supper,

Quest. What does Christ then auail ^ To what purpose Christ's bodily absence
^erueth. Mat. 28 18 John. 17. 2 Mat. 28* 20 John. 15. 4 Gal, 2. 20 Ephe. 1. 11.
now as touching his flesh, if he hau^ forsaken us?

A. Nay, he has not forsaken us, in a^ much as even now also in his glorified
flesh, he disposes althinges both in heaven and earth, and has received a
nam^ that is above all names, at his father^ hand. By virtue of which
authority he quickneth cherishes, and gouernet^ his church in this world by
his secret and unutterable power* and there withal reigns in the mids of al
his enemies: And in heaven he makes intercession to his father, until the
time that the last enemy (namely death,) be utterly put to flight.

Q. I pray you, what manner of intercession Christ's intercession
is this that you speak of?

A. He makes intercession, first in pacifiyng the father toward us by the
continual freshnes of his own innocence and obedience: and secondly because
we cannot call upon the father aright but in his name, so as he steppeth
evermore as an attoneme^t maker betwixt us and the father, to the end that
whatsoever we offer to the father, may be well accepted. (...) for the suit
that some men dream that ^ist should make, with kneeling down ^is fathers feet:
it is but fond deuic^ such men as have no skill to put a ^erence between
Christ when he ^s in weakness, and Christ being ^w in glory, nor finally
to discern hea^nly things from earthly things.

^uest. What think thou then of Obieccion against christ's mediation in
both his natures
^em which do so wilfullye maintain ^at Christ is not a mediator in respect
(...) both his natures?

^ns. I think them to be the devils In^uments, prepared to hinder the work
(...) the Lord, which thing experience yt ^lfe has taught us.

^uest. But to be a mean betokens a ^ace beneath the highest, and it
belon^eth to the lesser person to make means ^o the greater person: Hereuppon
I ga^her, that they seem too be Arrianes, ^hiche hold opinion that Christ
is a ^eane and a meanemaker or mediator ^s touching his godhead also.

Ans. I should wonder, that in so great ^ght of the Gospel, there could be
any ^ound, that would suffer themselves too be beguyled with so tryfling
toys, if (...) deed it self bewrayde not, that they n^uer followed gods
Gospel with a ryg^^ zeal. I speak of the wilful sort, a^ of such as are
condemned by their own judgment.

Quest. But this is no answering.

An. The shamefulnesse of the matte^ compels me to bruste out into the^^
words, because I see so many ha^ shrunk away upon so small occasion (...)
none, first unto the heresye of Arrius, afterward to the surmized opinion of
thr^ Gods, and finallye to the deuelishe dotag^ of Samosetane. Go to therefore,
and let v^ enquire of them severally in order.

Quest. Think thou then, ihat to be^ Difference between a mean and a
mediator or meanmaker.
mean is another thiug than to be a m^diator or meanemaker?

An. Yea truly. For the word Mean man betoken but the quality or state of a
person: and so the thing that is betwixt^ two vttermore things, may be
dee^med a mean or a middle thing? But ^ mediator or meanemaker, betokenet^ an
Vmper or attonementseker. Which are things so far diverse, that one may^ be a
mediator or meanemaker, which notwithstanding is not of a mean or ^ddle
degree, as when we seek to set ^en at one: and contrariwise, one may of a
mean or middle degree, and yet shall not follow of necessity that he is
^ediator.

Quest. But Christ is both a mean and Christ is both a mean and a mediator.
mediator.

An. I grant it.

Quest. If he be a mean in that he is the lord, or the son: the^ it follows
that ^^e son is inferior to the father, name ^e as if he were endewed with
some ^ind of Godhead that were a mean be^wene the godhead of the father and the
nature of man.

An. Then will thou have Christ to be mean, as touching the one of his
na^ures only, that is to wit as touching is manhod: or else to be no mean at
all?

Quest. Nay, but answer me first to my ^emaund.

An. I answer then, that have thou an ^ye to whither of his natures thou list
^lone by it self, christ cannot be said to be ^ mean, for in yt he is ye
son, he is equal with the father: and in that he is man, he ^s equal with
the residue of men. Therefore stood the manhood on hand of necessi^^ to borow
this effectual workinge at (...) hand of the divine nature that took it (...)
to it. Therefore in this work of media^ (that is to say of reconciliatio^ or
atto^ment) some doings are attributed to (...) whole person of Christ (that is
to say both his natures working together) s^ to his godhead severally by it
self, and so^ to his manhod severally by it self: but conclude, none of both
his natures h^ the mediatorship by it self alone.

Quest. But what shall we believe conc^^ning the office of intercession? for
su^ly what is to be thought of the office of intercession.
he that makes intercession for another is inferior unto him to whom t^
intercession is made.

An. Nay, that is untrue: for what sho^ let, but that one equal may entreat
a^^ther his equal, or the superior may (...) treat his inferior for another
man. A^ therefore it should not follow y^ the son^ were lesser then the father,
although (...) had taken this charge upon him or (...) own will, even without
taking any fl^ unto him. But I have showed alread^ how ye things that are
written of chr^ intercession, must not be restrained ^e reason that agrees
with ye souerein^s and degrees of this world. Moreover ^w the word is a mean
between the ^ther and us, in respect of the union of ^e two natures: and
how he is the ^ediator between the father and us, in ^spect of his office, I
have showed even ^ow.

Quest. They say also it should seem that ^e Godhead makes intercession to it
^lfe, if Christ should be called an inter^ssor in respect also that he is God,

Ans. They say so in deed, but very vn^ilfully. For although the Godhead be^ge
a thing vndiuidable, be whole and ^erfect as well in the son, as in the
fa^^er and in the holy ghost: Yet notwith^tanding when we consider the godhead
^^ the persons, we consider it not without relation of one person to another.

and therefore put the case (which thing (...) most true) that Christ makes
inter^ession for us to the father, even in his Godhead united to the manhod
which ^e took unto it: yet shall it not follow, that he makes intercession
to himself, ^einge that the father is one and yt son ^s another, in several
person throughlye distinct, albeit that the father and the Son be both one
thing and one god^ if the Essence of them be consydere^ with out their
persons. For like as i^ Christ incarnate there be several things and not
several persons: so in the god^ head there be several persons but n^^
several things.

Quest. What opinon have thou o^ Of praying to Saints and Angels.
praying unto Angels and Saints deceased?

An. That it is wicked Idolatry.

Quest. Yet it may be, that they which pray unto Angels and Saints deceased
cannot away with the making o^ any Images. Again ye should have made a
distinction between such a^ pray to the true and blessed Angels or to the
souls of them that were godly and holy men in deed: and such a^ worship
counterfeit Aungelles, that is to say feendes, or which worshypp^ such manner
of Gods as although^ they were Gods, yet should they (even by their own
confession) be bu^ wicked Gods.

Answer I grant, not only that sum sin^es Mat. 11. 22. John. 19 11
are more heinous than others: ^ut also that such as are giltye of one self
same sin, are not always a like ^iltye. Nevertheless, he that synneth ^he
greeuouslyer, discharges not him that sinned less heynouslye, out of the
^umber of offenders. And therefore ^et us suffer all this geere to slip, wher^f
there is no question betwixt us.

^dolles are conceived by fond fancye, and brought forth by the hand.
Therefore are they Idolaters, also, whose Idol ^urketh like a shapelesse
conception in ^he womb of their imagination: ney^her is there any kind of
idol more ^wglye, than this which is set up in the ^ery bowels of the mind.

Quest

But why call thou that thing Ido^atrie, The good intentes of the popish
praying to Saints.
which leans upon good reason.

Answer. Fie on that reason which not only ^eaneth not to Gods word, but
also ^eyghteth fully against it. And yet I see ^ot what good reason may be
alleged to defend so gross a wickedness.

Quest. I pray thee show me why thou say so?

Ans. To call upon one that is absent, whom thou can not make priuye to the
meening of thy mind, it is a poinct of extreme blockishnes. And to suppose
that the souls of such as be deceased, either be present every where, or if
they be absent and hear men's words, do nevertheless perceive the thoughts
of their minds: I say that both of them are manifest and horrible sins of
Idolatry: atleast wise if it be Idolatrye to father that thing upon the
creature, which is proper or peculiar to god alone. And whereas they make
exception, that God discloseth our peticions unto the saints, or else that
the saints behold all things in I wot not what a wonderful glass of the
trinity: look how easy a matter it is for them to say it: so easy is it
for us to shake it of as a foolish and gross forgerie. Moreover, as
concerning the angels, we here in deed that the Lord uses their service
in defendinge his children: and no doubt but they execute their charge as it is
enjoined them, and are careful (after their manner) for the welfare of the
godly. But what makes this that we should pray to them? for how ^^aye that
be done in faith, seeing we ^nowe not, neither when they come, nor ^hen they
go: nor when they be pre^ent, nor when they be absent: nor find any word
or example of it in the holy Bible: but rather that the Angels have ^ot
admitted so much as any outward ^eligious reuerencinge? finally seeinge ^ere
is none in the whole world to be ^ompared, either in power or love to^ardes
us, unto Christ God and man ^hiche sits at the right hand of the fa^^er,
making intercession for us, as the ^^ely mediator between God and men
^herevpon sprange the rabble of pety in^rcessours, but of manifest distrust in
^^m? And as for the vnfailinge love ^^ the Saints which many men harp ^^on,
although it be true: yet not^ithstanding it is so awklye applide for^^e
proof of prayinge to Saints, as it Another objection of the Papists for
praying to saints. 2 These. 3. 1.
^edeth no disproofe at all.

Quest. Yet notwithstanding we pray ^e for another, and desire one of us the
^^ayers of another, and in so doing the ^ostle has gone before us by his own
example Ergo. to require the intercession of some others besides Christ, it n^
why timpeacheth the office of the only mediator, unto whom we say not pray
for us, but, have mercy upon us.

Answer. First we are sure that the maynteyners of this praying to Angels
an^ deadfolkes, hold not them selves within those bounds: but do crave their
healpe in their dangers and distresses no less than the openest Idolaters
tha^ ever were, did in old time crave help^ at the hands of their petygoddes
tha^ were under the throne of their Iupite^ Again, for the members of one body
too request one of us too pray for an^ there, so long as we may be able t^
aduertyse one another of our affair^ in this life: is truly no point of
pra^ing unto men, or of thrusting in medi^tours in Christ's stead as they do:
b^ rather a calling upon our common ^ther together with our brethren, in t^^
name of the one mediator aforesay^ the which one myndednes is a most ^eptable
Sacrifice unto God.

Question

But the holy Ghost himself is said to Romans 8. 26 How the holy ghost prays
for us. Romans 8. 15.
^ake intercession for us with vnspeakble groninges.

Answer. That is because he teaches us too ^one and to pray aright,
according al^ as the same Apostle makes him too ^ye out.

Que. But when shall this intercession be Christ's intercession for us is and
shall be everlasting.
^^ an end?

An. Truly never: for even at such time ^^ it shall appear that we be with
god, ^ur cleauinge unto him shall not be but ^y the steppinge in of our mean
and ^ediator, and consequently of our head jesus christ, whose reigning and
preest^d are everlasting in the same respect. ^et not withstandinge, the whole
manner ^rulinge and gouerninge the Church ^at is now used, shall utterly cease,
after ^at y^ last enemy, (that is to wit death) (...) put away, and all the
chosen are taken (...) with their head into everlasting life, 1. cor 15 28 Of
the yelding up of christ's kingdom to god the father.
^d so god shall be all in all.

Quest. But Paul says that this king^^me or reigning shall be yielded up to
^^e father, and that Christ shall become ^iect unto him.

An. Paul verily having an eye unto Christ, as too the son of god in deed,
howbeit as manifest in the fieshe, and joined with his members, does worthily
attribute the chief glory to the godhead, which shall at that time be most of
all disclosed, when all enemies be ouercom^. And truele this subjection
beetokeneth some thing inferior to the godhead (for the creature shall never be
made equal with the creator, no not even in christ) but yet it does us to
understand, that the chief blessedness (next unto that which is peculiar to
the Godhead) consists in this point, that God acceptinge us (and our head
together in respect that he is man,) for his dear and faithful subjects, will
then at length geeue us the fullness of felicity, and punish the rest as rebel^
with endless pains. Of christ's coming, to eudgement. 2. tim. 4. 1.


Quest. But whereas it is said that he will come at the last day, to judge
both the quick and the dead: there is some hardness in that saying. For it
appears by many places, of the Scriptures (and specially by the Story or
parable of the rich glutto^) Luk 16 19.
that every man's judgment lights upon him immediately after his departure
out of this life, whither he be godly Luke. 16. 9. 23. 24.
or ungodly.

An. God does after a sort execute his judgment even the^: insomuche as it
is not to be doubted, but that the souls of the Godly whom Christ does gladly
receive, Acts. 7. 60 Phil. 1. 23
have a foretaste of the eternal happiness: and contrariwise yt the souls of
the ungodly have a forefeling of ye horriblenes of eternal death.
Notwithstanding besides that the said fore judgment has respect only too
their souls, while their bodies lie still a sleep in the duste: the Mat. 25.
3^
full declaration and executing of the judgment, whereby the whole man shall
either be made owner of eternal life, or else be cast into endless torment,
is delayed to the last day of the general Resurrection.

Quest. By the dead then, thou meanest The dead.
not them that shall be dead at such time as they shall be judged: but such as have been dead before, and shall then be risen again. Which then be the quick ones
that thou matchest against the dead ones?

An. They be those whom Christ shall then find still alive in this world, at
that second coming of his which shall be 1 cor. 15. 51 52. 1. these. 4. 15.
most glorious. The sudden chaunginge of which men intoo the one state or y^
other of the life to come (yt is to wit either of endless death or of
everlasting life) shall be unto the^ in steed of bodily death and risinge
again, as the Apostle teaches.

Qu How are they said to be dampened Endless da^pnation.
to endless death, who notwithstanding are risen again never to die any more?

An. Because that to live in so horrible torments both of soul and body,
deserves not the name of life, but rather of death.

Quest. But the Resurrection? is it not in general of gods goodness, yea and
that Obection against the generalnesse of the resurrection. 1. cor. 15. 22
in Christ who is the first fruits of them that rise?

An. Like as the father created all things in the Son: so also shall the
wicked receive life again in him, that is to say, by the operation of his
power. And yet for all that the blessinge of life shall turn to a curse in the
ungodly, like as al other things do. The wicked therefore shall not rise again
by the benefyte and virtue of Christ's resurrection (for this resurrection is
knit unto blissed life, with an inseperable knot: and therefore none but only
such as believe in Christ and are ^uely graffed into him, are made parta^ers
of that.) But by the power and auc^hority of the Son as he is a Judge: who at
the same time that he pronoun^ed the sentence of dubble death, and spe^ially
Genesis 2. 17 Genesis 3. 19
of eternal death against all mankind, did even then condemn all men ^n the
penalty of rising again, sauinge those whom he himself should preserve from
death For how should the punishment of the wicked be everlasting (as it must
needs be) if their bodies should co^tinew for ever in the dust, utterly void
of all feeling.

Quest. Nevertheless, seeing that the body Objection against the punishment of
the body for the souls offenses.
moves not of it self, but only is the Iustrument of the soul: it seems
to stand with equity, that the whole punishment of sin, or the whole glory
of righteousness, should have cleaued to men's souls.

Answer. The whole scripture speaks against it 1. cor. 35. etc
as often as it makes mention of ye resurrection, which doutles agrees not
properly to the soul. Again although the body sin not of it self alone: yet
does the whole man sin, and therefore he is justly punished whole. And christ
were not a perfect 1. these. 5. 25. Heb. 2. 14
redeemer, if he should let the bodies of his servant lie still in
rottenness. Neither had he needed to have taken a body unto him, if he had
come to deliver no more but our souls.

Quest. But what manner of life shall that Eternal life and eternal death.
eternal life be, and what manner of death shall that eternal death be?

Ans. It is to no purpose to search for these things: not only because such
curiousenesse is to be condemned, as drives men too demand the things
that the lord has as yet hidden from us: but also because it is a point of
extreme madness, to be desirous to comprehend that which a man is not
able to conceive. If we were now able to conceive that blissfulness, we
should already after a sort possess it, in as much as y^ understanding of man
does at leastwise so farforth enjoy the thing that is to be understood, as it
conceiueth it in understanding. The like also is too be thought of the
everlasting pains: whereof we see that even a very light conceyte of them
doothe now and then drive men too despair, and too horible factes. Now then,
that men feel not as yet the horriblenes of the everlasting fire any fullyer:
it is to be imputed to Gods forbearinge, who as yet delay^th his wrath.
Therefore let us rather ^eeke, by what way we come too it, that ^ee may hold
the way of life: and let ^^s settle ourselves in the things that the ^orde
has opened unto us concerning those matters in his word: namely that ^he
happiness of the Godly, and the vn^appines of the ungodly, shall be so great
that the manner and measure of none of them both can be comprehended by us ^s
now.

Quest. Then which is the way to eternal The only way to eternal life Ioh.
20. 7. 1
^^fe?

An. Even Christ as he himself witnes^eth: neither is there any other way that
^^adeth unto life.

Quest, And yet he quickens not all ^en.

An. I grant that he quickens none ^ut those that walk in this way. And to
^alke in this way, is to join a man's ^elf unto christ, yea and after a sort
to incor^orate himself into him, by beleeuinge.

Quest. What call thou faith? The distinction of true faith


An. The faith or belief whereby the ^hildren of light differ from the
children of darkness, is not simply that Insight (which the deuilles have
as well as they) whereby it comes to pass, that a man acknowledges the things
to be true, which are contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles: but moreover it is a steadfast assent of the mind accompanying the
same Insight, whereby it comes to pass, that each man applieeth Romans 8. 37 etc.
particularly to himself, the promise of everlasting life in Christ, in case
as i^ he were in full possession of it already.

Quest VVhither does nature yield us this faith, or does grace give it? or
when Whens true faith comes.
there does partly nature and partly grace give it?

An. Only the mere grace of god, which begets us anew.

Que. Are there not common Insightes and felings of god in the nature of man
though he be corrupted?

An. Yes verily be there, howbeit eue^ as some rubbices of a very princely
bu^^ding. Again I say thus much, that thi^ faith is not grownded in natural
I^ Mat. 16. 17. Ioh 1. 19. and 18. 17. 15
sights: but theremust further be adde^ the things that god has disclosed to
the world peculiarly by his Prophets, a^^ Apostles, which things flesh and
blood 1. Cor. 2. 9 19. 14.
^uld never have once thought of. Lastly ^is thing also is to be marked
(wherein ^^nsisteth as it were the special and pe^uliar Col. 22.
difference of faith (namely that ^he man must apply the promis of eter^all
life in Christ, peculiarly to himself ^y believing, which testimony the
scripture calls assured persuasion.

Quest. 1. These. 1. 5 Of man's corruption.
^pray you let us step a little aside to dis^ourse of ma^s corruption. First I
demand that thing thou think to be corruped in the nature of man: and
secondlye that manner of corruption the same is: and ^^stly what remedy there
is against it.

An. To the first demand I answer, that Corruption of the body in substance
John. 3. 6 Ephe. 2. 5
^ whole man is corrupted: yea and so cor^pted, y^ S. paul's saying (namely
that ^e be dead in our sins) is to be under ^^oode of either part of man.

Quest. Does this corruption touch the ^ery substance of him. That is to wit
both of soul and body.


Ans. Yea in deed does it as concer^inge the body, which even therefore is
^ecome mortal. But of the Soul we ^ust think otherwise.

Quest. What shall we think then of ^^e corruption of the soul?

Ans. That it is corrupted in qualities, Corruptione of the soul in qualities
and which those qualities be.
which for instructions sake I make to be two, namely reason and will.

Quest. Do thou then place qualities in the soul?

Ans. I do so, howbeit agreeable to a spiritualll and single nature. Otherwise
if a soul or a spirit be nothing else bu^ a substance, then let us make as
many under gods as there be souls of men^ But to the end we may eschew
many crabbed school points at once: ye shall understand that I admit but
one soul^ in a man: for I read not that there were any more created, and I
deem it an absurdity, that any one body should be indewed with any more
souls than one Also by the qualities of the Souls I mean two things. That
is to wit, fir^^ the powers grounded in the soul: whi^^ I say are no less to
be distinguished (howbeit by such distinction as agree^ to a spiritual
nature) from the very su^stance of the soul it self, than the pow^^ of
drawing steel is distinguished from the substance of the Adamant: And
s^condly the soundenes, or the rightnes, (...) (as Moses terms it) the
goodness (...) the same powers, which I said to be two.

Que. Well then, considering that the fall of man can never be sufficiently
understood Error in opinion about original sin.
and discribed. They that auouche original sin to consiste only sin
accidents or qualities, seem to take ^it but for some superficial blemish, that
sticks as it were but to the skin.

Ans. These be fond conceits of foolish men: and after the same sort did
Satan in times past beguile some men, yt would needs wrest the christian
principles to the ragged rule of their own most folish reason. By those
qualities I mean not what is me^t by qualities in the soul.
some accidents or byfalles, but things that stick in the very nature it
self, and yet may be disseuered from the very substance and as it were from
the ground work it self wherein they be, not in very deed, but by reason and
in thought.

Quest, Your saying the^ in effect, is that The soul is not corrupted in
substance but in qualities, for otherwise it should die as the body does.
the qualities of the soul are corrupted, and not the substance of it.

An. I say so, and I say further that the ^ontrary oppinion is the certain and
the ^pen way to Epicurishnesse, that is to ^ay to maintain the mortality or
dying of the soul. For grant we once never so little corruption of the
substance of the soul we must needs confess that y^ soul it self is in
danger of dying. Again if the whole soul be corrupted: the^ must the whole
soul needs dye out of hand. But if the corruption be but in some part of the
soul: how can there be any division of parts in a single substance, such as
the soul is? Therefore whosoever will maintain this so awk and wicked
opinion, had need to be stark mad: and no less blind had they need to be,
that should give ear to him.

Quest. Let us leave this geere for those to delight in, upon whom the lord
shall execute his rightful judgments. Now proceed and tell me what the same
corruption is.

Ans. Neither reason, nor will is taken Neither reason nor Will is taken away by
Adams fall, but both of them be utterly defaced and corrupted.
away (as I said even now): for had they ben taken quite away, the soul of
man must needs have perished, or utterly ben none at all. But both these
powers are so sore defaced: that whereas the eye of understanding ought too
have been most clear, according also as it was before the fall: now,
(^pecially in matters perteyninge to God and concerning ^yghte conscience,) it
partlye sees nothing at al, (no not even when the light of the creator is set
before it) according as it is too be seen in the chief points of the true
religion: the which, man's reason not only lotheth, but also fights against
them as fond and false with toothe and nail): and partly if it see, it ^eeth
very dimly: so as those small ^parkes of glimmering light that wear ^elt in
man to the end he should be vt^erly Romans 1. 20
inexcusable (of which sparks there ^s no man but he has sum bred in ^is
mind, and many mo have been ^ound out by men in bendyng themsel^es to the
considering of higher things) ^o by and by leave a man at his first step unto
the gate of truth, and therefore are ^arre unable so to foreguyde him as he
^aye atteyn too the priuities of truth. And furthermore as concerning
vpright^es to be maintained between man and ^a^: although ye eysight of man's
mind be ^mwhat less dull in those matters, ve^ly because god so moderateth his
just ^dgeme^t, as ye fellowship of mankind (out (...) which he gathers his
church) might the easlier be preserved, which other wise woolde perish out of
hand according to the desert of man's fall, if all discerning of right and
wrong, and of virtue and vice had bin taken quite away out of means minds:
yet notwithstanding, right great is the blindness of men, both in discussing of
general grounds, but specially in discussinge of matters debatable. Which thing
is manifestly proved by ye repugnancye which is found, not only in the
opinions of the common people when there be as many wits as there be heads* but
also even in ye judgments of ye wise^ philosophers and lawemakers: wheri^ many
have weeryed themselves of la^^ to no purpose, to make them agree togethere.
Namely will.
Now com I down to the other power of ye mind, which is the seat of the
affections. And whereas the same ough^ to be ruled by reason as by a wagongu^
der: yet notwithstanding, how often do^^ Romans 7. 18. 19.
it harie him headlonge away? And (...) marvel seeing that sometimes it carye^
away even the very soul it self, I for bear to speak of ye heady
unruliness (...) all the natural affections, which inconvenience, reason
fighting against it, do^ after a sort see and find fault with: but To. 7. 8. 9
10. etc.
only gods law does utterly discover it. And to the increase of that darkness
wherewith the power of understanding and willinge is ouercast, there is yet
another worser inconvenience: namely yt reason sucketh upon untruth, and
wrestleth wilfully Reason unreformed sucketh always upon untruth.
against gods wisdom, even when she is convicted and y^ the will is carried
wilfully unto vice even against the reprehensions of reason, (such as they be)
and is not able either to seek or to shun any thing aright, because she is
wholly a slave unto sin.

Quest. Are we blocks then? Objection


An. No, for when I say that man's understanding and will are blind and froward:
I do not utterly bereeue him of ye power of understanding and willing.

Qu. Ergo thou take away freewill. Of freewill.


An. If by free, you meene willing or vn^nstreined: I am so far from taking that
^way: ye contrariwise, I say the whole ^ind is willingly and of it own accord
^ried unto evil. But if you take freenes (...) be never so small an ablenes of
it self ^^to either of both (yt is to say to be in^^ned of it lelf as well to
the thing that(...)

Quest. Nay surely it is not the nature of Natural reason counseleth nothing
but evil.
reason to counsel evil.

An. Soothly so does reason bear her self in hand. For evil puts upon it
the countenance of good to make reason too like of it. But the true rule to
discern good and bad by, must be searched out of Gods law, and not out of
man's corrupted understanding. Therefore even 1. ^or. 2. 14
the very same thing which the natural man (as the Apostle terms him)
thinks to be good and coueteth as good, is by Gods spirit termed evil, as
always stepping somewhat aside from that which is rightlye good. For surely as
for the thing that gusheth out of so unclean a sink, although now and then
it be not altogether so foul as the very filth of the sink it self, yet
must it needs be unclean.

Quest. Yet do I not perceive how the How necessity and free vvil or
willingness may frame together.
thing may be called free, which of nece^sitie is carried but to the one part
only.

Ans. Then remember thy self, that the^ is a difference between compulsion and
necessity. For many things y^ are of necessity, are also willingly: of which
^or^ I think thou will not deny but Christian Necessity. Willingness.
death was one. But nothing can be both Compulsion
of compulsion, and of willingness together, no not even in those things which
we are most unwilling to do: as when Seamen suffer loss. Again I pray thee
^ooke a little neerlyer, how thou may define freeness. For whether of these
think thou is more fre? he that is in such state, as he may be either free
or ^ound: or he that is so fre, as he can by Freeness.
no means so much as think of being ^ound? Truly if thou take that to be
free will, which may be led either to good or too evil: thou shall quite
bereeue both God, and the Angels, yea and us also, (after we be taken up
into heaven,) of that freeness. Yea and it seems, that this also may be
doubted, whether the Man's freeness before his fall.
first man were indewed with the said freeness of debating on either part,
before he had given ear to Satan. For how could evil come in question: seeing
it was not yet entered into the world? So as it seems to me, that before that
time, Adam, was of his own accord with his whole mind and body disposed too
good only, without any contrary thought ^r debating at all, and much more
without any purpose: all which things S^ than has brought into man's
disposition by putting concupiscence or lust into ^^ Rightly therefore was that
tree called (...) tree of the knowledge of good and evil, in^ much as before
the eatinge thereof, m^ neither knew nor coueted any things but only good:
the forgetfulness whereo^ is so ouerspred by eatinge of that tree, ^ ever since,
men have not ceased to deba^^ of the ends of good and bad, though the^
themselves be shut up within the bounde^ of evil. The conclusion is this, that
the^ only are endewed with free will, which are set free from the bondage of
sin. And of this freedom (which shall never Ioh. 8. 36 Romans 6. 16 and 8. 15.
be thoroughly perfect til we be utterly sinlesse in the other life eternal) they
have the spirit of God for an assured pledge.

Quest. Then in the receiving of the first Of preventing grace
grace men do but suffer the grace of god to be wrought in them, and are not
iointworkers with the grace.

Ans. Truly if ye have an eye to the order of the causes, and to the first
entrance of the grace, whereby the lord shapeth us new ageine, ye must
needs grant, that the same proceeds wholly of God, who loves us first,
when we be Romans 5. 10 Tit. 3. 5 1. Ioh. 4. 19 The woorking of natural vvitte
with preue^tinge grace.
^et his enemies: and that we be but ^nely receyuers of it. But if ye
con^^der the very instant of the time wher^^ God woorketh in us: ye shall
find that the ableness to be willinge to re^eiue is given unto us, and also
that ^ee be willinge to receive, both together in one self same moment: For
o^herwise the grace were in vain. Ther^ore as many as impugn this manner ^f
together workinge, as though it were ^epugnant too the grace of God: they
^ewray their own unskillfulness many ^ayes, consideringe that this selfsame
together workinge is the gift of Gods grace, and woorketh in such wise
together with it, as that in order of causes it is in deed the latter, like as
it follows immediately after the cause that woorketh the effect: by reason
whereof all things are fathered whollye upon the only grace of God: and yet
notwithstanding, God at once and in one selfsame moment brings to pass,
both that through grace we may know, and through grace we do know in
deed: that through grace we may (...) and through grace we do will in deed^ and
finally that through grace we m^ do, and through grace we do indeed^ For
the efficient cause in possibility ca^ not be called efficient in working, vnt^
it be performed in very deed. Moreover since there is not taken from man,
neither the ability of understanding, nor the ability of willing, as I have
said afor^ but only ye ability to understand rightly and to will rightly: it
cannot be denid^ but that at least wise there is in him a natural together
working, because ye when as ye first disposing grace is not receiue^ but of one
that has understanding and will, and men by nature do generally understand and
will: man receives the offered grace, not as a block, but as one that is
endewed with understanding and will, and so farforth as he does but understand
and will, he works together with god his maker, at whose hand he has receyned
those natural powers: But in respect y^ he understands well and wills well:
that must be wholly attributed too the newcome grace: whereby it comes too
pass, that he prepares to make himself ready to understand aright, to will
a^ight, and to do aright, when he has re^eiued the grace: and also that he
vnder^andeth, wills and does rightly indeed.

Quest. And what is it to be thought of Grace effectual by grace.
^e effects of the first grace.

An. That the first grace is effectual, it (...) to be imputed to Gods second
grace, ^r we should straytwaies fall from the ^rst if there followed not
another imme^iatelye after, to make the former effec^ual, and so must ye
proceed on still from ^race to grace.

Que. But it could hardly be denied, but Of Merit or deserving.
that as soon as we have received the first ^race, we work together with the
rest ^f the graces following, and so conseque^t^y that the later graces are
bestowed for merit or desert of the former grace.

An. Away with the names of desert, and Romans 4. 4 1. Cor. 4. 7
merit, which fight full but against grace, ^ow much so ever the half pelagian
So^histers prate to the contrary. He that ^enyeth us to work together with
the ^rst grace, denies the efficacy of the first grace. And look what I have
said of the first grace, the same do I say of the graces that insew. For that
the first grace is so effectual, as that we use (...) well: we may thank
ye second gra^ for it. For were not the second gra^ present, yea and both
freely given and free^ effectual: we should not only not go forward, but also
go quite back again into a far worse state then we were i^ before. Then as
for this toogether working, which (as I said (proceeds wholl^ of the insewing
grace, what has it in^ that may merit or deserve any recompense at al?
Nothing at al: for even the^ when we after a sort do use it well^ (which
thing also, if the matter be we^ lookte upon, is through grace): w^ do
rather use it amiss.

I confess then that the faithefull servants have Talentes committed unto
Mat. 25. 14
them: But yet again it is of men grace that the woorkinge of those Servants
is allowed, and that they b^ taken for faithful Servants, an^ Romans 4. 5
finally that reward is given vnto^ them which is not dew unto them i^ any
other respect, than because i^ was freely promised, and is freely performed.

Quest. But I would feign learn this o^ Of the spreding of original sin
into al mankind By learning it one of an other, or by following one another
example.
you also: How this corruption is spread to mankind? Namely whither it be
(...) nature or by imitacion?

^. Forasmuch as ye be sure enough, (...) it is come in: ye should rather
have ^ed how it might be driven out again. ^euerthelesse because of many noysom
^ours, I will endeuer to satisfy you in ^s behalf also. I answer therefore,
^t the malady is first spread abroad by ^ture, and afterward confirmed by
^itation.

^^est. How can you prove that?

^s. By many textes of scripture when Romans 5. 14.
(...) will, and specially by Paul's argu^nt grounded upon effects. For even
^y also do die, which could not imitate ^am, by reason they are not of years
of Romans 6. 23
^reaton: but death is the reward ^inne: ergo all men are in original ^ne.

^^est. What if I should say that the Objection that the death of the body
should be but natural and not a penalty of sin.
^te death (which is the separation of (...) body and the soul, and the
loose^ge of the same body again into his ^t grounds,) is natural? For all
com^unded things are naturally subject (...) dissolution.

An. God himself speakinge by Moys^ Genesis 2. 17. and. 3. 19. Romans 5. 12.
will disprooue you. Besides this, your a^gument holds not of necessity. For ^
though the thing that is compounde^ may of it own nature be dissolved: y^
notwithstanding it is not dissolved ^ very deed, until the cause that
co^pounded it, do first cease to mainteine^ together. What absurdity then is
the in my speech, when I say that man w^ in such wise created of soul and
body^ yea and that man's body was in such w^ compounded or compacted together
of ^ elements, as the creator of them wol^ have maintained them together for
eu^ had not sin stepped in by the way?

Quest. I grant then that mortal bodi^ Of the conueying of the soul.
are begotten of mortal bodies. But wh^ is that to the corruption of the soul,
o^ less thou think that the souls also a^ conveyed over from one into another

Ans. What opinion many of the ol^ writers have had concerning this m^ter, I
pass not, neither will I greatl^ strive about it, so it be agreede upon the
original infection is spredde into us ^ nature. Yet think I it not good too
d^ semble this, that ye doctrine of conueyi^ over of the soul seems very awk
to me: for either must the whole soul, or at least some piece of it be
conveyed over. Now if the whole be conveyed: then doubtless must the parts
of it needs be quite dispatched out of hand. But if there be but some piece
of it conveyed: how can any piece of it be cut away from an Essence that is
most single?

Quest If the soul come not of the corrupt Bezaz opinion of the creation of
souls.
father, but of him that is the father and maker of spirits: how coms it by
that corruption? Is it by infection of the body that is knit unto it, like as
an ointment the better it is, the sooner it takes a tange of the unclean
vessel?

Ans. Truly me thinks your reason is sufficient to satisfy al modest wits.
But how so ever the case stands, let this suffice: that like as Adam received
the Image of god for himself and his, so lost he it from him and his: and god
(according as he had threatened) forsaks their souls as soon as he has
created the^ and sheded them into the body: whereby it comes too ^asse, that al
of the^ are borne the children Romans 5. 12 etc.
^f wrath, namely as heirs of corruption and of their forefathers guiltiness.

Que. Now then let us return to the only To be made one with christ is the
only remedi of sin, death and damnation That is to say, partaki^g of christ or
being made one thing with Christ.
remedy of this mischief, that is to wit, to christ taken hold upon by faith,
which is the gift of God. Therefore I would have you to declare unto me what
you meene by taking hold, ingreffing, incorporating, and communicating with
Christ.

Ans. They that imagine there is any joining or linking together of the
substances, after what manner so ever they dream it to be: they be utterly
deceived and judge fleshly of spiritual and mystical things. Ageine, they
that avouch Christ's only operacion or efficacy to be the thing whereof we be
made parttakers: seem not to have weyed sufficiently the express textes of
the scripture, Esaias. 9. 5. Romans 8. 32 1. cor. 10. 16 Ephesians. 5. 30 John. 17. 11
21. 22
wherein Christ himself is plainly said to be given unto us, and also his
workfulnesse in us is described. To the intent therefore that this
communicating may be understood: me must set down two things. Whereof the
first is this: y^ christ himself is made ours by ye benefit of the father, so
as all beleuers may say, this thing (yt is to wit, christ ye son of god
manifested in the flesh (is mine, by the grant and freegifte of the father,
that I might in joy it.

Quest. Here I pray you give me leave to A cavil against ou^ ownering or
possessig of Christ.
say a little by the way. Surely he that so speaks, is owner or master of the
thing that was given him: are we then owners or masters of Christ, and not
rather he the owner and master of us?

Ans. Seeing that the father has given us unto John. 13. 3. and 17. 10 1. cor.
6. 20. and. 7. 23.
Jesus Christ, and that Christ himself has redeemed us by giuinge himself
for us: if any man deny Jesus Christ to be ye owner and master of us, (yea and
y^ of very good right) accursed be he: Therefore when I say he is ours, y^ is
to wit which believe: I mean not ye there is given unto us any superioriti over
him, but I say ye he is geeuen and borne unto us or for our sakes. As for
example, a man takes a wife, which must obey him and be seruisable to him: and
yet on the other side ye wife, may say, like as I am this man's wife, and my
father has given me unto him too have authority over me: so on the other
side he is my husband, and has given him self to me to enjoy him, verily to
the end he may love me and cherishe me as his wife. Which similitude thou
know well enough that the prophets and the apostles do ordinarily use to
betoke^ this ^om. 7.1 ^. etc. ^. cor. 11. 2 ^. ph. 5. 15
communicating of Christ. The other point of this communicating, is, y^ he is
ours in such wise, as no conjunction of bodies, whither it be natural or
artificial, may be compared with it. Yet notwithstanding, it tends not to
this end y^ there should be made but one substance of his and ours, or but one
person of his and ours, all which things are most gross forgeries and utterly
wide from the kingdom of heaven: but it tends to this end only, y^ his
spiritual workfulnes should be ye more certain, the more near, and the more
effectual in us. And yet by ye way this is certain, y^ he in such wise
becomes ours, y^ he be comes one thing with us in deed: and the head and
members of any body cleave not so fast to gether by nature, as this conjunction
of Christ's is fast and streit knit unto us: insomuch as we be flesh, of his
fle^h, and Ephe. 5. 30 why our communiting with christ is called spiritual
bone of his bones: howbeit it is wholly spiritual and mystical.

Quest. I pray you show me why you call it spiritual?

Ans. I call it spiritual, not in respect of the thing that is communicated,
(for it is certain y^ Christ is communicated unto us, not only in spirit, but
also in his whole manhod) nor also as though this communication were
imaginatiue and consisted only in thought without the thing it self to settle
upon: nor finally as though we were said to be become one thing with Christ,
only in respect of consent, after which manner Luke says Acts. 4. 31
that y^ beleuers where all of one heart and one mind: But because all this
taking hold is done altogether by the mind and by faith, and because the holy
ghost is ye party by whose linking these things are knit together which are
so far a sunder in respect of distance of place: and y^ in such wise, as that
in this spiritual copulation Christ is as the head, and the church is as Ephe.
4. 15 16.
his body, drawing spiritual life from him her only head. And therefore all ye
whole real growing together of the very substances into one, (about the which
so many men have striued now long ago with so much ado, and by means whereof
that monstar of transsubstantiation and consubstantiation was afterward brough
into the Lords supper) is a gross forgery of man's fondnes, by no means
agreeinge either with the spiritual life, or with the verines of Christ's body,
or with the proportion of faith.

Que. I here well that Christ himself is received of the faithful by faith:
I here that the church is spiritually cuppled to her head by the bond of the
holy Ghost: but yet perceive I never the more, how these things that are so
far a sunder should be united.

Quest. I grant so. For it is not for naught Ephe. 5. 32
that Paul cries out, that it is a great mystery. Rightly therefore does one
give warning, that we should rather labor to feel Christ living in us:
than to be made privy to the reason of this communion: as which surmounteth
our capacity, although we be sure that it is spiritual, and that faith is
the instruement in doing of it.

Quest.

What if we should say that Christ is communicated unto us, only as
touching his force and efficacy? and that we should refer this place of
Paul's, (we be members of his body of his flesh Ephe. 5. 30
and of his bones,) Unto Christ's incarnation? ^n. Concerning Christ's being
one Christ's being one with us and we with him.
^ith us, so as we may afterward draw ^fe out of him being united with us, the
^ripture speaks more manifestly of it ^an that it may be applied to his
one^^ operacion or working in us, in as ^uche rather as it is the foundation
^^th of the effectual intercommuning, and of the benefit of imputation, which
^inge appears even by the proporti^ablenesse that is between it and bodily
^rrishment, whereof Christ himself is ^e author. For like as if a man will
re^yue the nurrishment of bodily food ^ suchwise as may be to the sustenance
^ his life: it behooves him to have it ^ farfoorth his own, as he may even ^te
it: So also to the intent we may ^cke the iewce of the spiritual and ^dles
life out of Christ, it behooves us ^ take hold of him with the mouth of ^^th,
and spiritually as it were to di^st him into us. As for Paul's place ^^^erning
Christ's taking of man's name unto him, it cannot be fitly applied Ephe. 5. 32
^ this matter: for according to that: all ^^ without exception might say they
be Christ's members, which thing the Apostle sets down, as peculiar to the
Church alone, and so also does the re^semblaunce of bodily wedlock importe.
For every man and every woman are not one flesh: but each man is one flesh with
that woman whose husband he is, and each woman is one flesh with that man
whose wife she is. And therefore this cupplinge into one flesh, is not of
nature, but of covenant: and so also is our conjunction with Christ into one
spirit* Too conclude, If the Apostle had meant so as you say: namely that
Christ has knit himself unto us bu^ by his Incarnation, and that we be
joined unto him but by faith: he should rather have said, that Christ is of our
fle^^ and of our bones.

Quest. On forth, I pray you, and shew^ The fruit of our being one with Christ
me what we receive by being spiritual^ made one with Christ through faith
(...) you have said.

An. Again we enter into a howge g^ whose wideness, length, and depth (wh^^
Ephesians. 1, 18 6. 9. etc. Ephesians 3. 8. 9 19.
as otherwise it surmounteth our capa^^tie according as the Apostle witnesse^^
we know so farforth, as the holy gh^ wherewith we be endewed sercheth the
^epth of God. He that has not spared ^is own Son (says the Apostle) but
^ath given him for us all, how should he not also give us all things with him?
Wherefore I answer that all things needful for salvation flow into us, out
of Christ, when we take hold of him by faith.

Que. But if it may be, I would have you show unto me particularli which those
things be.

An. I answer then, that some things are Christ's own in such wise as they
^leaue always to himself alone, and become not ours but by imputation, of
which sort be the things that he has performed for our sakes, namely that
by becoming subject to the law, he fulfilled all rightu^usnesse, and suffered
the punishments dew for our sins: both Gal 4. 4 Math. 3. 15 Romans 5. 19 Phil.
2. 8
which things the Apostle compriseth under the name of obedience. And some
things do so rest in christ: as yet notwithstanding the force and operation
of them is spread intoo us: of which sort is Romans 8 3. 4
the singular puerenesse of the manhod in Christ, garnished with all gifts
without measure, which pureness not only becomes Romans 6. 6 Gal. 2. 20.
ours by imputation, but also is the headspring and original of our new birth,
and of all the spiritual gifts that accompany the same.

Quest What call thou imputacion? Imputation
Ans. That benefyte of God the father, whereby he vouchsafes to account
Christ's obedience as ours, in as ample wise as if we ourselves had fulfilled
the law, and made full satisfaction for our sins.

Quest. But stands this with Gods nature, that he should accept any man as
rightuous for another man's righteousness?

Ans. In deed it is an other man's righteousness 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ioh. 17. 20.
21. etc.
in as much as it is without us, and rests in another subject or person,
that is to wit in Christ: and yet is it not another, in as much as the same
subject, that is to wit Christ, is ours, yea and also is spiritually beecome
all one thing with us by faith.

Quest. Nay truly, if he be become all one thing with us: now it seems
that what so ever he has in him, the same is ours in very deed, and not only
by imputation.

^ns. Certesse were it once granted y^ Against the doctrine of
Transubstantiation
^e very substance of Christ were bee^me our substance by real copulation ^d
vnitinge, (which thing follows of ^eir opinion that auouche Christ's flesh
^^d blood to be eaten with the very ^outh and so to be conveyed into us):
^en should your saying follow of conse^ence also. Whereby it may be percey^d,
how greatly the doctrine (as well (...) transubstantiation as also of
consubantiation) fights against the doctrine righteousness by imputation,
besides at it also takes away the verinesse of ^hristes flesh. I said before
that christ ^^d we be verelye made one in deed: ^^wbeit that the same is a
mere spiri^all misterye, the hand whereof is ^e holy Ghost, and that the
mark ^hereat it ameth, is not the growinge ^^gether of the substaunces or of
the per^^ns into one (for to what purpose were Ep. 4. 15. 16 Ephe. 5. 23
at?) But that the spiritual life should (...) that means flow from Christ
the ^isticall head into his mystical body ^derneath it.

Quest. Let us return too Imputation.

An. Contented: and I say that ly^^ Christ's righ tuousnes is ours by imputacion
as whatsoever want of righteousness, an^ whatsoever spottinesse of sin is in
(...) the same is without Christ, and yet ^^ imputed to Christ: So on the
other side^ I say that Christ's obedience is out^ us, (as stickinge in Christ
the only ground of it,) and yet notwithstanding is imputed unto us. And the
foundaci^^ of this imputacion is this, that he is o^^ with us and we one with
him, after spiritual way and manner as I sayd^ before, so as he was accounted
a sinne^^ not in himself but in us: and we be ^^ kened for rightuous, not in
our selue^ but in him.

Quest. But it is said that Abraham's fait^ Abraham's rightuous nesse Romans 4. 3.
was imputed to him for rightuousen^^ and not this obedience of Christ's.

An. You know this, that the things which go in order one under another, ^^
not contraries. Faith is said too (...) accounted unto righteousness, because
is the instrument whereby the said obedience whereof the immutacion mak^^ us
rightuous, is taken hold upon. Aft^^ Romans 5. 1. 9
which manner also we be said to be justified by faith, namely in as much as ^
^eth hold of christ's obedience, by im^ation whereof we be made rightuous.

^est. There is yet one doubt behind, we your saying that Christ is taken
Objection a against this that faith is the free gift of God by Christ.
^^de on by faith, agrees with that ^ich you said before when you avouched at
all gifts do flow intoo us from ^riste taken hold upon by faith. For
^eemeth to follow, either that faith ^ot of the fathers gift in Christ, or else
^t this your latter saying is untrue. ^r needs must faith go before taking
^ld, if christ be taken hold on by faith

^^s. The beginning of our salvation ^^meth of God, who first chose us in
Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 3. 24. 2. Tim. 1. 9 1. Ioh. 4. 19
christ ere we were born, yea and ere e^r the fou^dacions of the world were laid
^d also first loves and knows us in ^e time of our being borne, when as yet
^e be not given unto Christ and graffed ^o him in very deed, but are too ^e
given and graffed. Therefore if ye ^ue an eye to the very instant of the ^e:
we do both believe, and also take ^lde by belief, upon christ offered unto
^, both at once. For the cause of a thing ^nnot be woorkinge in very deed,
vn^se the effect of it come forth together with it. But if ye look too the
ord^^ of causes, I grant that the traynme^^ of faith (yea of true faith)
goes before the taking hold upon Christ, and^ consequently is given, not to
them y^ a^^ already greffed, but to them ye are ^^ the point too be greffed
intoo him. Y^^ follows it not thereupon that faith (...) not given unto us in
Christ, consi^^ringe that the heavenly father, setty^ his determination in his
only Sonn^ does not then first behold us in Christ when we be given unto
him, but ha^^ chosen us, known us, and loved us (...) him, yea even before the
foundations (...) the world were laid, and much rath^^ when as yet we hated
him: like (...) Christ himself also took hold of us first Phil. 3. 12 Romans 5.
6 8. 10.
to the end that we might take hold^ him afterward. Again look. what is begone
in us by grace, that we migh therb^ be greffed into Christ, and therefore (...)
in respect of the order of causes, is do^^ before our taking hold upon
Christ^ the same is increased and strengthen^^ in us afterward by the same
grace i^ Christ, whom we have now taken h^^ on by faith.

Quest. What then are the things that The things that we attain in Christ.
1. Cor. 1. 30
we atteine in Christ?

An. Paul concludes this whole matter most plainly and also most briefelye,
when he says that God the father has made Christ, our wisdom,
Iustifica^ion, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Que. What meene you, by being made what wisdom is. Luke. 1. 77
^ur wisdom?

An. The selfsame thing that zachary ^^eeneth when he says, that his own
^^^nne John Baptist is sent to show the ^nowledge of salvation, that is too
say ^o show Christ himself. For the only Coll. 2. 3.
^rewe wisdom, is this which Christ ^^acheth vnto^ men: namelye when he
^iscloseth himself unto them, which ^^inge the father also has testified
with loud voice from heaven, saying, here Mat. 17. 5
^ee him.

Quest. Reckon you this among the gifts that we receive by Christ?

Answer. My meeninge is that Christ himself (...) so geeuen unto us to be
the only tea^er of that true and native wisdom: ^^ that he teaches
himself unto us. For he is both the teacher and the thing that this is
taught. And therefore among Christ's gifts, the very foremost and chiefest
is, that he geeueth himself unto us, when he furnishes us with the knowledge
of himself.

Quest What does Paul call justification Justification. or righteousness. Ephe.
1. 4.
in this place?

Ans. That whereby we be made rightuous: that is to say, so farfoorth
perfect, sound, faultlesse and unblameable: as not only there is quite wyped
out of us, whatsoever uncleanness is in us from top too to, whereby God (who
is singulerly pure) may by any means be offended: but also there is most
plentuouslye found in us, whatsoever may so much delight him in this human
nature, as he of his good will may voutchesaue to crown with everlasting
life. And of that righteousness whereby a man i^ accounted ryghtuous before
God, the certain squeer and inuariable rule i^ James. 2, 8 etc.
Gods own law. And the law not only forbids the things that are not to be
done, threatening everlasting death for a penalty: but also inioyneth the
perfect louig of god and our neighbor. Therefore that a man may be accounted
rightuous before god, there be two things required of necessitye: that is to
say, the utter absence of all sin, and the fulfilling of all right according
to the law.

Que. But this was never found in any mortal wight.

An. Saving Christ, who not only never sinned, but also performed y^ whole
law to the full.

Que. Tell me I pray you, was not christ perfectly rightuous even from the very
moment of his conception?

Ans. In respect of his Godhead he not only was rightuous from everlasting,
but also the very righteousness it self, y^ is to say, the souereine and most
perfect pureness. And in respect of his manhod, Math. 1. 20 Luke. 1. 35
he was indewed with singular holiness, yea even far above the Angels, even
from the very instant of the conception Math. 3. 15 John. 17. 4. Ioh. 19. 30
of his flesh. But now by the name of righteousness, we meene that which
follows upon the perfect performing of gods law, which righteousness christ
had not in effect, until he had finished ye whole work that was enjoined
him. Phi. 3. 9. 10
For this is the righteousness, by the imputation whereof we be justified or
made righteous: and not the foresaid essential righteousness which is proper to
the godhead, nor yet the other natural pureness of Christ's flesh, whereof we
1. Pet. 2. 22.
will intrete severally by it self: for want of which distinction, Osiander
has ouershot himself to fowly.

Question.

But I see not yet how this righteousness may suffice. For inasmuch as
Objection against righteousness by Imputation.
we not only perform not the law, but also are ouercouered with innumerable
sins: how shall we be accounted as though we had never sinned, (that is to
say to be undefiled of our sins,) if the spots of our sins be not first
washed out? and that cannot be don without suffering of the punishments dew to
them

Answer. Thou say right. Therefore whereas I said that Christ not only
brake not the law, but also did most fully and perfectly perform the law:
thou must take his so doing to comprehend in especially a satisfaction for all
the sins of them that believe: for every man is bound by the law to love god
and his neighbor perfectly, not indefinitely but defynitelye, that is to say,
as having regard of his own peculiar calling. As for examples sake, if a
magistrate love God but as some other private person does, he cannot be
said too have done his duty, because he is bound to love god as a
magistrate, which manner of dealinge is too be understood of all other kind
of callinges. And Christ was sent to suffer for us the punishments dew for our
sins: which thing he performed all his life long, but specially in that
Sacrifice of his, wherein he beecame Phil. 28
obedient to his father unto death, even the death of the Cross. Therefore by
woorkinge in sufferinge, and by offeringe himself for us, he both fulfilled
the law for us, and also made satisfaction for our sins.

Quest.

But in respect that Christ is beecome Objection against the sufficie^cy of
christ's righteousness for any but himself
man, it seems he was bound by nature to perform the righteousness of the
law, that is to say too love God and his neighbor perfectlye, because the
said law is laid upon the very nature of mankind. And therefore it seems that
his fulfilling of the law was not for us, but for himself, that he might
purchase himself life, which thing cannot be said of the punishments that were
to be endured by him for our sins.

An. Although we should say, that christ as touching his flesh, purchased
himself eternal life by fulfillinge the law whereunto he was bound: yet
were it no absurdity to say also, that the force of this desert is so great,
that it flows also eue^ unto the beleuers. But the former part cannot well
be justified. For seeing that this manhood of his was joined too the word by
personal union, yea and so joined, as it was most holy in it self, who ca^
think (if y^ said humane nature be considered without the charge of
mediatorship, which is not of it self coincident too the manhood, but
enjoined to the son by the father of his own good will, and willinglye
undertaken by the son) I say, who can think that there was any defaulte in
this manhood which he had taken unto him, so as it should not forth with
have been most woorthye of the everlasting life, even from the very first
moment of the said union? Therefore this his being bound too the performance
of the law, is not properlye by nature, but of good will: nor simplye for that
Christ is a man, but because he beecame man for our sakes: which condition he
undertook of his own accord, and performed it, not in his own behalf, (for
by good right he was most blessed Gall. 4. 45
already) but in our behalf, for whom it was his will to become subject too
the law, to the intent to redeem them that were under the law. Furthermore,
see how uncertain a saying that is which thou spakest last of all
concerning the satisfyinge for our sins. For that is even the cheifest part
of his obedience or fulfillynge of the law, as we have proved a little
before. So then if he fulfilled the law in his own beehalfe: you must needs
confess that he dyed for his own sake also.

Quest. You say then, that we be justified The parts of righteousness:
before god that is to say, that we be cou^^ed and denounced rightuous,
because Christ's obedience is imputed unto us, which consists chiefly of two
parts: ^amely of satisfaction for our sins, and ^f full performance of all
righteousness ^f the law.

An. I say so.

Quest. To what purpose then is Christ Sa^ctificatio^ or holiness.
furthermore made our sanctification? for doubtless he that is accepted for
rightuous, is also accounted for holy.

Ans. Whosoever is rightuous, must also of necessity be holy: but not
contrariwise, (except there come new grace too the former graces) after the
manner that we have avouched the term Rightuous too be taken in this present
matter, that is too wit for such a one as not only is not hild for a
transgressor of the law, because his sins be cleansed away in Christ, but also
has fulfilled the righteousness of the law in him. To be short I say,
that this holiness is the goodness and ^. John. 3. 9
vncorruptnes of his person: and y^ this righteousness whereof we entreat as
now, and whereof the believers are termed rightuous in themselves, is not the
righteousness that comes by imputation, but the imp of that holiness: so as
the former is as the tree, and this other is as the fruit of it* After this
sort was Adam created holy, that is too say, good and faultlesse, and he
had also beecome rightuous if he had kept the law which his creator had
appoyncted him.

Que. But al men are corrupt by nature.

An. Agein except Christ the second Ada^ Mat. 1. 18 20. Luke. 1. 35 Romans 8. 3.
who was conceived by the holy ghost, too the end y^ the nature of man might
in him not only recover the clennesse which it had lost, but also be
advanced too a degree of goodness far higher without measure. For the first
Adam was but created after the image of God: but Col. 2. 9 2. cor. 5. 19.
the latter Adam is also God, because he is vphild in the everlasting son of
god, who has by unutterable means sanctified the nature that he has taken
unto him: and that is done too the intent the same should also make us holy.

Quest. And wherefore do you call christ Christ the second Adam. Romans 5. 18
19. 1. co. 15. 45
the second Adam?

An. Because y^ like as Adam was created too the end y^ al men should be borne
of him by natural generation: So christ ^ath taken man's nature upon him, ^oo
the end that all such as believe in ^im should be spiritually borne a new
(...) him by grace.

Quest. Was it not enough for us to be Of our dubble birth
^orne once by natural means?

Ans. Yes as apperteyning to this life: John 3. 4. 5.
(...) respect whereof it were a folly to think we be borne any oftener. But
for as much as Adam has put himself in danger of dubble death, both for
himself and for his offspring: it behooved us either to perish or too be borne
again intoo everlasting life after a far other sort. And therefore this other
Adam is given us, that both holiness and everlasting life Romans 5. 18
might flow spiritually out of him intoo us by grace, like as sin and death
were sprede into us from the first Adam bodily and by nature.

Quest. Layforth yet more plainly this Our sanctification in Christ laid
forth more plainly
sanctification of ours in Christ.

Ans. That thing is said too be sanctified or made holy, which is sorted out
from the common uncleanness, that it may be most pure and wholly consecrated
unto God the utter enemy of all uncleanness. After this sort is our nature
Romans 8. 3. 4
sanctified or hallowed in Christ, even from the very instant of his
conception, and that too the intent to sanctify us: which thing is done two
ways. For first, like as I said that we be accounted thoroughly rightuous
before god by imputation of Christ's righteousness not in ourselves, but in him
too whom we be united by faith: Even so also I say, that by the imputation
of his perfect holiness and sowndnesse, our persons are accounted thoroughly
holy and sound, and so consequently are acceptable too the father, not in
ourselves, but in christ. Further I say, that the force and efficacy of this
most pure holiness which is in the flesh of Christ, flows even in too us
by the working of the holy Ghost in us, so as we be hallowed in ourselves, that
is to say, we be segregated from the defilinges of this world, and serve God
both in spirit and body. Which benefit is euerywhere in the scriptures called
Sanctification, or holiness, regeneration, or newbirth, Illumination or
Inlightening, the new man, the new creature, and the Spirit or Spiritualnesse.

Que. you say then, that this latter sanctification, An objection against
sanctification by imputatios.
is not a thing without us nor ours by imputation only: but a new indowment
perfectly greffed and stickinge in us, bestowed upon us in christ, by the mere
grace of the heavenly father, and wrought in us by the virtue of the holy Ghost

An. So say I.

Que. What need then have we of the other sanctification of our nature which
is imputed to us?

An. Forasmuch as this holiness that Romans 7. 25. Gal. 5. 17
sticks in us, is but only begone in us, according as it appears by the
continual debate between the flesh and the spirit, even in the best sort of
men: Therefore to the intent our persons may be acceptable unto god, and so
consequently the thing that proceeds from us may please him, (for the life of
holy men is as it were a continual offringe up of themselves, whereunto the
Apostle exhorts Romans 12. 1
us) there had need to step in a far other holiness, namely the same
which is most full and perfect in Christ: at the sight of whom, our most
gracious father, (who notwithstanding is a continual enemy to al uncleanness
and filthynesse,) may hold himself appeased, as he that is both singularly
just and singularly merciful.

Quest. But why does he not sanctifi us why we be not fully holy in this
life.
fully out of hand?

Answer. Nay rather you may marvel at his goodness, in y^ he drepeth any little
drop of regenerating grace into any man. And yet why he should delay the full
sanctifiynge of us unto another world, there be many causes, whereof the chief
are two. The one is, for that we be but of a weak faith, and therefore (as
much as in us lies) we hinder the effectualnes of ye holy ghost. The other
is, that in as much as we be saved by mere grace and not by works, he y^
glories should glory only in the lord. For 1. Cor. 1. 1^.
if this holiness were perfect in us: then should our righteousness also
be perfect or cleaving in us, and so consequently Christ should not
substantially and properly be our Savior, but only an instrument to dispose
us after such manner as we might afterward iustifye our selves by our own
righteousness, which is flatly the foul and detestable error of the
halfepelagian Sophisters.

Que. You say then that between our The proportionable resemblance betvveen
h^ linesse and rightuousenesse.
sanctification and our righteousness, there is such a proportionable
resemblaunce, that look how great the one is, so great also is the other.

An. Yea in deed. For true sanctification cannot be idle: and such as a
Luke. 6. 44
fruitful tree is, such also is the very fruit of it. Wherefore inasmuche
as our 1. Cor. 13. 12
understanding is partlye enlightened with the knowledge of the true god: we
do also partlye know him. Forasmuch also as we partlye assent to Gods
promise, and apply the same to our selves: therefore we do partly believe.
And because our will is partly changed: therefore we partly will well and
work well.

Que. What mean you by this partly?

An. That is to say, not perfectly, but only so farfoorth as we be borne
anewe: so as in one selfsame ground (howbeit in diverse respects) there is
cleanness and uncleanness, light and darkness, belief and unbelief, good
will, and will declininge from good, and spirit and flesh.

Quest. What mean you by Spirit? Spirit
An. All the powers in man, as well superior as inferior, so farforth as they
be sanctified or regenerated.

Quest. And what call you flesh? Flesh
Ans. In a man that is not regenerated, I mean thereby the whole man, even as
much as is of him, within and without, from top too toe. And in a man that
is regenerated, I mean agein al his powers so farfoorth as they be not
sanctified or regenerated. 1. John. 3. 6 Of sinninge and not sinninge 1. Ioh.
1. 8


Quest. But John says that the children of god sin not.

An. The same says also that they are ^yars which say they have no sin.

Therefore they be said not to sin, because that although sin dwell in them,
yet it reigns not in them. For the spirit fights in them against the flesh,
and at length shall get the upper hand. And in consideration hereof, the
regenerated only Romans 7. 15
may rightly say, the evil that I would not do, that do I: and the good
that I would do, that do I not.

Quest. Even the natural reason that is in Of natural reason and the pour
thereof
any man unregenerated, does oftentimes strive against his lusts. And thou
know that virtue consists in subdewinge the unreasonable part of the
mind, unto reason.

An. What is to be thought of the Philosophical virtues, I have answered
before. I grant there is a certain warenes, and a certain conscionablenes
left in man, to reprove (and after a sort also Romans 1. 20 Romans 3. 11 12.
to restrain) the headiness of the affections, too the intent that every
man may be vnexcuseable. And therefore as for the philosophical
distribution, a^ it were of the parts of the soul, and the things that y^
Peripatetikes write concerning meannesse: I not only reprove the not of any
untruth: but also praise and commend them as remnants of y^ image of god.
Nevertheless I say, y^ the distribution of man's parts which the holy ghost
teaches us, is far after another sort, matchinge the natural man and the
spiritual man, the inner man and the outter man, the new man and the old man,
and the flesh and the spirit one against another. And in those names by which
vice is noted, he betokens also even the souerein and ouerrulinge part of y^
mind He means Reason
which the philophers make so great account of, and finallye whatsoever man
has of nature without the grace of regeneration.

Que. Is not reason, reason then?

Ans. Yes undoubtedly, and it always becomes better sighted by searching,
Reason is vt terly blind in matters concerning god, and maimed in matters
concerning man.
but yet it is always faulty till it be regenerated. For first and formest,
even when it understands and discerns the good: it understands it not, ne
discerns it not as it ought and should do, by reason on of the original
corruption, which the Philosophers could not so much as once ^istrust.
Moreover, in many even of ye ^eightiest matters, it not only sees not the
truth, but also utterly and of set pur^ose fights against the truth.

Quest. I beseech you confirm these things with examples.

Ans. I will. Although the Philosophers write many things notably and very
ex^ellently concerning God the sovereign good: yet notwithstanding, which of
the^ ^ll has by his natural insight perceived ^he one substance of the
Godhead in the John. 5. 23 John. 17. 8
three persons? And yet there is none other knowing of the souerein good, that
(...) either true, or that works salvation.

Que. But yet it is said, that Trismegistus and specially the disciples of
Plato taught ^ome such like thing.

Answer. It may be that some men have come to what the knowledge of the old
philosopher was as touching God, and how little too be regarded. Romans 1. 12
^ome dark knowledge of this mystery ^eliuered over by ye Patriarks and
written (...) holy writings: but away with y^ toys ^f those men, y^ seek for
the truth of these things in y^ writings of ye philosophers. For when they come
to the poinet, to lay ^rth ye nature of god, after they have said many things
according to truth, ho^ sodeinlye do the cunningest of them sly^ away to
fondnes, as the Apostle ryghtly says? For from whence comes they^ multitude of
gods? from whence comes their deuidinge of the godhead in^^ greater gods
and lesser gods? From whence comes the frantyckenesse of the Epicures? From
whence comes the stoicall necessity too bind even the god* head it self?
From whence has Aristotle his dotages, dreaming that the world i^ without
beginning and without ending and taking away all particular providence? And
yet I will ouerslyp other toys innumerable confuted in so many places by
Aristotle himself. To whom I pray you may we wit the coming in of all
superstitions, but too this noble Over ruler? Furthermore if we come That is
too say Reason
down unto man: which of the philosophers could know himself, seyinge he
knew not the original of the first man and his fall? Yea truly what can be
imagined more awk, more brainsik, or more monstrous, than the saying which
many men cease not to father upon Aristotle the wittiest of all philosophers,
namely^ that in all mankind there is but only one soul? Besides this, these
wise men are not even yet agreed upon the immortality of the soul. And what
quarelyng is there among them about the affections? And if we come down to
the mutual duties between man and man: how many things not onley fondly, but
also wickedly and shamefully have the best commended lawmakers of al nations
ordained? which of them did eue^ bethink him of the true remedy against ye
headines of affections? and no marvel, seeing they knew neither y^ causes, nor
the effects of that deadly disease. You see therefore y^ even very reason it
self, (so long as it continues but natural,) is stark blind in the matters
of greatest weight. And how many things be there, wherein it not only is blind,
but also stark mad? for besides y^ each of the^ defends those few errors
which I have reckened out of a great sort mo, so wilfully as they cannot abide
to be taught righter things: That the world should be created of nothing, that
the word should become flesh, that any man should be borne of a virgyn,
that we should be counted rightuous for another man's righteousness, that
the dead bodies should rise again, and many other such things: reason not
only admits them not, but also lotheth and skorneth them: yea and if ye
press over far upon her, at length like a bedlem she trampleth all the whole
heavenly wisdom under her feet,, except she be made spiritual by ye grace of
god. Yea and even then also she cease not too wrestle against the known
wisdom, so farfoorth as she is not changed. And therefore I trow ye see the
thing too be true which I spoke.

Quest. But you divines also (be ye never Objection of misagreing of the
christen di uines
so spiritual) agree not thoroughly among your selves in all things.

An. That comes not to pass through fault of the scriptures, wherein the
points of true religion are set forth plainlye and manifestly enough: but we
may blame the selfsame reason for it, which is both blind and also stubborn.
Neither said I that we be regenerated throughlye, but only in part: for were
we regenerated thurrowlye, we should all of us agree fully too the truth in
all poynctes. And therefore I deny not but there remain the remnantes of that
ignorant and stubborn nature, but they shall be done away by little and little.

Quest.

Well then, let us grant that what soever pure knoweledge, or right
judgment, or just desire there is in us: the same proceeds of the mere grace
of the heavenly father in his son: but will thou not grant that this
righteousness Righteousness by comparison.
which sticks in us, is righteousness, and therefore also exceptable too God?

Ans. I grant it is righteousness. For Math. 7. 17.
a good tree brings forth good fruit: howbeit, but by way of comparison,
that is to wit, if it be compared with such fruits as are rotten in deed.
But if the very best works even of the holiest 1. cor. 4. 4 Romans 4. 2 Tit.
3. 5.
men, should be tried by the rule of Gods will, that is to say by the law:
I say they be sins, and albeit they be not such as fight full but
against the law, (such as aduoutrye, stealinge, lyinge, and such like be):
yet are they sins because they shrynke from that degree of goodness, which
the law does iustlye exact at man's hand.

And therefore as I have said before, we must rest our selves upon the only
obedience of Christ imputed to us by faith, as the only righteousness that is
absolutely perfect and full in all points.

Quest. Nay rather, by what right should Objection in excuse of man's unableness
by nature
god exact any thing at men's hands, who^ he knows to be unable to make
payment, even by nature whereof he himself is the aucthor?

Ans. That we be not able to make payment, it is not of nature, which both
would and could yield unto her creator (after whose image she was made) the
thing that both he required and she owed, in as much as she was created to the
same purpose: but it sprange of the willinge corruption of the same nature,
which brings too pass, that no man either will or ^an acknowledge that
debt, and much less pay it. Nay rather, all of us do nothing else but
increase that det. But too speak even after the manner of men: doothe any man
cease to be a detter, which through his own fault is not able too Romans 5.
15 16. etc.
pay? Furthermore where the creator may of very good right and dewtie,
require at our hands, that which h^^ does, yea and peradventure somewhat more
too: if he take the same in so good worth at our hands that believe in his
son Christ (whom he has given unto us most liberally and freelye) that of
his like liberality he geeues us faith also, whereby to take the gifts y^ he
offers us: who would not rather honor the fathers so infinite goodness,
than stand in contention with him?

Quest. To God therefore the souereine A subtle shift to challenge some piece of
righteousness un to man.
good, be glory and praise everlasting. Nevertheless give me leave to ask you
thus much. At leastwise this righteousness that cleaves unto us, so
farfoorth as it has regard of righteousness, must needs please God who
delights in righteousness.

Ans. I perceive the wiliness, not of you as I think, but of Satan. For
inasmuche as he cannot bereue Christ quyte and clean of the glory of our
salvation: therefore he goes about at leastwyse to nippe of some piece of it:
which thing would surely come to pass, if he could make men believe that
thing which the filthye Sophisters bear folk in hand: namelye that Christ's
righteousness does but simplye that which is wantinge in our righteousness.
Thus therefore stands the case. God bears such a love toward
righteousness, that whatsoever has any spark of righteousness and cleanness
at all, he allows it after a sort: but that is of his own infinite Psalm.
5. 5 Romans 2. 10
goodness, and not for any desert of such manner of righteousness, which is
but shadowish. So allowed he the repentance of the Ninevites, and of Achab,
although it were no true repentance, but a certain shrinkinge of themselves
under the mighty hand of god. For he is so exceedinge good, that he does good
even too them that be most unworthy, and much more too such as be by any
means touched with the feelinge of his majesty. Then delights he much more
in the works of them that be regenerated, although they be imperfect. But
first I say, that these works of the regenerated do please him, not for
any woorthynesse of them, but of the mere grace of the father, who pardons
that which is missinge of righteousness, and accepth that which proceeds
of his own spirit. Again I deny, that our justification, and so consequently
that life everlasting shall be given too these works, after one manner (that
is to wit as the cause of them), please they God never so much through his mere
grace. Romans 1. 17 and. 6. 23. Heb. 12. 2
For this is a sure ground, that the rightuous shall live by faith, and
everlasting life is the gift of God.

Question.

But if they please, they seem worthy A pursewing of the former objection.
to please at leastwyse in sum behalf?

Answete. Most falfe is this consequence. For God cannot (no not even of
covenant) allow any other righteousness, as worthy of that name, than such as
is fully answerable to the law in all points, except he will be repugnant too
himself, which thing were a sin to say. Thus therefore ought thou too
have gathered. The works of the regenerated do please God though they be
imperfect: ^rgo God is exceeding merciful.

Question.

Besides this there is mention made Hire, wages, reward and recompense
euerywhere of hyre, wages, reward, requiting, and recompense,

An. The name of Wages has a larger scope than the name of everlasting life.
And it is certain, that God of his passinge liberality, rendereth temporal
blissinges even too the ungodly, be they never so unworthy. Again whither you
refer the name of wages too eternal life, or too other benifites: yet does
it not follow, that the same is paid as dew det. But rather this does most of
all commend Gods mercy, that he vout- Romans 4. 4
saves to give the name of Wages, or hyre too the vndew reward which he
bestows upon us of his own mere grace in Christ, too the end y^ we, although
we be but unprofitable servants, (for who Luke 17. 10
is able too bestow any thing upon god?) might notwithstanding perceive, that
we have not lost our labor. Finallye although this wages be promised freely,
and given freely: yet is it given too him that woorketh and therefore it is
called a wages or hyre. Of giving to the worker.


Quest. If it be given too him that works, ergo it is given him for his
works.

An. Nay rather if it be given, we be sure it is not paid as a duty.
Again there is far difference between giving too a woorker, and geuinge for
works. I may well say therefore, that eternal life is given to them work,
(because faith shall be esteemed, by the fruits of it and righteousness by
faith,) but not paid them for their works sakes. And after this manner must
that text be expownded 2. Cor. 5. 10
where it is said: Every man shall be judged according to the things that he
has done in his body, and such other like sentences.

Quest. Why so?

Ans. Because good works make not works make not men rightuouse. Math. 7.
17 18.
men rightuouse, but follow him that be leeueth and that is aredy become
rightuous in Christ: like as good fruytes make not a tree too be good, but a
tree is known to be good by the good fruits of it.

Que. But alitle before, you fetched good works, not out of justification, but
out of Sanctification. To. 15. 16


An. I grant it. For there is no man justified by imputation of Christ's
righteousness, but he is also sanctified by his spirit. good works be needful
to salvation.


Quest. Say you then that good works be needful to salvation?

An. If faith be needful too salvation, and works do of necessity
accompany tre^e faith, as which cannot be idle: surely the other follows
also, that good woorks be needful to salvation, how beeit not as a cause of
salvation, (for we be justified and therefore also do live by faith only in
Christ) but as a thing that of necessity cleaves unto true faith. So says
Paul, that those be Gods children, which are led by gods spirit, and John
Romans 8. 14. 1. John. 3. 7
says that those be rightuous which work righteousness: And James also
declaring, not by what means we be justified, but whereby true faith and
insticatio^ are discerned, Iam. 2. 21 22.
proves by Abraham's example, y^ those are not justified which utter no works
of faith. For in such wise must. James be made to agree with Paul, too the
end it may plainly appear, how they be but brabblers which condemn the
necessity of good works for false doctrine.

Question.

What if a man should never be Of faith that works not till it be very late
endewed with faith till the last instant of his death? for so it seems too
have happened too the thief that hunge by Christ. What manner of good works
^halll such a one be able to bring forth?

An. Uerely the faith of that thief was Luke 23. 40 etc.
unspeakably workful in that short time: ^or he rebuked the blasphemies and
wicked dooinges of the other thief: he detested his own crimes: with an
assured and passing wonderful faith, he acknowledged Christ for the
everlasting king, even in the reprochefulnes of his cross, when all his
disciples hilde their peace: he called upon him as his savior: and finallye
he openly reproved the merciless cruelty and wicked speeches of the ^ewes.
But, the acknowledginge of sin, the calling upon god the father in christ, and
thankesgeuinge, are the excellentest works of the first table, which cannot
be utterly separated from faith in no man. And admit that some man being
prevented with death: is able too show no works of the second table: Yet is
not the faith in him therefore too be counted idle, because that although it
have not Charity in actual deed, yet is it accompanied with it in
possibility.

Quest.

I have yet one doubt more behind. Why any man should be damned for Damninge
for evil works.
evil works, if no man be justified for good works.

Ans. The reasone is, manifest: namely because that even the lightest sin that
is, deserves, although not the extremest pains in everlasting death, yet
everlasting death it self, which generallye is the hyre of sin: but no
righteousness can worthily deserve eternal life, except Romans 6. 32.
it be such a righteousness as the law requires, that is to wit a perfect and
sound Romans 3. 20.
state. Therefore show me one that fulfilleth ye law (as there is none found
which is not a breaker of the law) and I will grant the foresaid argument.

Quest. Say you then that there shall be Odds or difference in punisheme^t
odds in the punishements of the damned sort?

An. Although this matter be to be inquired of very soberlye: yet have I not
spoken it unadvisedly. For besides that the order of Justice requires, that
he which has sinned more greeuouslye should be more grievously punished,
considering that all sins are not alike heinous, saving so farforthe as they
match in generality: (for it is a Paradoxe of the Stoykes, and not of
christians, to avouch that all sins be equal) christ himself witnesses the
same thing expressly, saying y^ Mat. 10. 15.
the case of the Sodomites shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment, than
the case of them that had rejected him.

Quest. Then shall therebe odds in the Odds in glory.
glory of those that shall be saved.

An. Verelye so doothe the reason of contraries require. And whereas the Apostle
says, that such as have sown sparelie 2. Cor. 9. 6
shall reap sparelye: it seems not that the same should be restrained to
temporal blessings only.

Quest. But of sowinge comes reapinge: Objection to prove that works deserve.
ergo righteousness and life proceed of good works.

An. Truly, similitudes must never be racked further, than the nature of the
things that are treated of, and the purpose of him that uses the similitudes,
will bear. For else there will ensew most fond and false things out of number:
which thing when unskillful interpreters mark not: they must needs setforth
many foolish and false things. But in the foresaid place, the Apostle
sets forth the proporcionable resemblance of works and glory, and not y^
cause of glory. For in all places he stedfastlye defends, that righteousness
is the mere gift of God, without the works of the law, and is not paid as
a dew det, but bestowed upon the believers as a grace.

Que. He means but the works of the A popish and Epicurish objection. Romans 4.
4
Ceremonial law.

Ans. A fond answer. For his matchinge of duty and grace one against another
cannot stand onles all ye works of the law be excluded without exception:
and yet I will ouerpasse other arguments of paul's, which are bent directlye
against the very law of the ten hests: bent I say, not to^ deface ye law
(which is the madness of the Romans 7. 7
Manichees) but too take away from it the power of iustifiyng. Again I beseech
you, if works may be thanked for any manner of righteousness: why should ye
exclude the ceremonies y^ be rightlye used? For truly they be comprehended in
y^ sowerth commandment of the ten hestes, and as long as they were rightlye
used, they were most excellent works.

Quest. But ceremonies be abolished by Ceremonies abolished by christ
the coming of Christ.

An. I confess they be abolished, because they be fulfilled in Christ. But
the matter it self declares that where Paul disputes of the causes of
Justification: his reasons tend not to prove that the Ceremonies be abolished,
but too show that salvation rested always in the only righteousness of christ
imputed to the^ that believe: and for confirmation thereof, among other things he
alleges y^ examples of Abraham and David.

Quest. Then may we say, that paul excludes works of preparation.
but only the good works that go before the grace of Justification.

An. No less fond is this answer also. For besides that the Apostle alleges
manifeestly the examples and testimenies of them that were justified, namely of
Abraham and David: to the intent I may To. 4. 6. 15
^et pass his other reason grounded upon the very nature of the law: what a
madness were it to busy a man's self about the excludinge of those things,
which are not at all? for why? to deem that they wiche are not justified, can
d^o any good works: it is no less folly, than if a man should say that a
tree can bring forth good fruit, before it be g^od ^t self.

Quest. But although the hyre of eternal Objection of reward dew by covenant.
life be not dew for the worthiness of the very works: yet is it dew at
leastwise by covenant.

An. What covenant meene you I beseech you.

Quest. The covenant of the law, which is, Do this and thou shall live: And if
thou will enter into life, keep the commundementes.

An. How this covenant is to be understood, it is to be seen by the
threatening which is set against the promise. And that is this, by the witness of
the apostle: cursed is every one that abides not in Gal. 3. 10
all the things that are written in the book of the law, that he may keep
the^. But the law requires perfect love: And no man but only Christ has ever
performed the law to the full: therefore life is dew to none by the covenant,
but only unto Christ. As for us, we have it given us by mere grace, from out of
him, who also is himself given unto us by why works be called good whereas
they merit not.
mere grace.

Quest. Wherefore call you them good works then, if they deserve not eternal
life?

An. Surely, the Latin divines, yea even the ancient sort of them, have
improperly used the word Merit or Deserve, in sted of Obtein: and the word
Desirt or deserving, or Merit, for a good work: which thing ye shall never
find in the holy scriptures. Now although the works of y^ regenerate are not
so good as they should deserve eternal life: yet are they good so farforth as
they proceed from the good spirit of God, and from a heart y^ is cleansed by
faith. And agein they be good, because y^ by the^ the lord is glorified, our
neighbor helped, and we our selves also reap this excellent fruit of the^,
that they be witnesses unto us of our faith, and consequently of our election.

Quest. Let thus far then suffice concerning both the parts of Sanctification.
Now remains that which the Apostle says also, namely that Christ is become
our redemption.

Ans. By the word redemption, the what is me^t by redemption.
Apostle meeneth in that place, not the very act of redeeming, but the effect
of it: that is too say, the end whereunto the said Justification and
Sanctification lead us, the which is this: that being redeemed from sin and
death by Christ we should also be made partakers of eternal life in him, whose
pledge and earnest penny we have even in this life, that is to wit the holy
Ghost by whom we be sealed up.

Que. But David grou^deth this redemption and blesing in the release of sins.
Why then add you also the imputation of the sanctification that sticks in
Christ, and his fulfilling of the law?

An. What if I should encounter thee with these textes: Blessed are the clean
in heart, blessed are the blameles in y^ way, and such other like? would thou
gather here upon, y^ the releasing of sins is excluded? I think not. So now
and then sanctification is meant by the term of justification, because these
two go never a sunder. And why may I not make answer thus also? that sometimes
there is mention made but only of y^ releasing of sins, not to the end to
exclude all other pates that make men blessed, but by cause the rest are
couerfly comprehended under it? And if thou will urge me yet further: I may
also fitly answer, that a^ the other are meant by y^ releasing of sins. For who
can deny, but that even original sin has need of cleansing? Ergo it is
comprehended in the releasinge of sins. Also who can say that he only is too
be taken for an offender y^ does some thing which he is forbidden: and not he
also which performs not that which is enjoined him? Ergo not to have
fulfilled the law is also sin, which also has need too be released. Now
remain the sins (that is to say the deeds) that are don against the law,
whereof there is no question but they have need too be satisfied for. All
these are released by Christ's satisfaction which is imputed too us all. Now
let us come too the name of Release.

That man is properly said to release a debt, which freely yea and utterly
discharges his detter, so as he reserueth no action too himself against him.
Now then, we be all of us the children of wrath, not only because we be
corrupted, or because we fulfill not the law, or because we do the things
that are forbidden us: but also because we ought too appear pure before God,
such as he made us: and not only not too be transgressors of the law, but also
to be performers of the law. Therefore too she end that we, who else must
perish, may have full and perfect release of all sins: this foresaid
release must of necessitye match with the other release whereof we spoke
before, which takes away but the one part of our sins. And we have found both
these releases in Christ whom we have taken hold on by faith: who not only
has suffered for all those sins of ours, but also has fullye sanctified our
nature in himself for us, and fulfilled all righteousness therein for us, so as
we not only be set free by him from death, but also obtain the reward of
everlasting life in him.

Question. You conclude then, that all things necessary The conclusion of the
things before said
for our salvation are found in Christ alone, too whom we cleave by faith, so
as there is no damnation for the^ that be greffed in Christ.

Ans. I conclude so in deed: yea and also that the same is the only knowledge
of salvation.

Quest. You say also that this faith is the Acts. 16. 14 Ephe. 2. 8 Phil. 1. 29
gift of god bestowed upon us of his own mere grace, and therefore that the
first entera^ce of it is of god and not of our selves.

Ans. I say so.

Quest. Then I pray, let us search to who^ To whom faith is given
it is geeuen. For the thing it self witnesses, that it is not given unto al
men in as much as the believers have always bin so feawe.

An. Yet does it not follow, but that it is offered unto all men. And
therefore it seems y^ we should first seek whither it be offered too all
or no. Which demand will lead us to the very headspringes, that is too
wit too providence and predestination.

Quest. Be it so: and therefore I pray you show me what you call Providence.

Ans. I mean by it, not only that unspeakable What providence is.
power, whereby it comes to pass, that God has foreseen all things from
everlasting, and most wisely provided for all things before hand: but also
that eternal decree or Ordinance of the most wise and rightuous god, whereby
every thing that has bin, has bin: and every thing that is, is: and
every thing that shall be, shall be, according as it lyked him too appoyncte
from everlasting.

Que. Say you then that this Providence is the brynger to pass and the
disposer of all things.

Ans. It is so, and that in such wise, as it The prero gatiue of Providence.
deserves some excellenter name, than to be called a cause. For this is it
that orders all causes, and rules even the particularest fallings out of
them, so as they may be guyded to their appointed ends.

Quest. But there be some Angels evil, Objection against gods Providence.
and men are evil by nature, and what so ever proceeds from either of these
(except it be from me^ that be regenerated) must needs be evil, as the thing
that proceeds from an evil begi^ning: but god cannot be the author of evil
things. Ergo he is not the author of all things, considering that so many
evil things are to be excepted.

Ans. As well each one of the Angels (for Note this
there can no offpring be granted in a spiritual nature) as also the first
persons of mankind, (that is too wit Adam and Eve,) were created good. And
therefore Another objection against the same.
none of them both are too be displaced out of Gods ordinance.

Quest. Admit it be so, as touching that original and first state of theirs.
But seeing they be now corrupted and full of lewdenes, how can ye bring them
within the compass of that eternal ordinance of god which is so workefull,
but you must wrape god up in their naughtiness?

Ans. Do you suppose it could stand with equity, even by the judgment of
themselves Gods providence resembled by a clock
(be they deuilles or be they the wickedest sort of men,) that they should
therefore be exempted from subjection too their maker, because they have bin
stubborn ageinste him? And yet must this needs follow upon your saying.
But thus stands y^ case. I pray you did you never behold a clock, wherein a
certain wheel greater than the rest turns to y^ right hand, and carries all
the rest about with him, some to the right hand, and other some too the left
hand, with a mere contrary motion one too another?

Quest. Yes: and truly I have wondered oftentimes, that man's cunning should
be able to represent too mine eyes, the thing that man's mind is scarce able
too atteyne unto in the compasses of the skies.

An. Assure thy self that y^ same is a true image of the divine providence, so
thou except this thing whereunto nothing can be found fully like, no not even
in the compasses of the skies, and much less in those handwrought Instruments,
because nothing is equal, no nor (to speak properly) like unto the highest
(namely, that God almighty whom I now compare too the greatest wheel which
is the mouer of all the rest) is in such wise in the world, as that he is no
part of the world, and yet has given selfmouing too each one of the wheels
that move themselves: and that in suchwise, as he himself is by no means
moved, and yet moves al things according too his eternal providence. And
this mystery of Gods providence was represented to us by gods appointment in
the vision of Ezechiell, wherein we have this to mark Ezechiel. 1 5. etc.
further, that those fourfold images were ouercouered with wings, and the
wheels folded one within another, and that God was plased highest above al
things: least we might surmize the mouer himself to be moved together with
the causes, or least we might ouercuriously imagine ourselves able to perceive
the reason of those several mouings. This foundation being laid, I Answer three
things. The first is, that the instruments which have life and are endued with
reason, (of which sort be Angels and men) are so styred by god their maker:
as that they also stir themselves by an inward selfmouing of their own, and
therefore that in the bringing to pass of one action, there mete two causes,
that is to wit god who is disseuered from the Instrumente and yet gives y^
Instrument beginning to move it self: and the very instrument moving it
self. Another is, that these instruments are so moved by God, as that he
himself stirs always well, but the instruments, (if they be evil) go a
contrary motion, that is to say, always amiss: but if they be good, so as the
first author who moves always well, and the instrument which moves it, do
agree: then follows a good and commendable work. The third is, that god so
moves the evil instruments, (for it is they only who^ we have now in
question) and they on the other side are so moved by themselves, that by reason
of the dublem^ning beginning, there is also a dubble work, (which seems
notwithstanding to be but all one,) and the same is good in respect of the
good beginning, and evil in respect of the evil beginning.

Quest. I would have these things enlightened with some examples.

Ans. I will so, and that with assured and Examples of Gods providence.
evident examples: but first I will put to this distinction. That God the
notable workmaister, using the evil instruments well whatsoever they be, does
either match the^ one against another, or benefit the good by y^ service of
them: and whither of these two things so ever he does, no man ye is in his
right wits will deny but it is good, namely either to punish the bad, or to
benefit the good. Now let us allege examples. That Joseph came Joseph. Ge^n.
45. 7 and. 50. 20
by Gods providence intoo Egipte, and was advanced there unto great
pre-eminence, that he might be the preserver of the Church: both he
himself says it, and the matter it self declares it. And what instruments
did the lord use too the compassinge of the matter? Satan an instrument of
Gods providence.
Even Satan who stirred his brethren against their most innocent brother, the
very wicked intent of the same brethren, the covetousness of the merchantmen,
and the lust of a most mischeuous woman. All these sinned most grievously, in
as much as they were the beginners of their own doings. But God, using well
those most ungracious instruments which thought upon no such thing,
defended his servants from the famine, settled them in a fruiteful soil,
nurtured his faithful servant Joseph, and finallye advanced him too the
highest degree of honor. Is it not a most rightful work of gods justice,
that naughty persons should fordoo themselves? So punished he the Madianits,
vsinge thervntoo Madianit^^ Judge. 7. 22.
the spirit of discord, and the ungracious wilfulnes of the murderers
themselves, so as they made assault one upon another, doubtless with a wicked
mind, 2. Kings. 12 22. Achitophell 2. Kings. 15 34 and. 17 14 23. Absolon.
but yet by the rightful justice of God. It was good that David should be
chastised, even after his sin was acknowledged and forgiven. It was good also
that Achitophilles treachery and Absolons traiterous mind should be
discovered and sorely punished. To ye performance of these matters, y^ lord
uses the outrage of satan, Achitophells own falshartednes and Absolons own
traitorous ambition, horrible lechery, and unnaturalness: by which evil
instruments the lord executed many things exceeding well. For he showed how
much he mislyketh whooredome and craftiness: he chastised 2. kings 17. 23.
2. Kings. 18. 9. etc.
David fatherly: he punished Achitophell by his own hands: and finally he
made Absolon to cast away himself. The scripture bears witness, y^ our being
tried and consequently our chastisement is of 1. Pet. 3. 17 1. these. 3. 3. 4
Gal. 6. 14. 2. cor. 12. 9
the good will of our heavenly father, that thereby he may be glorified and
his power made perfect in our weakness. And except we be of that mind: what
comfort is there for the godly in so great myseries? For in the trial of Job
after this manner, there is used the spitefulness of Satan, and the
covetousness and excessive cruelty of the robbers. Satan therefore did sin in
heaping so many myseries upon the servant of god: and the robbers did
wickedly in stealinge away another man's goods. But the Lord did exceeding
well in triynge his servant and in shewinge ye all satan's attemptes against
the church are in vain. Finallye you will not deny, but that the
excellentest of all Gods works, was the reemption of ma^kinde. For the father
de^uered Act. 2. 23 and. 4. 28 Romans 8. 22 Ephesians. 5. 25
his own son for our sins, ^y his foredetermined purpose, and by ^he
foreappointment of his eternal or^inance, according as Peter and the church ^f
Jerusalem say, and the father is he that has not spared his own son for
^ur sakes. And what manner of instrume^^es has he put too the performinge of so
The Instruments of christ's death
great a matter? Surely the woorst that ^oulde be (for no good man could have
found ^n his heart too pursew a giltles person, and much less to betraye him,
condemn him, and crucifice him): Namely even the malice of Satan who was
entered into the heart of Judas, the cursed covetousness Luke. 22 3. 4. John.
12. 6 Mat. 27. 18 John. 19. 8
and treason of Judas himself, the most desperate envy and unrecoverable
malice of the Jews, and finally Pilates niceness and untoward dealinge. So
is there none of these which sinned not most heynouslye, and all of them were
paid afterward with most sore punishment at Gods hand for the same. And yet
in the mean while, by this selfsame work he saved us from sin and death.

Que. But hereby there seems not any Objection against the foresaid examples.
other thing to be gathered, tha^ that the purposes of evil persons are
turned by God to a contrary end.

An. Yes: hereby also it is concluded, that God moves even the evil, well and
effectually, to bring his own work to pas^e by them. But you must bear in
mind that which I have said: namely, y^ god does in such wi^e move evil
persons well, too bring his own good work about, not as a hammer or a
hatchet in aworkemans hand, which are tools that can do nothing at all of
themselves: but in such wise as the evil persons do also move themselves
ill, too will amiss and to do amiss, because that they themselves are the
woorkinge causes of their own evil dooinges. Now also this must be added,
that God (truly) works in the good and by the good: and that he works by
the evil, but not in the evil.

Quest. What difference then is there Difference between ^^ and By
in these little words?

Ans. Undoubtedly great. For God uses both the one and the other as
instruments as often as he lists: and therefore he is rightly said too work
his work as well by the one as by y^ other. But God works in those only,
whom he breaths upon with his holy spirit, and whom he rules with his holy
spirit Romans 8. 14. 1. cor. 12. 11 Ephesians. 1. 11
either strengthening them in goodness (namely the Angels, and the men that be
regenerated) or else indewing them with new goodness, as when he sancti^teth
Ioh. 14. 17 Romans 1. 26 and. 28. 2. tim. 2. 2^
his servants first of all. But as for the rest, he works not in them by
do^ing any thing within them himself: but gives them up to be moved and
misruled partly by their own, lusts and partly by the devil, howbeit in such
wise as their lewdness can neither will nor work any thing, but that which he
^ath most rightfully ordained.

Question. Permission or suffera^ce.
What think you then of the name of permission or sufferance?

Answer. If by the name of Sufferance, there be meant that difference which I
spoke of even now, namely that God woorketh not in the evil persons, but
leaves them up to Satan and to their own lusts: I myslyke it no whit.

But if Sufferance be matched agayn^^ willingness, I reject it, first as false,
an^ willingness.
secondly as utterly against reason. That it is false it is manifest by this,
that i^ god suffer anything to be done against his will, then surely is he not
God, that is to say Almighty. But if he be said to suffer a thing as though he
were reche^ less: how far are we of from the opinion of Epicure. It
remains then, that look what he suffers to be done, he suffers it
willyngly. Willyngenesse therefore is not to be matched against Sufferance.
Again if it be false it must needs also be against reason. And I say that
this absurdity may appear sufficiently too any heedefull person by this, that
the Aucthors of the distiction whereby Sufferance is matched against
willingness, do by that mean not only not attein to that which they would,
(that is to wit, that god should not be accounted the author of evil, which
thing we acknowledge with all our hearts) but also bring the flat contrary
too pass. For who is more in fault then he, which a great way of foreseeyng
a mischeef that is too come, and being able too disappoint the same with his
only beck not only disappointeth it not, but also suffers it that is to say
gives leave to execute the mischief, (for not even they that be of that
opinion, do deny, but that Satan (and much rather wicked men) have not any
power to do any mischeef, but by appointment) in case as if a man having a
cruel Lion shet up in a cage, might with ease keep him in from hurting folk
and yet not only would not, but also would let him loose and suffer him to run
upon this man or that man? Perchance thou will say, that so men's sins
deserve. I grant it. Yet notwithstanding it remains still, that Gods
willingness matcheth with his sufferaunce, (like as when a Magistrate
delyuereth an offender into the executioners hand, appoynting him the manner of
his punyshement) and therefore that there is no reason to say, that sufferance
strives against willingness.

Quest. What then? do evil persons How evil persons perform Gods will.
perform Gods will.

Ans. If you take will in his general singnification, that is to wit, for that
thing which God has willingly determined too have come too pass, and refer
the word Do, not too the intent and purpose of the wicked, but too the very
falling out of the matter: then surely God executes his will (that is to say
the thing that he has determined from everlasting (even by the wicked also:
according too this saying, who shall resist gods will? But if that by the name
Romans 9. 19.
of Will, ye meene the thing that of it self is acceptable unto God, and
will have the word Do, too importe a right affection of obeying: then truly
I answer, that the wicked sort, not only Psalm. 5. 5 Mark. 3. 35
do not Gods will, but also are carried wholly to the contrary part.

Quest. Surely I have not any thing too allege against it. Notwithstanding, I
Objection against providence, because God created all things good
come back again too that which you have answered: namely that God created
all things good at the beginning. From whence then commes their faultiness?
For if it entered without Gods appointment, then is your saying impeached:
namely that nothing at all is exempted from gods Providence, no not even
from his working providence. But if Gods appointment forewent it: (I speak
it not of purpose too blaspheme him) how is he not the author of all evil?

Ans. The cause of the faultiness of the Angels and of the first man, was
the willing inclination of their own wills unto evil. For god had created
them but chaungeably good: for, too be of it self vnchaungeably good, is
peculiar only unto God alone.

Que. Then both the Angels that never fell nor never shall fall, and also all
they that shall be gathered up into everlasting life, should be Gods.

Ans. I deny the consequence. For, that Why the blissed Angels never fell nor
never shall.
the blessed Angels never fell nor never shall fall, and that there shall not
be any end of their everlasting blessedness: it comes not of their
unchangeable nature, (for y^ is peculiar unto God alone) but because they be
continuallye underpropped with the power of the unchangeable god: which power
if it should forsake them (as forsake them it might if god would) then
doubtless might they not only be changed, but also utterly banishe away
and be brought to nothing. And therefore I have said, that the cause of
faultiness is the willinge inclination of the will (which was made good in
deed, howbeit yet able too be changed) unto evil. For the said will was
chaungeable, by Gods ordinance who created it so, because that otherwise look
how many unchangeable natures he had made, so many Gods had he made. And
changed it was at Gods forsaking of it (for too whom is he bound) but yet by
changing it self of it own accord, so as the cause of faultiness may seem
to be imputed, rather to forsakinge, than to infor^inge.

Quest. But if this change happened not An objection that God should be the
author of evil
without gods foredeterminatio^, verelye it may seem that all this
inconvenience is to be fathered upon him.

Ans. That follows not, forasmuch as gods determination took not away the
will of y^ first man, and so also neither his aduisement or choosing, but only
ordered it. For he was changed by falling utterly of his own accord, which
thing is to be understood much more of the falling of the Angels, whose
faultines krept upon them from at home, and perhaps y^ was the cause that
moved God to have pitye upon men which fell by the stepping in of the devil,
and not too have pity of the devil and his Angels.

Quest. But otherwise it could not come to pass, than god had ordained should
come to pass.

An. I grant both. For neither were it reason that the said everlasting
ordinance (wherein I showed a little erst, that all things and every thing
without exception, are comprehended) should be shet out from the changinge of
the chief piece of work. And too ^^uouch y^ such manner of ordinance were
changeable, it were a poinct of wickedness. Let both o^ the^ therefore be most
true. Yet does it not therevppon follow, either that the^ fault is in God, who
(as I said) does always well yea even then also when his instruments offend:
or that man is without fault, as who has not offended but willingly. For this
necessitye where through the thing that god had ordained must needs come to
pass, has not taken away either will or happening, but rather has ordered
and disposed them: consideringe that among the causes of men's doings, even
the cheifest cause is will.

Quest. Your meaning then is, that the The necessity inforceth not man's
will.
necessity of chosig that which god has ordained from the beginning repugneth
not against will. But happening is said to be that which may either fall out
or not fall out.

An. Yea and I say more plainly, y^ willingness or happeninge are not taken
away by necessity, but by compulsion. As for example: It was of necessity y^
christ Math. 26. 54. 56 John. 13. 11 18.
should die in the age, time, and place fore ordained from everlasting, for
else the Prophets might have lied. And yet if ye have an eye too the natural
disposition of Christ's flesh by it self, without the foredetermination of
God: there is no doubt but by nature he might have lived longer, and therefore
that in that respect he dyed by hap. Christ's bones might have bin broken,
if ye look upon the nature of bones by themselves: but Ioh. 19. 36
if ye look unto Gods ordinance, they could no more be broken, than it is
possible that God should alter his determination. And therefore the
unchangeable necessity of Gods ordinance, does not take away the
happeninge of the second causes, but dispose it. Also it Acts. 17. 3
was of necessitye that Christ dyed by the ordinance of his father, and yet he
dyed willingly: yea and God forbid that ever we should dye unwillingly, who
notwithstanding must of necessity die once. And what more? God himself is most
freely, yea and most willingly good: and yet is it utterly impossible that he
should not be good. Ergo willingness and necessity are not repugnant. For
whereas it was of necessity y^ of two repugnant things Adam must choose but
the one: although none of them both was within the compass of his own will:
yet surely the one of them was set down in the everlasting ordynance of God,
which ordynance was both out of Adams will and above his will, and yet
compelled not his will: but rather forasmuch as his will could not take both
of them, it willingly and of it own accord inclined finally too that part,
which the ordinance of god had foreset.

Quest. But surely, that necessity which is Necessity of sinning excuses not
sin
entered in together with lust, into man's heart, in such wise as he cannot but
sin, (according as thou have declared before) seems too take away happening.

An. Although I should grant it too be so, yet cannot men be exempted from
blame: first because this necessitye of sinning wherewith mankind is now
overwhelmed, comes not of the Creat^* but of the willing inclination of man's
natural will unto evil, as I said before. And who will think it strange, y^ he
should be burned, which has willingly cast himself into the fire? Again,
although it be not of hap but of necessity, that man is now carried unto
evil, (consideringe that since he is corrupted by sin, he is (as the Apostle
says) become the bondslaue Romans 7. 14 John. 8. 36
of sin, and so remains til he be set free by y^ son of god) yet
notwithstanding, that which he does, he does it willinglye Romans 8. 7.
and vnconstreined. For like as he cannot but do evil, so also he delights
not in any other than evil, albeit that the evil lurkinge sometime under the
color of good, do make him take it for good. And therefore not even this
necessity which was brought in by willinge fall, takes away the willinge
moving of the will. Which thing being granted, it follows that man is verily
the cause of sin, inasmuch as although he sin of necessity, yet he sins
willingly. And yet say I not that happeninge is taken away by this necessity
another. For although that in man which is hild bound under necessity of sinning
and is not yet regenerated, there remains now no deliberating whether he may
choose the true good, or the evil, as there was in man's nature before his fall:
yet notwithstaning there remains a deliberating between evil and evil. For
where the case stands not upon choice of this or that, there is no
deliberating or debating. Now then, even the headiest and hastiest men that be,
do deliberate: but neither can they understand any thing, nor thing any
thing, and therefore much less deliberate of any thing but either with straying
from y^ good, or else plainly against their conscience: ergo al their
deliberating is busied about the choosing between two euilles or mo. And
their preferringe of the one or the other, comes altogether by hap as in
respect of their own voluntary will, which happening y^ unchangeable
ordenaunce of God does no more take away now in men corrupted, than it took
it away in old time in mankind uncorrupted.

Qu. The sum then of the things which The conclusion of the discourse
concerning providence
thou have spoken concerning providence is this: that nothing in the whole
world comes too pass against Gods will or without his knoweledge (that is to
say* rashly and casually) but altogether in such wise as God himself has
ordained them from everlasting, disposing all the mean causes most mightily and
effectually, so as they be carried on to their appointed end of necessity as in
respect of his ordinance: and yet that he is not an author or allower of any
evil, because he deals always most rightfuly, with what instruments so ever
he execute his work.

An. So it is.

Quest. This is yet again the thing that troubles me. For although I see
that God works rightefully by the evil sort: yet not withstandinge, if all
and every thing be done by gods eternal or dinaunce, so as nothing at all may
be excluded: then it remains that the evil doings of the evil persons,
even Of fatherige evil upon god.
in respect that they be evil, are not exempted from Gods ordinance, which
thing me thinks cannot be said without wickedness.

An. Neeedes must he be sore troubled and to no purpose which laboreth to
comprehend gods wisdom within the bounds of his own reason. For I pray you, if
you would go about too contain the whole Ocean in a drinkinge Cup, what
should you else do but only lose your labor, and be counted a fool for so
doing? And yet more tolerable (though not too be talked of) is the
proporcioninge between the maine sea and the least cup that can be, than
between gods wisdom, and the foolishness of man's most corrupt wit.
Nevertheless, I suppose y^ this which thou obiectest may also be fitlye
answered unto. Therefore I grant thee eue^ this also, that the evil works of
evil men, even in that they be evil in respect of themselves, are not done
against gods will or without his knoweledge: for were it so, then should
either Godlesnesse or else Epicurishenes follow of necessity. But I say
further, that if thou have an eye too Gods ordinance: the very evil it self
has a respect of goodness, although, it be evil in it self, so as this
Paradox of Austins is very true namelye that it is good also that there
should be euilles, too the end that God should not suffer euilles to be: and
truly in not sufferinge: he is not unwilling, but willing.

Quest. What then? Shall we say that god wills none iniquity.
God wills iniquity?

An. God forbid for it is the horriblest of all blasphemies to say so. But
stay thy self awhile I beseech thee, that I may expound that which I have
said so truly and godlilye as it cannot be denyde, but god must also be
avouched not to be the Judge of the world. The name of Will is taken sometime
in the largest signification, for that which god ordains or appoints. In
which signification we must utterly say, either y^ god wills all things,
(y^ is to say y^ nothing comes to pass which God will not have done): or
that God is not almightye, if never so small a thing com to pass which he would
not have don: or else y^ god regards not all things, if any thing come too
pass he cares not how. And sometime by ye name of Will there is meant only that
which likes him because it is good of it own nature: and after this manner
the faith full only are said too obey God and too execute his will, because
y^ in this sense God is said too will (that is too say too Psalm. 5. 4*
allow and except) only that which is good, and not too will iniquity.
Which will of his is uttered fully unto us in his law: but his other will is
not so, but in part. For who knows what shall befall but this one day? And
nothing shall beefall but that which God has from everlasting both willed and
ordained too befall.

Quest. Can God be thought too have How God wills or not wills evil.
willed or ordained any thing which he misliketh, and so consequently which is
evil?

Ans. Truly it must needs be confessed, that whatsoever god has ordained, it
is ordained altogether willingly: but even herein also appears rightly his
infinite wisdom, that with him even the darkness has a respect of light, (yea
and that in such wise, as it nevertheless both is and continues darkness
still) that is to say, it is good that there should be also some evil:
because god finds the reason how it may come too pass, y^ the thing which
both is and contineweth evil still of it own nature, may nevertheless have a
respect of goodness before him, and how the thing that is against his will,
(that is to say, which of it own nature is unrighteous, and therefore pleases
not God) may not come to pass without his will, that is to say, without his
ordinance. As for examples sake. That God saves his elect by redemption
freelye given in his son Christ, it is too his own exceeding great glory,
which otherwise should not have shone forth. But man should not have needed
redemption from sin and death, except there had been sin and death: Ergo
in respect of Gods ordinance it was good that sin and death should enter
into the world.

And yet the same sin, both is and contineweth so sinful of it own nature,
as Romans 5. 15
amends could not be made for it, but by most terrible punishment. Again
we recover much more in Christ, tha^ we forwent in Adam: Ergo Adams fall was
the best and profitablest thing that could be for us, as in respect of God,
who by this wonderful mean prepares a kingdom of everlasting glory for us
in Christ: and yet this fall is so evil of it own nature, that even we that
believe and are justified, do feel many mysteries and mischaunces which
spring of it, even too the death. Also it is grealy to the glory of god, that
he shows himself a most sore punisher of all sin. But if there had been
no sin there had bin no gap open for this judgment to come in at: Ergo in
respect of gods ordinance, it was good that there should be sin, and that
the same should afterward be spread abroad, too be punished with everlasting
pains in the Deuilles and in all that be set without Christ. Also Saint
Peter says, It is 1. Pet. 3. 17
y^ will of God, (that is too say it is his ordinance) that when we do well,
we should be misintreated. But he that ^ooth well, cannot be hurt but by
sin: Ergo in respect of God that wills it, (that is to say which
ordayneth it) it is good that there should be persecutors of the Church,
whom notwythstan^ynge he iustlye punishes afterward most seuerelye as
offenders against ^is will, that is to say as dooers against that which he
allows. Therefore even by the express words of y^ Apostles, the thing that is
against Gods will (that is too say against that which he allows and
commands) comes not to pass without his will, that is to say without his
ordinance: and yet can it not therefore be said, that god is contrary to
himself, or that he wills iniquity: according as Austin does rightly
conclude against Julian, out of the word of god.

Quest. Therefore it seems right that Of suffera^ce and willingness.
sufferance should be distinguished from willingness.

An. What I deem meet to be thought of this distinction, I have spoken a
little before. Truly if Sufferance be matched against Will, that is to say
against ordinance: such ouersetting is not only false but also foolish and
fond, considering that even in such actions as are not of free choice by
themselves, (as for example; when marchantmen that be in danger do cast out
their goods, and generally as often as men choose the less evil too avoid
the greater inconvenience) even the heathen men ackowledged free will too
bear sway. But if Sufferance be matched against willingness, that is to wit
against that which God is willing withal, as well liked and accepted of him by
it self and of it own nature: so as the thing that is good of it self may be
matched against that which is good but by well falling out, and which has some
respect of good in it, not of it own nature, but in respect of the end that
it is guided unto by God, through whose incomprehensible wisdom, even the
darkness does service unto the light: theu truly I admit it, so that this also
be added to it, namely that the same is not a vain and idle sufferance (as a
number dream) but a most workful; and yet nevertheless a most rightful
Sufferance. for the better understanding whereof, take the matter in feawe
words too stand thus. I think thou wylt not say that a judge is but as an
idle loker on, when upon the heering of a transgressors case he delivers him
too the Shreefe too be put too this kind of punishment or that. For surely
the Shreefe does not so much put him too death, as he is the instrument of the
Judge that puts him too death: so as if any cruelty be extended in that
behalf by the sentence of the judge, the same may be imputed not so much too
the executioner, as too the judge that commanded him.

Quest. I grant all this. But how many Objection against the foresaid
allegations
unlikely hoddes be there between these and the things that we entreat of?

Ans. I confess that. For else there should be no difference or at leas^wise
very small between a like thing and a same thing. Nevertheless I woold have
y^ r^^ken up at leastwise the chief of them, that I may answer to them one by
one.

Quest. In the sentence of Judges there goes trial before: but in these
things whereof you entreat, there is oftentimes no such thing perceived.

An. How many things are done justly by the magistrates of this world, ye
trial whereof is not seen of their subjects? And will thou attribute less unto
God, who sercheth thoroughly all things ye lie hyd even in the bottoms of men's
hearts, as well past as too come?

Quest. The Shref does nothing but by co^missio^ received. But where have the
wicked me received any such commandment as to kill one another, or to hurt
good men

An. In this thou art deceived, y^ whatsoever god appointed to be don, thou
imaginest him to give knowledge of it with some loud voice, unto the^ whose
service he purposes to use in the dooinge of it. But experience it self
teaches, that y^ is not always true in neither of both the cases: that is too
say whither he have determined to use mercy or to use justice: no not even
then when he uses instruments that have understanding. For who doubts but
that Pharao was ordained Genesis 45. 8 Psa. 1 c 5. ^
of God to intertaine Joseph, and too prepare harborow for his Church? And yet
he received no such commandment outwardly, no nor so much as thought of
any such thing in himself. Nevertheless that was ordained of God, and the
covert motion of Pharaos heart tended too the executinge of that which the
Lord had ordained. That the Chaldies were ordained to punish the evil
Israelites, and to narture the good, the prophets had foretold it a thousand
times, yea and that in such wise, as Nabuchadnezer had received express
commandment conceruinge Iere. 25. ^
the same thing: in so much as the Lord does also call him his servant. Yet
did not the lord command the Chaldies any such thing by name: but (as
Ezechiell writes,) giving over y^ kings Ezechi. 21 21. etc.
heart partly to Satan and to his Soothsayers, and partly to his own lusts,
he inclined him of his own swaye to perform that which God had determined.
How much more must we believe the same to be done, as often as the lord uses
the things that want reason, or also that be utterly without life, as his
executioners? For so did he call ye Flies, Froggs Exodus 7. 18
Gressehoppers, Hayle, and death too punish Pharao. So also says the wysest
Prou. 16. 33
of all men, that even the very Lottes fall not out at adventure. For all
things serve by a secret motion, to execute gods ordinances. But this
difference there is, Difference between the good in strumentes and the bad in
executing Gods will.
that the good instruments do nothing but through faith, (that is to say upon
assurance that they be called to that which they do,) and with a mind settled
too obey. But as for the evil instruments, forasmuch as they be led with a
blind bayrde by Satan and their own lusts, and have an eye too nothing
less than to the obeying of God, against whose express word they either know
or ought too know that all their intentes and purposes do fight: therefore
they serve not the Lord, although God do secretly use the travel of them,
even against their wills, in such wise as they do not any thing else, than
that which the wonderful woorkn^aister himself has ordained.

Quest. Then let us stay here concerning Gods eternal providence, from the
which I se not that any thing at all may be exempted: and let us (if it please
you) proceed to predestination, which I would first and formest have described
unto me.

An. Predestination being considered in what predestinacion is.
general, is nothing else but the same thing that we have called gods
determination or ordinance, howbeit as having regard to the end or work of
the very ordinance. For there is nothing which the wise creator of all
things, (who doubtelesse has neither made any thing ^naduisedlye, nor can be
deceived or ^lter his purpose,) has not ordained ^othe too myddle ends, and
specially ^oo some one vttermoste poyncte of all. But custom has won, that
predesti^ation is considered cheefelye in the gouerninge of mankind. Thus
therefore do I describe it. I say it is gods everlasting and unchangeable
ordinance, goinge in order before all the causes of salvation and dampnation,
whereby god has determined too be glorified, in some by sauinge them of his
own mere grace in Christ, and in othersome by dampning the^ through his
rightful justice in Adam and in themselves. And after the custom of the
scripture, we call the former sort the vessels of glory and the elect or
chosen, that is too say folk appointed to salvation from before all worlds
through mercy: and the other sort we call reprobates or castawayes, and
vessels of wrath, that is to say appoincted likewise too rightful dampnation
from everlasting: either of both which, God has known seuerallye from time
without beginning.

Question.

But it is a hard case too say, that A worldly and over scrupulous dout
there be some foreappointed to damnation, and therefore thou know that many
refer the word predestination only too the chosen, and that they say
rather that the Reprobates are foreknowen.

An. I Inow what that means. Many were afraid least they should make god the
cause of the destruction of the reprobates, and also report him too be cruel,
if they should confess that the reprobate also are predestined of God. But
they needed too have feared none of both, as shall be showed in dew place.
Again, that is but a fond startinghole. For if foreknowledge (as they call it)
carry the force of a cause, no less than predestination does: then say they
that which they would not say. But if it have not: the^ may they also say ye God
is not the cause of the salvation of them that be predestined. For why? The
Apostle in reckeninge up the Romans 8. 19.
causes of the salvation of the chosen, sets down (...) (which these men
Acts. 2. 23.
interpret foreknoweledge) in y^ first place Yea and Luke sets down the
same foreknowledge as the ground work of Augustine de Ciuit. Dei lib. 19. ca 1.
our redemption. Rightlye therefore does Austin acknowledge predestination on
both sides, although he do now and then shole out the predestinate sort from
the foreknowen. But let us away with this strife about terms. My meaning was
only too show that I had don aright in setting down predestination for a
general term, whereof there be two particular Two sorts of predestination
sorts, which notwithstanding do meet together (and that is a thing
inespecially to be marked) no less in the end, than in the head and
original beginning. For the headspring of them both is the ordinance of God.
And both the ways (which are as it were cut out from this head,) do meet
agein in the uttermost point, that is too wit in the glory of God. These
things being set down, too the end I may answer to that The answer to the
doure or objection last before named.
exception of thine, namely that it seems a hard case, that there should be
some predestined unto death: I say that these things insewing, seem unto me
much harder. Namely that god should not have forepurposed some certain end with
himself in creating men, howbeit that (even as the vnwisest woorkeman of them
all do rightly witness) the end is the first thing in the intent of the
dooer. That god in creating men purposed an end to himself, which aferwarde
should fall out incertainly, that is too wit in such sort, as it should rest in
the power of the clay and not in the power of the potter, too make the thing
come too pass or not come too pass which the workmaister had purposed. That
god knowinge the will of his own handywork, should alter his own purpose, so
that whereas he had determined too save all in Christ, yet notwithstanding
he should alter his mind and destroy all such as would not incline too that
purpose. For all these things (say I) do of necessity follow their opinion,
which uphold that such as perish, do perish contrary to Gods appoyntement. And
least we may seem too wander without our listes, that is to say, not to deal
by only consequences of reason: First I say that all opinions which strive
against the just proportion of faith (of which sort this must needs be
one, the granting whereof is accompanied with so many wicked things) are
plucked in pieces by the holy Scriptures. Secondely I say, that as often as the
scripture makes mention of the predestination of the chosen sort: so often is
the predestination of the Reprobates confyrmed likewise, in as much as the
cause it self requires, that whereas some be chosen unto life, the refidewe
must be understood too be appointed unto death. Furthermore saying that the
vessels of glory be said too be predestined too glory: the ouersetting Romans
9. 22 23.
of flat contraries does utterly require, that we should conster the vessels
of wrath to be such as are predestined unto death.

Quest. But here it is noted, that when the Apostle entreats of the vessels
of Another objection upon a distinction of terms
glory, he uses a word that imports doing: and when he speaks of the
vessels of wrath, he uses a word that importteth suffering.

Ans. I grant that if it be demanded of the middle causes whereby the
vessels of wrath are carried too the wrath that is appointed for them, they
themselves are the onlycause of their own damnation. But truly this
destruction is toyish. For Acts. 13. 48
Luke, iutreating of y^ elect, uses a participle of the passive voice, saying,
as many as were ordained to everlasting life. What? was that of themselves, and
not rather of the mere grace of god? Besides this, it is nothing to the matter.
For we entreat not of salvation or damnation: but of the ordinance too
Salvation or dampnation, which disposes and orders the very causes of
executing the^ and therefore in no wise hangs upon them, for that is
altogether above the skies as the old proverb says. To be short, whither is
it harder to say y^ some be predestined to dampnatio^, than to say y^ they
be registered to da^pnatio^ long ago as saint Jude. 4 1. These. 5. ^.
Jude speaks, or to say y^ they be appointed to wrath, as Paul speaks?
Lastly, I said not y^ the dampnation of the reprobates is the end y^ god
purposed upon in his fore ordinance: but his own glory. Neither also did I
simply say y^ the Reprobates were appoincted to da^pnation: but I said they
were ordained too Just damnation: showing thereby that although no man be
dampened but such as the lord has ordained to damnation, (for otherwise the
aforesaid blasphemies that I spoke of would follow of necessity): yet are none
damned but such as are found too have in themselves just causes of dampnatio^.
What falsnes the^ or what roughnes has my foresaid saying in it.

Quest. You seem to be disproued by this 1. tim. 2. 4
saying, God will have almen saved, and by such other like universal sentences.

An. Then say thou that some be dampened The right understanding of all
general or indefinite propositions concerning providence and predestination
whither God will or no, or else confess that the said text must be taken
otherwise: which thing the promises also do show: namely (which th^^ge even
the scholeme^ themselves have espied) y^ thereby must be meant, not ye
particulars of all kinds, but all kinds of particulars: (...) speak more
plainly, so as it may be, not an universal but an indefinite proposition,
which ought to be interpreted thus rather: that is to wit, that god will have
any manner of men too be saved, which self kind of speech Matthew uses when
he says, that the Lord healed all sykenesses and diseases, that is to say al
sorts or kinds of diseases, according as both Math. 4. 23.
Latinmen and Englishemen do now and then speak. For I pray you dare any
man say, that God will have all men saved, yea even though they continewe in
unbelief too the very last gasp? Truly no. For if it be the fathers
will, that he which believes in the Son should not perish: it follows
John. 6. 40
that it is his will also, that which believes not in the Son, should
perish. And therefore those two things, namely Too be saved, and too come to
the knowledge of the truth, must be yoked together, so as it may be
understood, that God will have those only too be saved, whom he vouchsaueth
to com to the knowledge of the truth. But faith (which Ephesians. 28 2. These. 2. 3
is this true knowledge lyghteth neither upon all men, nor yet upon the
ronner or willer (as the Apostle witnesses): Romans 9. 1^
but comes of Gods mercy, and lights upon them only which (as Luke says)
are ordained to everlasting life, Acts. 13. 48 Acts. 16. 14
and whose hearts (as the same Luke writes) God opens so as they take heed
to his word. Then must we understand, that gods predestination extends to all
sorts of men, that is too wit both Jews and Gentiles, private persons and
magistrates, men and women, old men and yongmen, slaves and gentlemen, such
as be giltye of many sins and such as be giltye offeawer sins. For these
only and such^ other like, are the circumstances y^ are included in y^ foresaid
sentence.

Quest. Will you then make election to Election must needs be particular.
be particular?

Ans. And I would feign know if the man be in his right wits, that
imagines Election too be universal. For truly he that takes all, makes no
choice: and he that chooses a thing out from two other things or mo, must
needs be said too refuse or forsake the things that he chooses not.

Quest. But surely the calling and promis are universal.

Ans. Understande them too be indefinite vvithou^ an^ peremptory or precise.
excepting of any persons.
(yea and that, in respect of certain circumstances of which I have spoken)
and thou shall think the rightlyer. And so altogether are those things also
too be taken which diverse learned men of our time have written about this
controversy. Or else see, how very reason of necessity confuteth that
universal calling. For if ye mean it of the calling by the preaching of the
word: it is not true that all men are, or ever were, yea or ever shall be
called so seuerallye hereafter. For how many have died, do dye and shall
die, before they have hard aught at all of this word? But if ye take it to
be meant of the other calling which has a much larger scope, namely of the
beeholding Romans 1. 19.
of nature whereby is understood that which may be known of god: not even
this another is so universally true as that it comprehends every several
person. For how many have died and daily do dye in such age as is utterly
unfit for that contemplation? There can not nor may not any calling, and
muchlesse any election be warranted too be universal, but only too be
indefinite: and that must also be only with an exclusion of these certain
circumstances aforesaid.

Quest. But what if we say, that all men are called universally to salvation
under condition, that they believe: and therefore that salvation is offered
universally as in respect of God which calls, and that the fault why this
calling is not universally of effect, is not in God, but in the stubbornnes of
the unbelievers which refuse the good turn that is offered them?

Ans. This doubtless is true in some respect. Stubbornnes is the let of the
effectual worki^g of gods promises. Mat. 20. 16
For no doubt but the stubbornnes of the unbelievers, is the thing that
disappointeth the application and efficacy of the promises that be offered. No
dout also but calling has a larger scope than election. But yet your
supposalls are neither truly enough nor fitly enough spoken. For first we have
showed, that not even the outward calling. (whither ye look to that which is
natural or to that which is done by the word of the Gospel) pertayneth too
every several person. Wherefore as touching those that we speak of, there is
found in them no stubbornness against the Gospel, but only original
corruption, which notwithstanding is even of it self alone sufficient
Condition of beleeuinge
to damn the reprobates. Besides this, although the condition of believing be
annexed: yet does not the ordinance hang upon that, but rather that hangs
upon the ordinance, as which goes in order before all other inferior causes.

Else, see how false and unreasonable things insew. For it will follow that
Absurdities folowi^g upon the fore said question
God in devising with himself, did first set before him his whole woork as
already finished, and that according as he saw his work should be disposed
of itself and not by him that made it, he should thereupon take occasion too
determine, that is too say, too appoint either too salvation or damnation. Or
if ye like better that god himself was uncertain how the performing or not
performinge of the condition would fall out: Then must it be concluded, that
Gods ordinance hangs in suspense, and that the determination of the case (as
Austin trimly says) is not in the power of the potter, but of the clay. And
hereupon will be grounded another false opinion: namely, that faith has not his
beginning of God, but of the will of man, if it be so that Gods foresight gave
him cause too determine upon his choice. Neither is it too the purpose to
object, that faith is not foresene, forasmuch as it is a gift of god that
comes in by the way: but that corruption and unbelief are foresene, which
are natural in man after his fall. The nature of contraries in reasoning
For the reason of the contraries requires in any case, that look in what
degree faith is placed in the ordinance of Election: even in the same degree
must faithlesnesse or vnbeeleefe be placed in the ordinance of reprobation.
Therefore if ye make faith foreknowen, too be the cause of the ordinance of
election (which is utterly a point of a Pelagian and therefore repealed by
Austin) you must needs deem the same also of unbelief in the contrary
ordynance of reprobation. And on the othersyde, if ye submit faith unto the
said ordinance, (as you needs must, for we be chosen to the intent to believe,
and not because we would or should believe) you must needs also in the contrary
member submit unbelief to the ordinance of reprobation.

Quest. Will you then make the ordinance The causes of unbelief and of faith
are subject to gods ordinance.
of reprobation to be the cause of vnbeleeue, as well as you make the ordinance
of election too be the cause of faith?

Answer. No. For the ordinance of election is in deed the efficient cause of
faith. But corruption or unbelief with the fruits thereof, are in such wise
put under the ordinance of reprobation, as that the will of man is the first
efficient cause of them and yet notwithstanding they be subject too the
ordinance: because that although it be not through the ordynance, yet is it
not besides the ordynance nor without the ordynance, that those things happen,
whereof the failing cause and not the efficient cause is grrounded in God, as I
said before, For like as they only believe in whom God creates faith: even so
through Gods forsaking of man's will, sin is krepte into mankind and there
abides yelding ill fruit in as many as God lists too leave up too their
own lusts, that they may be the cause of their own damnation, whervntoo they
are also inregestred and appoyncted from everlasting. Furthermore, that I may
retire unto the other question: whatsoever is said of the forenamed condition
which is annexed too the ordinance, as who should say that the ordinance
depended upon the condition: Difference between Gods ordinance and the
execution of his ordinance.
it is unfitly spoken.. For the ordinance of sauinge the elect sort, is another
thing than the very glorifiynge of the elect: and the ordinance of dampning
the Reprobates, is another thing than the very damninge of them, in somuche
as the ordinance it self must needs be distinguished from the execution of
it. The execution than of the ordinance of election, (that is too wit, the
salvation of the chosen,) depends upon faith that takes hold of Christ:
and the execution of the ordinance of Reprobation,) that is too wit the
dampnation of the castawaies,) depends upon sin and there fruits thereof,
according t^o this saying of the Prophet, thy destruction O Israel comes of
thy self. And Iocl. 13. 9.
of this ordinance of choosinge some men too be saved by grace, and of
refusing othersome too be dampened through their own sins, we know none
other cause but this one, namely that the Lord, who is both incomparablye
merciful and incomparablye rightful, will be glorified in that wise. He that
holds not himself contented with this, for as much as he seeks some higher
thing and some rightfuller thing than Gods will: he is worthily reproved
by the Apostle for a ^rabler.

Quest. Ergo God hates some, not for A right popish and worldly objection.
their sins sake, but because he lists so too do.

An. This is a slanderous objection. For it is certain that God hates no man
but for sin: for otherwise he had hated his own work. But it is one thing to
hate, Differnce between hating and ordeining too just hatred.
and another thing to ordeine one to just hatred. For the cause of ye hatred
is manifest, namely even sin: but why God appoynteth who^ he lists unto
just hatred, though the cause be hid from us, (sauinge too the end he may
be glorified) yet cannot it not be unrighteous, to^sideringe that the will of
God is the only rule of rightfulnes. For if we speak of this sovereign will
of God, which orders and disposes the causes of all things: we must not
say that a thing ought too be rightful before God should will it: but
contrariwise, that God must first will the thing before it can be
ryghtfull: which who so considers not, shall reason but confusedly of this
matter.

Quest. But yet for all this, God seems Whither there be any accepting of
persons with God.
too be a regarder of persons if he yield not alike unto all that have done
alyke. For in this poincte all men are like, that they be corrupted by nature
spread into them from Adam.

An. Nay truly, it follows not of necessitye that whosoever yields not
alyke unto like, should be an accepter of persons: but he only which
yeldeth not alyke unto like, because he is parciallye moved by some
circumstaunces that accompany the person it self: as if two men were offenders
alike, and the judge should acquit the one of them because he is rich, or his
kinsman, or his countrieman. For these be the persons that may not be regarded
of him that will judge vncorruptlye. But I pray you, let us put the case, y^
two men be indetted unto you, both in like sum, and both upon like
conditions. Now if of your liberality you forgive the one his debt, and
exact the other man's debt according too extremity of law: shall there be any
excepting of persons in this behalf? What if some sovereign having a cupple
that offend alike, do of his mere grace parden the one man's offense, and
punish the other according to his deserts, shall there be any parciality in
the matter? Nay truly, if there be any fault in such dealing, it is not
toward him that is punished, but toward him yt is borne withal, and that is
but a gentle fault. Muchlesse therefore can any parciality or regard of persons
be deemed to be in y^ case which we have now in hand, considering how God
acquiteth not the elect, but by the imputation of christ's satisfaction: and if
any thing may be called in question as scarce indifferent in this behalf, me^
may seem to cavil rather upon the mercy toward the elect, tha^ upon the
rightful rigor toward the castawaies. Finally to what end is all this? For
in order of causes, gods ornance gooeth before the very creation of mankind:
unless thou will make god so unwise a workman, as too create mankind before he
had determined with him self, to what end he would make him. And what could he
see in them that as yet had no being, whereby he might be moved to determine
this or that concerning them? Therefore this discourse also pertains not to
the ordinance, but to the execucion of the ordinance: wherein notwithstanding
(as I said even now) there can no parcialitie or accepting of persons be found.

Quest. Do thou not then by the term lump (which the apostle Paul uses)
understand Romans 9. 21.
the created and corrupted mankind, whereout of God ordineth some to honor
and some to dishonor?

An. There is no doubt but God takes How God shapeth both the chose^ and the
reprobates out of one lump.
both the sorts out of ye same lump, ordeining them to contrary ends. Yet do
I say and plainly auouche, that Paul in the same similitude, mounteth up to
the said souerain ordinance whereunto even the very creation of mankind is
submitted in order of causes, and therefore much less does the Apostle put the
foreseen corruption of mankind before it. For first by the term Lump, there
is manyfestlye betokened a substance as yet unshapen, and only prepared too
work upon afterward. Again in likening God too a Potter, and mankind too
a lump of Clay whereof vessels are too be made afterward, out of all doubt
the Apostle betokens the first creation of men. Furthermore he should
speak improperly, too say, that vessels of wrath are made of that lump. For
if that lump betokened men corrupted: then were they vessels of dishonor
already, and the potter should not be said too make them, other than such as
they had made them selves already.

Finially so should the cause as well of the ordinance of Reprobation, as of
the execution of the same ordinance (that is too wit of the damnation of the
Reprobate) be manifest: for men should see, it were corruption. But why then
should the Apostle mount up too that secret will of God which is rather too be
honored than searched, if he had so ready an answer at hand, specially which
might earye alikelyhood of truth with it even in the reason of man?

Quest. Truly thou compellest me to agree unto thee even in this point also.
But yet this is another thing that troubles me. If this ordinance be of
necessity and unchangeable, as it is indeed? to what purpose do men disquiet
themselves? The wilful and unreasonable objection of the worldlinges.
for whether they do well, they must nevertheless perish if they be or
deyned toodamnation: or whither they do ill, they shall be saved if they be
ordained too life.

Question. Certainly it is a fond objection, too surmize that thing which never
shall nor can come to pass. For from whence coms Repentance and the fruits
thereof? Truly even from regeneration thorough the spirit of Christ taken hold
on by faith: But true faith is given to the chozen sort only: Ergo only the
elect do repent and give themselves too good works. The rest have not so much
as the will too think any thing aright, and much less too do it, considering
that too will aright and too do aright comes of Gods grace, which is
peculiar only to the chozen. And therefore as fond also is the saying of them,
which hold opinion that they shall be saved if they be chosen, what kind of
life so ever they give them selves unto. For as many as be chosen, are the
children of God, but if they be Gods children, then also (as the Apostle To.
8. 14
says) they beeled by Gods spirit. And therefore the elect truly cannot
perish: (for then should gods ordinance fail, or else at least wise God
should be changeable), but like as they cannot perish, so also are they in
their seasonable time indewed with faith, and ingreffed in christ in whom
finally they be justified, sanctified, and glorified.

Que. But yet must they needs perish Needs must the reprobates perish and the
cause thereof.
that are ordained too damnation.

Answer. I grant: but yet it is because they be sinners. For evermore
between the ordynance and the execution of the ordinance there steppeth in
sin,, which will stop the mouths of any men be they never so captious. For
what is more rightful, than that God should punish sin? And too whom is he
bound too show mercy? Therefore I am not wont too marvel that any man
perissheth, but rather I marvel that Gods goodness can be so great, as that
all do not perish.

Question. Because thou have so often distinguished the middle causes from the
ordynance that disposes them: I would also have them rehearsed on either part.

Answer. Forasmuch as God (as it may be perceived by the falling out of
things) The middle causes between the ordinance of predestination and the end
of it.
had determined from everlasting, to setforth his glory chiefly in mankind,
which glory consists partly in extendinge mercy, and partly in extending
hatred against sin: he created man sound both within and without, and endued
him with right understanding and will, but yet he made him chaungeable. For he
himself being singularly good, could not create and will any evil: and yet
except evil had entered into the world, there had bin no room neither for
mercy, nor for justice. Man therefore being changeable, brought himself and
all that should be borne of him in bondage of sin and of Gods wrath,
willingly and altogether by missehap as in respect of the beginning that
sticked in man himself, that is too say in respect of his own will, albeit
that it were of necessity if ye consider Gods ordinance and the sequel of
the matter. From thensforth the Lord, (according as he had determined from
everlasting,) bringing forth now some and then some, does so lead them forth
too their appointed ends too be glorified in them on either side: that of
them in whom he will have his glory to appear by their salvation, some he
remoueth out of hand too eternal life as freely comprised within his
covenant: and othersome (whom it pleases him too have too continewe longer in
this life,) he calls by the effectual Romans 8. 28 etc.
word of the Gospel, sometime earlyer and sometime later, at what time he
lists, and greffeth them into Christ, in whom he justifies them, sanctifies
the^, and finallye rewards the^ with eternal life. And as for y^ residew
which are appointed too his rightful vengeance, (for to whom is he detter?)
either he destroys Romans 11. 35
them out of hand, or else patiently giving them respit (that they may not
Romans 9. 22.
be altogether without taste of his goodness) either he voutsaueth not too call
the^ at all, or he calls them no further but too make them the more
inexcusable. Hereupon it comes to pass, that being left up too their own
lusts, they harden themselves, until they have filled up the full measure of
wickedness, and then they pass away unto judgment. In what wise these causes
of the dampnation of the reprobates, do come to pass besides the ordinance of
God who forsakes the reprobates and delivers them up too Satan and too
themselves, as that the whole blame does notwithstanding stick altogether in
themselves: I have showed already in dew place.

Quest. Then must the vessels of mercy praise the lord, and the vessels of
wrath blame themselves. But whither may I flee for succor in the perilous
temptation of particular election.

Ans. Unto the effects whereby the spiritual Remedies against the temptation
of particular predestination.
life is certeinlye discerned, and so consequently our election, like as the
life of the body is perceived by feelinge and moving. For we that walowe as
yet in the puddle of this world, are not able too lift up our selves unto
that souereyne light, except we mount up by those steps whereby God draws
his chosen unto him according too his foresaid everlasting ordinance, as whom
he has created to his own glory. Therefore that I am chosen, I shall perceive
first by y^ holiness or sanctificationbegon Phil. 2. 13. 1. Ioh. 3. 10. To. 8.
15. 16
in me that is to say by my hating of sin and by my loving of righteousness.
Here unto I shall add the witness of the holy ghost comforting my concience,
like as David said, why art thou heavy O my soul, and why do thou grieve
thy self? Put thy trust in the lord. Hereto pertains Psalm. 42. 11
the earnest minding of Gods benefytes, which though it rather frayeth us than
comfort us for a time while we think therwithall upon our own
unthankfulness: yet at the length it must needs lift us up, forasmuch as
therein are always too be seen the manifest tokens of his free and
unchangeable fatherlye love toward us, not shadowed, but playnelye expressed.
Upon this Sanctifycation and comfort of the holy Ghost, we gather faith.
And thereby we rise up unto Christ, to whom whosoever is geeuen, is of
necessitye chosen in him from before all worlds, and shall never be thruste
out of the doors

Question. What if those witnessinges be faint?

Answer. Then it beheueth us too know that Other ^o comfortable remedies
we be tried, and therefore that our sluggishnesse is then most too be found
fault with. Yet withstanding our hearts must not in any wise shrink, but we
must strengthen the^ with those indefinite promises, and throw darts at our
adversary agein. For although the encounter of the flesh against the spirit
do comber our consciences with great doubtinges of the trewnes of our faith,
specially as ost as the spirit seems too quayle and in a manner too be quite
quenched: yet notwithstanding, it is certain, that this spirit which sets
it self truly (though but faintlye) against the assaults of the flesh, is
the spirit of adoption, the gift whereof is not too be repented of. For
otherwise the elect might peryshe, and they that be once justified might fall
away from Christ. Whereupon it woolde follow, either that God is chaungeable,
or that the sallyng out of his ordynance is uncertain, whereof none of both can
be imputed too God without blasphemy.

Quest. But the garlond is given to those only that hold out.

Ans. I grant so. And therefore whosoever Perseuera^ce or holding out to the
end.
is elected craves perseverance and obtains it.

Quest. Think you then that the spirit of adoption is never shaken of?

Ans. I confess that the spirit is now and then interrupted in sore
temptations, and that the testimonies of his dwellinge in us are oftentimes so
brought a sleep, that he seems to be quite gone from us for a time. But
yet for all that, I say he is never quite taken away: for needs must gods
determination of saving his servant stand sure, and therefore when* time
serves, at length the mistes of the flesh are chaced away, and the gladness
of the lords sauinge health always restored, which shyneth as the Son into
the troubled consciences of the elect. Finally Howtrewe faith and the effects
of it ar interrupted.
I say, that true faith and the effects thereof are in likewise interrupted
in the elect as the powers of y^ mind be hindered in them that have the
sleepye disease or in drunkenmen: in whom the soul is not taken away, (for
there is great odds between the sleepy disease or drunkenuesse and very death)
and yet that they which have the spirit of Adoption have an assured pledge of
eiernall life. Therefore in this most dangerous encounter, the same thing
wherewith Satan assayleth us, both can and must warrant us assured victory. For
except the spirit of adoption (which is also the spirit of holi^^esse,
righteousness, faith, and life) were present in us, there should be no
striving in us, but sin should reygne quietly at his pleasure. For the man that
Mark too know an elect from a worldling vnelected* or from a reprob^te. Romans
7. 13 Romans 7. 15 19 Romans 7. 25.
is not endued with that spirit says thus: I do the evil that I have a mind
unto: I do no good, nor I have no list too do it. But the man that is
regenerated, and so consequently elected, (howbeit as yet still wrestling,)
says thus: I do the evil that I would not, and I do not the good that I
woold do. Woe is me, who shall deliver me out of the body of this death? And
in crying out in this wise, the elect person casts his Anchor in the very
Throne of God the father, whom he beholds in the preached word and in the
Sacraments. Finally when the elect shall have gotten the full victory in the
other world, he shall say thus: I do the good that I woold do, and I do none
evil, nor none I list to do.

Question. What if a man never feel the testimonies of such spirit in
himself?

Answer Yet must it not be deemed that he is one of the number of the
reprobates. No man must be hastily deemed for a ^eprobate
For the lord calls those that be his, at what time he himself lists. And
therefore such manner of men must be sent away too the word and the
Sacraments, where they may here God speaking and alluryng sinners unto him.
For although they receive not the fruit and operacion of those things for a
time: yet must they incorage themselves and also be diligently styred up by
others, too continewe in heeringe the word of God even against their wills: and
then one time or other they shall obtein^ that which the Lord as yet
deferreth, not too the intent too cast them of, but contrariwise too sharpen
their desyr^ and earnestness.

Quest. I would therefore that we might talk among ourselves concerning the
Sacraments also, about the which in especially there is now adays so great
strife between the churches.

Ans. Truly I refuse not so to do. Notwithstanding (as I think) we shall do
that more conveniently another time.

In the mean while, if you be satisfied in the things you have demanded, I
am very glad, and I would with you too mind these things earnestly night and
^aye.

All honor, glory, praise, and thanks be only unto God the Father through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen, ()
EINIS.

