Rich his Farewell to Military profession: conteinyng very pleasant
discourses fit for a peaceable time: Gathered together for the only delight of
the courteous Gentlewomen, both of England and Irelande, for whose only
pleasure they were collected together, And unto whom they are directed and
dedicated by Barnabe Rich Gentleman.

Malui me diuitem esse qua^ vocari.

Imprinted at London, by Robart VValley. 1581.

(...) (...)
Must ask (...)
To her belonges the stau^ement o^ the (...),
(...) ^eeldes all those their just deserved place.
(...) her pathe and run her royal race:
(...) Rich rewards to each, she yeeldes each where,
(...) might become this worthy Rich to wear.
(...) painful man that Tilles his ground, reapes fruit,
Each merit has his meede, pain has his hire:
^^sert requires that Fame should not stand mute,
(...) Wisdom does to Virtues ways aspire.
(...) of gain does ser men's hearts on fire,
(...) yield him thanks, that erst has undertook,
(...) delight to pen this little book.
(...) Momus mates chat on, in their dispight,
(...) wranglers wreake and wrest the worst they may:
(...) sort will judge and take delight,
(...) ^^^glyng Iayes that know not what they say:
(...) their witless wits bewraie,
(...) ^^iche shall reap, what he right has won,
(...) praise for that which here is done.
Finis quod VV. J. Gent.

Baptiste Star in praise of the Aucthour.
IF due desert should reap reward,
or worthy merit, guerdon have:
Why should not Rich press forth himself,
thy lovely Laurel croune to crave.
Whose life in feeld that won him praise,
he leads at home in Pallas ways.
Skorne not then Zoilus his good hap,
that can his will subdue and tame,
But try to tread his pathe whereby,
thou may thy life with virtue frame.
Allow his pain, and pen to wright,
who naught pretendes but thy delight.
Lo he who wonted was in feeld,
to meet his furious foe in face:
Has scalde Parnassus hill where he,
attendes Mineru' her noble grace.
And there his pen does play his part,
as did else where his sheeld and darte.
Finis. B. S.

(...) ^^peror Claudius, a noble Duke whose name was Sappho ^^ke of Mantona,
who as well, through his own magna^^^itie and valiaunce, as otherwise through
his great poli^ie and experience in Marciall affairs, had atchiued many
notable victories, in the behalf of the Emperor against the Turk, which
made him both famous to the world, and feared of his enemies, but most
entirely beloved of the Emperor Claudius* But the Wars being once finished
and brought to an end, so that the Empire remained in tranquillity and peace:
Soldiers were forgotten, Captains were (...) cared for, such as had proffered
themselves to fight for the (...) of their Country, were now shaken of, and
such were preferred in their romes, as had any faculty in them te^ding to
pleasure and delight, as Dau^cers, Pipers, Fiddlers, Minstriles, Singers,
Parisites, Flatterers, Iesters, Rimers, Talebearers, News cariers, Love
makers, such as can de^ise to please women, with new fangles, str^unge
fashions, (...) of their beauties, when sometimes it is scarce (...) by
commendyng of their mani^olde virtues, when God knows they have few or none
at all. But see I pray you how far my wits begin to square, I pretended
but to pen certain pleasant discourses, for the only pleasure of
Gentlewomen, and even at the the very fir^^ ^ntry, ^ am ^alne from a reasonable
tale to a railyng rage, as it may seem. But I pray you Gentilwomen bear with
my weakness, and as the Preacher in the Pulpit, when he is out of his Text*
will sai^ ^or excuse: Good, people, though this be somethyng degressyng from
my matter, yet it may very well serve at this present: Take this I pray you
for my excuse in like case.

And now to my purpose where I left of before this noble ^^ke Sappho, had no
skill in Courting tr^^e: his head which (...) been accustomed to bear ye lofty
Helm, had now quite ^orgotten to wear the waueryng Plumes, ready to blow
a^aie with every wind. His body most ineured to wear a ^^ate of steel,
could not be brought in fashion with this qu^in^ (...) nice araie. His neck he
thought more fitly to pa^se the (...) Targe, then to be hanged with Gemines or
Chains of gold: his fingers commonly practiced to graspe the (...) or Lance,
could not be brought in frame to strike the Virg^nall or Lute: his voice served
him better to cheer his Soldiers in the field, then either to feign or sing
ditties in a ladies Chamber: His tongue had more used to speak simply and
plain, then to dissemble with his friend, or to flatter with his foe: His
legs had better skill to march after dubbe a dubbe a dubbe, then to mince it
with a Minion, tracyng a Pauion or Galliarde upon the Rushes: what should I
say farther, this noble Duke had no manner of skill in Carpet trade: But thus
it fell out that Parasites and Flatterers, having once entered credit with the
Emperor (as surely it is almost a common infirmity, as well amongst Princes,
as other superior Officers, to be seduced by Flatterers, Pickthankes, and
Talebearers) this noble Emperor likewise, by the instigation of such as were
about him, who perceiuyng the Duke to be none of their flatteryng fraternity,
and enueighing the great reputation wherein the Emperor held him, had so
incense^ the Emperor against him, that now his likyng was ^^uerted into
loathyng, and his great love turned to a me^^ hate, that in the end the poor
Duke was brought to answer unto many forged articles surmised against him, who
neither in consideration of his former service dooen for his Country, neither
in respect of the innocence of his cause, could otherwise be dispensed
withal, then to be banished into exile, him self, Messilina his wife,
Aurelianus his soonne, with Phylene his daughter: And although the common sort
of people held him in great honor, and much lamented his case, yet it could
not be h^lpen, but the Emperous decree openly pronounced, must needs take
place.

I beseech you Gentlewomen, yet to comfort your selves, I know your gentle
hearts, can not endure to hear of such ungentle parts, but these are but the
frumpes of ordina^^ Fortune, not private to Duke Sappho alone, but common (...)
al men that be of the like profession, for what happened bet^^^ to the most
noble Captains of the world, or what other, (...) compence received either
Caesar, Scipio, Haniball, or (...) (...), who having honored their Countries,
with sondrie ^^^umphes, and many notable Victories, when the Wars were ended,
and that there was no more need of them, finished their days in such pitiful
plight, as I will keep to my self, because right courteous Gentlewomen, I
rather desire to draw you into delights, then to drown you in dumphes, by
reuealyng of such unnatural factes, as I know your gentle Natures is not able
to digest.

Thus you have heard how this noble Duke, with his wife and children, by
sentence from the Emperor, were banished from out their native Country, as
also from any other Realms, Cities, Tounes, or territories, being within the
Emperors Dominions. There rests now for the Duke to make such poor
provision for his furnishyng, as his ability might any ways serve him, the
which GOD knows, fell out so mean and skante, as it scarcely serves him to
defraie his charges, to carry him from out those places, from whence he was
prohibited: and taking his course toward the parts of ^^acedonia, after a
long and weary journey, he arrived at a Town called Tariffa, where being
lodged in a mean and simple house, his money now being at the last cast,
wherewith to bear his charges, his poor Wife and children altogether wearied,
with their long and troublesome travail, and him self all ashamed to be known
what he was. Now it fell out, that the Host of the house many times vewyng,
and castyng his eyes upon the Duchess of Messilina, who notwithstanding she
dissembled her estate and degree, contented to leave her honorable dignity,
and to perticipate such equal fortune with her housbande and children, as
their hard happes had conducted them unto, yet her beauty (which could not be
blemished with mean and homely garments) had so entangled her arrant Host,
that he could not be merry when he was out of her ^weete sight, and now though
he perceived his ghest began (...) wax slack in his payment, and not able
to disburse for his ^^^inarie expenses, yet for the love he bare to his wife,
he was (...) ^ntented to chalk up the charges behind the door, hoping (...)
end to have cleared the skores to his better content, and as time and
conuenience might serve him, he spared not (...) the Duchess understand his
great likyng toward her, a^suryng her, that the courtesy that he used
toward her housbande, was only for her sake, and that if he were assured his
good will might be acceptable in her sight, she might assure her self of such
a friend of him, as would be as careful of her as her housbande, to whom she
was married.

This Lady now having well pondered the words of her amourous Host, who
would not think but that she was much perplexed in her mind, that she who had
been borne of honorable Parentage, espoused to a noble Duke, whose dignity in
times past, surmounted all the rest, whose trainyng up had ever been amongst
those of the highest degree, and now that her honorable estate, was not only
eclipsed by crooked Destiny, but also to have her Chastity assailed, by such
a simple coisterell, whom she durst not so sharply shake of, as her heart
would very well have served, for that she knew (...) Duke her housbande was
run in his debt, neither could (...) tell by what means he was able to
discharge it, she was (...) fore constrained with fair speeches, to shift him
of from (...) to time, the which the knave perceiving very well, began (...)
to think with himself, that it was but her housbandes pr^^sence, that hindered
him of his purpose, and therefore determined to find a present remedy.

And now coming to his ghest, began to reckon with him, and to call him to
accoumpt for the charges wherein he was behind, tellying him, that at that
very instaunt, he had occasion to occupy money, which made him not only to
seek up such small sommes as were due unto him, but also to try his friends
otherwise to serve his turn, and that helpyng him now at his present need,
he might then begin again (...) new score, and would bear with him a much
longer tyme^^

The poor Duke then enforced to seek out an old (...) for an new Sore,
which is to pray when he was not (...) pay, with very courteous speeches,
desired his Host to be (...) with his inabilitie, assuring him that when time
should (...) he would so thoroughly recompense him, as he should (...) (...) to
hold him well contented.

But what prayers may prevail, where pity is clean exi^^d, or what
gentleness is to be looked for, to come from such (...) ungentle chorle, whose
mind was only set upon Rape and Rauine, who had premeditated before the
drift (which as he presupposed) was now sorted out as he looked for.

Wherefore (as it were) half in a fury, he uttered forth these words: My
friend content your self, and take this for a resolute answer, the money
which now rests in your hands, although I might very ill forbear it, as my
case stands, yet for that it is not mine ease, to run into any farther
charges, without a better assurance, then either words or promises, I am
notwistandyng contented to bear with you for that which is already past,
myndyng from this day forwards to give no further credit, and for that you
are altogether a stranger, unto me unknown, both what you are, from whence
you come, whether you will, and where I should find you, I purpose therefore
for my better security, and the rather to (...) by that you already do owe
me, to keep your wife in ^^aune, whom I know is so dearly beloved unto you,
that for ^^er sake I shall the sooner hear from you again, otherwise I know
not where to inquire after you, nor how to come by that is my due, which I am
not well able to forbear, neither do I mind clearly to lose.

The poor afflicted Duke, having never fallen before into cutthrotes hands,
persuaded in deed that the tenor of this Varlettes words, and the keepyng
of his wife tended to no other end, but for his better assurance to come by
his money, was constrained to make a virtue of necessity, and was so ^nuche
the better pleased, for that his wife might still remain free from farther
travail, and thinkyng in time to settle him ^elf, and to recover his wife and
children about him: with this ^esolution he began to relate unto his wife, with
what saluta^^ons his gentle Host had greeted him withal, desiring her to
^^mfort her self for a season, assuring to do his best endeavor, (...) so set
up his sails to the prosperous gales of Fortune.

(...) his good Lady, hearing her housbandes discourse uncertain what to do,
wept bitterly, as well for grief to (...) his presence, as for that she should
be left in the house of ^^arrant knave her Host, but like a wise Lady,
hearing the a^^leadged reasons of her Lord and housbande, did think it not
for the best, to increase his old sorrow with a new greef, contented her self,
vtteryng these words.

Dear housbande, knowing all that you have said to be very just and true, I
am contented for a certain time to force my will, in hope that hereafter we
may live together, ioiyng our selves in the company of our children, and this
I would desire you, that so often as you can by convenient and trusty
messengers, to send me word and intelligence of your health and estate,
because the same should bring greater contentation unto me, then the welfare of
mine own self.

This said, she imbracyng him very lovingly, and he kissing her with great
sorrow and grief, took his leave, and badd his Lady and spouse heartily
farewell, leauyng with her Phylene her dear daughter.

Thus himself with Aurelianus his little son, (...) from Tariffa, toward the
famous City of Cayre, and (...) passed through a Wilderness, having lost
their way, ^^^dering two or three days without any manner of food, saving
Hippes, Hawes, and Slowes, such as they could gather in the Desert, the poor
child being over come with faintness, not longer able to travail, began to
complain to his afflicted Father, desiryng him to sit down to rest him self
a time, the woeful Father tormented in his mind, to see his poor distressed
child, sat him down under a Tree, where after a while, recountyng to himself
his sonderie misfortunes being oppressed and wearied with travail, he fell
into a sound sleep, the Child after he had a while rested himself, leauyng
his Father a sleep, began to seek about for somethyng to s^ake his hunger,
and as he was straiyng thus about the woo^^des, it fortuned the Duke of
Vasconia, having lost his com^panie in the pursuit of a Stag, where he had been
a hunty^^ and as he was crossyng the next way to go to the City (...)
Messyna, where he held his Court, having in his comp^^^ (...) the Lord of
Sura, with three or four serving men, he fortuned to epsy the child runnyng
in the bushes all alone, and calling the child unto him, he said, alas my
little boy, what make thou in this place, art thou here alone, or how came
thou hither I pray thee tell me. Forsothe Godfather (quod the child) I came
hither with my Father, who lies a sleep here by, and I was seeking somethyng
to eat, for by my trothe I am so a hongered, that I could eat worse meat
then a piece of a roasted Pigge, and that with all my heart.

The Duke greatly pleasuryng to hear the pretty answer of the child,
replied in this wise: How say thou my little knave, will thou be my boy
and dwell with me, and I will give thee good meat thy belly full, how say
thou will thou go with me.

Yea forsooth Godfather (quod the Child) on that condition you will give me
roast meat enough, I will go with you, for I think I did not eat my belly
full of roste meat, this month and more.

(...) The Duke then commanded one of his men to take up the Child, whom he
carried away with him, and now perceiuyng it to be both well favored, quick
witted, and very apt to learning, he brought it up at School, where he proved
not only wise and learned, but also in many other exercises, convenient and
fit for Gentlemen, he commonly excelled every other man, and thus leauyng him
at School, I will convert my tale to his woeful Father, who when he was
awaked, and missed his pretty son, began to pry about in every bushe,
seeking and calling, what Aurelianus, Aurelianus, where be you Aurelianus: But
in the end when he could no where find him, thinkyng assuredly that he had
been devoured by some wild Beast, began with pitiful exclamation to cry
out. O Fortune, Fortune more then fickle, who in a moment hoiste a man up to
the highest degree, and by and by, in less space then in the twincklyng of an
eye, she throws him down again (...) low, as more misery is prepared for
him in one day, then ^he advanced him in an hundred years, which I now
prove, and have experience in my self, and so much the more, the greater is my
greef, who have been nourished delicately among^^ my friends, maintained still
in most prosperous estate, hoping for the full perfection of my felicities, by
Marriyng a Noble Dame, with whom I pretended to spend the residue of my life,
according to the scope and lot appointed by the almighty God, but now behold
all my enterprises be quite plucked back, and my purposes turned clean topse
torue, in such wise, that from honorable estate, I am driven to wander like a
Vacabonde, driven from Post to Pillar, from Country to Country, from Region,
to Region, to sequestrate my self from amongst my friends, without any
assured place where to make my abode. Oh froward fate, how can thou be so
hard hearted, and void of pity, still to prosecute thy cruel pursuit, first
to deprive me of my honorable dignities, then to banish me from amongst my
loving friends, thirdly to separate me from Messilina, my well beloved wife,
more dear unto me then the balls of my unhappy eyes, and not yet contented,
but now to bereue me of my sweet Infant, my only hope of comfort in my old
age. O Death Death, the (...) ^^rowes, and the beginner of felicities, now make
sharp thy Darte, and give no longer delaie of life, dispatche, dispatch at
once, the most unfortunate man that lives this day on earth: for what auailes
my life, if in the gulf af sorrow and grief I droune the pleasures of the
same: But ah I see right well, thou preseruest the same of purpose, but to
delight in my greeues, and to triumph over my adversities. And here withal the
brinishe tears so streamed down his cheeks, that he was not farther able to
speak one word, but runnyng up and down the Woods, sighing and sobbing in
great anguish of mind, and his body much infeebled for want of food and
sustenaunce: He fortuned to meet certain labouryng men, that dwelt in a poor
Village not far from the place, who perceiving by his geasture, that he was
passionated in his thoughts, they began with such courtesy, as they had
learned in the Country, to demand the occasion of his grief.

But he knowing very well, how far they were unable t^ minister relief to
the least of his afflictions, could render (...) other answer, then piteous
sighs and sobbes: but the poor Pesaunts, when they had better beheld the
tallness of his stature, the seemelinesse of his countenance, and the
comeliness of his personage, were greatly moved with compassion toward him,
and with such badde eloquence as their skill would permit, began to persuade
him to walk with them to their Cabbins, where he might refresh himself, with
such homely Iunckettes, as was provided for their own suppers. The Duke
contented to yield to their requests, walked along with them, where he
remained all the night very pensive and heavy in his heart, and began to
think with himself, that there was no more hope left for him to hear of his
son, and therefore began to imagine, how he might render some releef to his
poor wife and daughter, whom he had left as you before have heard.

Now there was dwelling hard by the place, a noble man that was Lord of the
Village, who having intelligence of this distressed Stranger, caused him to
be sent for, before whom when the Duke was presented, after many questions
debated between them, the Noble man demanded of the Duke what Country man he
was, and how he had been trained up, and then if he could be contented to play
the Seruyngman, and would be careful and diligent in his Masters affairs,
that then, he would be contented to receive him into his service, and would
reward him accordyngly, as he was able to deserve.

The Duke all ashamed to be known what he was, reverently made answer, that
he was borne in the Country of Achaia: and that he had been trained up in
service with sonderie Noble men, and would be very well contented to do his
best endeavor, to serve him with the best service he could do.

Thus the poor Duke became a Seruyngman, whom we will leave with his Master,
and return to his wife, who was left in Hucsters handelyng (as you have heard)
remained in the house with this Verlette, who sought by sondrie assaies, to
satisfy his villainous lust, and like an expert Soldier when (...) comes to
besiege a hold, first sends his Herauldes to summon the Forte, proferyng
many large conditions, if they will quietly surrender, but if defiaunce be
made, then present^ly he places his Battery, thunderyng forth his Canon shot
against the walls, which if they be so well Rampered, that there will no
breach be made, yet he cease not with gifts and bribes to corrupt the
Warders, not caryng how he conquereth so he may have the spoil.

This vilaine in likewise, sought first with piteous sighs, which saust with
sugared words, did serve in steed of Harauldes, to persuade her to yield up
the keys of the fortress, that with peaceable entry, he might take
possession at his pleasure: but being by her repulsed, and the Flagge of
defiaunce displaied upon the Bulwark, then with thunderyng threats he
thinks to make his Battery, proferyng to cast her into prison, for the debt
which was owing him for her housbande and her self. Other whiles again he
would tempt her, and try her with gifts, thinkyng that for the necessity she
was driven into, she would have made sale of that, which she preferred before
her own life.

This noble Dame, perceiuyng her self so hardly beset on every side, fearyng in
the end, the Verlet would work her some greater despite, so enforced her
self, with Phyleno her little daughter to fall to work, that with weauyng and
knittyng of laces, and otherwise with their needles, they had gained so much
money, as she was able to set her self free, from out a knaves debt. And
thinkyng with her self, that her housbande had remained about the City of
Cayre, to the which he purposed to journey when he departed from her: she
determined with all convenient speed to repair thither, as well to comfort
her self with the company of her Lord and housbande, as otherwise with her
yearnings to help to relieve him, but for that she had understanding that the
passage by land, was not only troublesome, but also very inconvenient for her
to travail, by reason it lay through Woods and D^^sertes, she gate
inteligence of a small Bark that was bou^^ thither by Sea, which only stayed
but for a wind to ser^^ her turn: hereupon she discharged her self from the
Tow^^ of Taryffa, and when wether served, agreeyng with the Master for her
passage, her self with her daughter repaired aborde the Bark, which being put
to Sea, was forced by the extremity of a contrary wind, to put them selves
romer for the safety of their lives, to a clean contrary place. And where
they meant to have sailed to the City of Cayre, they were now arrived at the
City of Cherona, where the Lady coming a shore, she ioyed nothing so much
in the narrow escape she had made with life, by reason of the tempest, as she
sorrowed for being so far driven from her housbande, whose fellowshippe she
more desired, then either wealth or worldly treasure. But for as much as both
her self and her daughter, were very evil at ease, and greatly infeebled with
sickness at the Sea, and bad liyng in the Ship, she determined to make her
abode still at Cherona, till she might conuaie letters to Taryffa, that should
certify her housbande of all that had happened.

In the mean time, her housbande having received some small benevolence of his
Lord and Master, who had conceived some good likyng of him, by reason of the
skill that he had in the ridyng of Horse, very desirous to render his wife some
portion of his good fortunes, who had been so long time partaker of his evil
happes, crauyng leave of his Lord for a time, came to Taryffa, where when he
missed his wife, whose letters were not yet come from Cherona, and therefore
could get no inteligence, but that she was gone to Cayre, of purpose to seek
him: in a great perplexity he traueiled toward Cayre, where making great
inquiry could learn nothing of her, from thence he posted from place to
place, from City to City, from Town to Town, but being never the near his
purpose, he then began to double his dolours, and with bitter words to curse
the celestial Signs, and Planets, which reigned at the day of his Nativity,
and hour of his birthe, contented to yield him self a captive to mishappe, and
to surrender himself a subject to Fortunes froward frumpes.

Being thus turmoyled with great anguishe of mind, wanderyng to and fro, he
was brought so low and bare, that he was ready to beg an alms from door
to door, and coming to a poor Country Village, his penury was such, that
he was glad to become a servant to him that was the Sexten of the Parish,
whom he had not served long, but the old Sexten his master died, and for that
he had now learned to ryng Belles, and had some cunnyng in the keepyng of a
Clock: the Parishoners were contented to place him in his Masters rome; the
Duke thinkyng himself more then thrice happy to get so great preferment,
thanked Lady Fortune that had so freendly dealt with him, resoluyng himself to
continue the office while he lived, but Fortune findyng him so thankful for a
little, dealt more freendly with him, as after you shall heart.

But I will first declare how it happened with his soonne Aurelianus, who was
taken up in the woods by the Duke of Vasconya; as before you have heard.

But here I must first remember you, that the Duke changed his name from
Aurelianus to Siluanus, which name he gave him of purpose, for that he was
found in the Woods.

Siluanus now having been trained up at School, was come to man's estate, and
besides that he had the knowledge of good letters, he was comely in his
personage, and of very good proportion, and in all manner of actiuities,
appertainyng to a Gentleman, he exceeded every other that was in the Court,
besides in his demeanours he was so courteous and gentle, that he gained the
good will and likyng, both of one and other, but especially of the Duke him
self, who allowed him such large expenses, whereby to maintain himself as
brave as the best.

Now this noble Duke having no other children but one only daughter, whose
name was Valeria, in whom it seemed that both Virtue and Beauty had heelde
some great contention, who should bear away the prise, for although that in
beauty and good grace she exceeded every other Dame yet her virtues and good
conditions surmounted more he^ beauty, then the finest gold surmounteth lead
or dross.

This Lady now having heard great report of the nobleness of Siluanus, who
was suspected to be but some poor man's son, by reason he was found in the
Woods, began yet to bear him very good countenance, which at the first
proceeded but of the noble Nature, which ever was accustomed to be favorable
to such, in whom was found any worthy desarte: but as the fish which by
little and little sucketh upon the bait, till at the length she swalloweth
down the hook, whereby she hangs fast, not able to free her self, so this
Lady Valerya, contemplating her self many times to behold that young Gentleman
Siluanus, was so far entangled with his sweet and pleasant, countenance,
that now perforce her will, she was constrained to yield to Love, and feelyng
her self ensnared, and bereued of former freedom, being by her self alone,
she began to complain as follows.

Alas (says she) is it possible, that now force perforce my mind should be
so altered, that straiyng from the bounds and limits of vowed Chastity: I
should now become amourous, and subject to a certain unacquainted lust, from
whence comes this alteration? or how happens this unaccustomed hew? ah
Love Love, how have thou tormented me, and taken away the health and
soundness of my mind, it behooves me to show my self, as issued forth of
the noble house of Vasconya, and with the greater care I ought to take heed,
how I degenerate from the noble blood whereof I am descended, rather then to
set my mind on a fondlyng unknown, unto whom peradventure if I discover my
fondness, will not let to mock me for my labor, and for all the beauty or
nobleness of my birthe, will make me his iestyng stock, and solace himself
with the fondness of my conceiptes. But stay stay unhappy tongue, that
thundereth forth such hateful words against my beloved Siluanus. Oh thrice
accursed wenche that can so ungently conceive against him, that in all his
demeanours, does show himself as noble as the best, but of what metal are
either Monarche, King or Keiser framed of, otherwise then of natural, and
common earth, whereof other men do come? Or what makes these differences,
which by sottishe opinion we conceive, either of gentle or ungentle* otherwise
then the show of virtue and good conditions. Then the party whom I love, is
both virtuous, valiant, sage, of good grace, learned and wise. Vaunt thee
then Valeria, that thou likest no inferior fondlyng, unworthy of thy love,
but a worthy Gentleman, endued with noble qualities, in whom both Heaven and
Nature have forgotten nothing, to make him equal to them that march in
foremost rank: It is Siluanus whom I love, and of him I pretend to make a
lawful housband, for otherwise I detest to lead the filthy life of lawless
lust, but thus the bond of Marriage being made, I may love and live without
offense of conscience, neither shall I do any blot or blemishe to the
greatness of my house. But if any be so scrupulous, as to think by marriyng
of him, I should deminishe mine honor: It is the thing that I do least
esteem, for what is honor worth, where the mind is void of contentation,
and where the heart is bereued of his cheifest desire, the body remains
restless, and the mind is never in quiet. Siluanus therefore shall be my
loyal housbande, meaning thereby neither to offend God nor man.

And now from hence forwards, she devised with her self, how to make her love
known to Siluanus, not sparyng when she was out of his presence, before all
men to praise his great perfections, wherewith he was enriched, and in his
own presence she used such loving countenance toward him, that although
Siluanus were but young, and had never been trained up in the School of Love,
yet he perceived very well, that those friendly glances were lent him of good
liking, and those loving countenaunces were grounded of good will, and albeit,
he saw the inequality and difference between them both, she being sorted out
of royal race, and himself altogether ignorant of his own estate, and from
whence he was sprung, yet being now led by Love, whose laws have no respect
either to estate or dignity, he determined to follow his Fortune, and to
serve her, which so louyngly showed her self, to requite him with the like,
and the more he called to mind the divine beauty of his Lady, her graces,
wisdom, behavior, and courtesy, so much the more increased his desire,
fortifiyng himself against all mishappes, and perilles that might succeed, and
began to debate with himself in this manner.

How is it possible that I should be so foolish, to despise a duty so rare
and preciouse, and to set light by that which the noblest would pursue, with
all reverence and endeavor, I am not the first, that has obtained the love of
a Lady: no no, I see she loves me, and shall not I requite it by yeeldyng
love again, if I were so void of humanity and good nature, besides I might
work mine own overthrow, in seemyng to despise so noble a Lady, so the
Gods would not let to minister revenge, as they did upon Narcissus. But ah
silly wretch that I am, what folly is this that I have now premeditated,
with the peril of mine honor, and the hazard of my life: see see how far
my affections begin to straie, through the hot assaults of foolish fantasy,
enraged with an appetite rising on vain hope, what madness on me to think
that Valerya will so much forget the greatness of her house, or yet unbase
her self in respect of me poor silly soul: but what if she would be
contented, either in respect of marriage or otherwise in respect of good will,
to surrender her self to satisfy my request, how much were I the near my
purpose, alas nothing at al, the first, I know should be denaide me by the
Duke her father, and as for any other courtesy, although I know it be far
from her thought, yet surely mine own conscience would not suffer me, to
proffer so great villainy to so noble a Lady, neither the reverence and
duty which I owe to her father would permit me, to requite his gentilnesse
toward me with so great an injury. Cease therefore Siluanus, subdue thy
sensuality, that by vanquishyng thy self, thou may set open the gate to
Fame, who with her Trompe of everlasting glory, she may advance thee
renowned to all posterity.

But alas, shall I then give over to love my Lady Valerya, reason wills me so
to do, but love has so blinded al my senses, that reason gives no manner of
light, what help have I then hereafter to hope for, alas I know no one, and
therefore be content. Herewithall he stayed his travail, resoluyng with
himself to conquer his affections, and being in his Chamber taking pen and
yuck, he sat him down and wrote these verses followyng.

No shame I trust, to cease from former ill,
Nor to reuert, the lewdness of the mind:
Which has bin trainde, and so misled by will,
To break the bounds, which reason had assyngde.
I now forsake the former time I spent.
And sorry am, for that I was miswent.
But blind forecast, was he that made me swerve,
Affection fond, was lurer of my lust:
My fancy fixte, desire did make me serve,
Vain hope was he, that trained all my trust:
Good liking then, so daseled had my sight,
And dimnde mine eyes, that reason gave no light.
O sugared sweet, that trainde me to this trap,
I saw the bait, where hook lay hidden fast:
I well perceiude, the drift of my mishap.
I knew the bit, would breed my bane at last,
But what for this, for sweet I swallowed all:
Whose taste I find, more bitter now then gall.
But lo the fruits, that grew by fond desire,
I seek to shun, that pleased best my mind:
I sterue for cold, yet feign would quench the fire,
And glad to loose, that fainest I would find,
In one self thing, I find both baall and bliss,
But this is strange, I like no life but this.
When he had thus penned these verses, he committed them to memory, and the
next day being in the company of certain Gentlemen and Gentlewomen in the
Court, taking a Lute, whereon he could play very well, and having likewise
good knowledge in his song, and therewithal a very pleasant voice, he began
to sing this dittie before mentioned, in the midst whereof came in the young
Lady Valerya, wherewith Siluanus stayed his song, but she ioynyng her self to
the company, seeing the saint that secretly shrined in her thought, she had
vowed her greatest devotion unto, desired Siluanus, at her request, to begin
his song again: Siluanus, making the matter nothing nice, was pleased very
well to satisfy her request, and taking the Lute began his song, to the which
the Lady gave intentive ear, from the beginning to the ending, and perceiving
the song to be made in some extreme passion forced by love, she demanded of
Siluanus who had penned those verses, who answered, they were of his own
pennyng, and so lately done that he could not forget them: the Lady then
thinking Siluanus to be in love with some other Gentlewoman, departed very
speedily, as though some sudden motion (...) happened to her mind, and
coming to her Chamber, ^huttyng fast the door, she began to say as follows.

How much am I unfortunate above all other women, that being a Lady of such
blood as I am, and yet am happened into so strange a misery, that in manner
with mine own mouth, I have made request to him, which rather with all
humility, ought to profer me his service, and yet am scornfully rejected, and
an other like to catch the birds, whilst I do but beat the bushe. Oh
Siluanus Siluanus, deemest thou me no better worth, then so lightly to reject
my proffered love, and shall an other that is much less worthy, bear away
the sweet fruit of my desired hope, and shall possess without desert, the
glory due to a firm and faithful friend? No no, I can not think thee s^
ingrate, and my heart foretells me, that it is impossible my Siluanus should
wander so far from equity, but that he is able to discern of colors, and
will not requite me with wrong for right, I am sure not to be deceived in my
love, I know he loves me, but that he dares not to disclose the same,
fearyng I should refuse him, and cast him of with shame, I will not let
therefore with mine own mouth to bewraie the same unto him, and to manifest my
good will, whereby my chaste and honest amity once known unto him, virtue her
self may knit the knot between us, which can not choose but bring forth the
fruits of true and perfect freendship.

And shall I then being a Lady of such degree, be constrained to sewe,
where every other woman of the meanest reputation, be ordinarily required, and
that with the importunate instance of their suitors, I shall then be noted of
boldness, and be thought to straie too far from the limits and bounds of
modesty, and to make a greater show of lightness, the^ is properly looked for
in us that be of the feminine ge^der, but what strictness is this prescribed
to our sex, that we should be bereued of our liberty, and so absolutely
condemned of lightness in seeking to satisfy our lawful and honest desires,
with what trampe be we tempered withal more then men, whereby we should be
able to withstand the forces of the flesh, or of power to resist the
concupiscenses which Nature it self has assigned, we be termed to be the
weaker (...) yet they would have us more puissaunt, then either Sampson or
Hercules: If man and woman be made of one metal, it must needs follow by
consequence, we be subject to like infirmity, from whence comes then this
freedom, that men may ask what they desire of us, be it never so leude, and
we may not crave any thing of them, that tends to good and honest pretense:
It is termed to be but a man's part that seeks our dishonor, by leude and
lawless lust, but to a woman it is imputed for lightness, to firm her
lawful likyng, with pure and loyal love, if men will have pre-eminence to do
evil, why should we be reproved for doing well.

Whereupon stand I then amazed with these fond opinions, my love is not
unlawful, neither before God nor man, I love Siluanus, whom I will take for my
housbande, for otherwise to love him, my heart does not intend, therefore
without any farther respite or delaie, I will make my love known unto him, and
the band of Marriage once confirmed between us, shall cover the fault which men
would deem, neither shall my mind be altered, either by the sugared persuasion
of friends, neither terrified with any threats, that may be thundered
forth by Parents blusteryng wrath, I am not so far overwhelmed with Pride,
that in respect for the greatness of my Parentage, I should despise a
Gentleman endued more with virtue then with riches, though there be some that
be of this condition, that they will sooner prefer the greatness of birth,
then the greatness of virtue, the abundance of wealth, then the abundance of
wit, the perfection of beauty, then the perfection of the mind, but I am
out of the number of those women, which care more to have their housbands
purses well lined with money, whereby they may be maintained in their
bravery, or sometimes fix their fancy upon some young man, that is of goodly
personage, although void of virtue, quality, and good conditions, that ought
to garnishe a Gentleman, and does more beautify and enriche him, then either
the bare show of beauty, or any other gifts of Fortune, but I cannot imploye
my love upon transitory treasure, when the (...) of the mind is clean taken
away: no no, it shall better content me to see a mean Gentleman beloved and
praised of every one for his virtues, then to marie amiser possessed with all
the goods of the world, hated and ill spoken of for his vices, Fear not then
Valeria, to follow thy determination, and to put in proof what thou have
pretended.

Here withal staiyng her self, she began to practice the mean, in what
manner she might bewray her love to Siluanus, seeking for occasion and time
meet for her purpose, and although there remained in her, a certain natural
shamefastness, wherewith maidens are commonly accompained, which for a time did
close her mouth, and made her to defer the time of her desolued mind, yet in
the end thoroughly persuaded in her intent, she sent one of her Maidens,
willing Siluanus to come and speak with her; about certain affairs that she
had to imploye him: The maid having finished her message, there could never
more joyful news happen to Siluanus, who entryng the Chamber of Valeria, with
tremblyng heart after he had done his reverence, with great fear and
bashfulnesse said, for that I understand your Ladyship ha^^ to employe me
about certain affairs, I shall think my sel^ the most happiest man in the
world, if my travail and diligence, might any ways do you service, be it
that ^erein I should offer or sacrifice mine honor or life, crauyng no greater
benefit for the satisfaction of all my contentations, received in this world,
then to serve, obey, and honor you, so long as my life does last.

The Lady now, all ravished with joy and contentation, perceiuyng by his
change of color, the fault proceeded of vehement love, taking him aside into
a window, Love had so closed up her mouth, that she knew not how to begin
her tale, her mind was so troubled, her wits so far out of course, that her
tongue failed to do his office, in such wise that she was not able to speak
one only word.

He likewise perplexed with the like Fever* was now astonished to see the
alteration of his Lady.

Thus these two Lovers, like two senseless Images, stood still beholding
each other, without any manner of moouyng, in the end the Lady taking courage
in her self, with a tremblyng voice, joined with a maidenlike shamefastness,
began to say as follows.

Being assured (my Siluanus) of your discretion and wisdom, which Nature
has not only endued you withal, but art has also accomplished, what Nature
began to work, I will therefore make no doubt at all, to let you know
the hidden secrets of my heart, neither will I go about with circumstaunce
to color my words, but being well persuaded, that when you shall both hear
and savor my speeches, and therewithal sound the deapth of my devises, you
will easily conjecture, that my enterprises be none other then just, and that
my alleged reasons, are grounded of good pretense, I think sithence your
ariuall here in the Court of the Duke my father, you have not seen me in any
behavior, otherwise then virtue does permit, nor in any my demeanours
exceedyng the bounds of modesty, otherwise then becomes a maiden of my
calling, being descended of so worthy a (...) (...) if this be a fault that
being provoked by the pureness of my heart, and fidelity of my good will, who
to keep the same inviolable, do voluntarily offer my self to the honest
disposition of your judgment, as it shall please you to conceive of me, I have
then committed a fault in liking you too well, but I trust nothing at all
offended God, who knows the innocence of my crime. Think not Siluanus, that
I am the friend of Fortune, and practice pleasure alone without virtue, for it
is modesty that commands me, and honesty is the guide of my conceiptes,
swearing and protesting by the Almighty God, that never man shall touch
Valeria, except it be in Marriage, and he that otherwise would assail me, I
have a heart that shall encourage my hands to sacrifice my life. And now
Siluanus, if you will not think me more prodigal of my present, then your
fancy will serve you to take in good part, behold, it is you that I have
chosen for my Spouse and loyal housband. And although I had determined to
dissemble that, which now I have laid open unto you, yet reposing my self in
your virtue and honesty, I trust I shall not have cause to repent me, for any
thing that I have either said or done.

Siluanus which all this while hearing this heavenly harmony, with full
assurance of that he most wished for, albeit he saw no possibility, how to
bring to pass this desired Marriage, yet determined not to refuse so great a
preferment, being so frank and liberally offered, answered in this manner.

I know not Madame, with what humility and reverence I might receive, and
accept this your great bounty and nobleness, so graciously offered unto me,
I do acknowledge my condition and state too base, and that my love may be
thought to presume too far beyond the bounds of order, considering that my
ignobilitie and birth, are no meet matches for such a peerless Princes, yet
this I dare boldly affirm, that if love and entire affection borne to your
Ladyship, might serve to counteruaile that defect, which by place of birthe
the Destinies have denaied me, I dare undertake I should as well deserve to be
received, as he that is lineally descended from the greatest Monarchy of the
world. The which love if till this time I have delaied to open, I beseech you
Madame, impute it to the greatness of your estate, and to the duty of my
calling, but now for as much as by your own motion, grace, courtesy, and
great liberality the same is proffered, and that of your own bounty, it
pleases you to accept me for yours: I humbly beseech you, not to dispose of
me as of a housbande, but as of one which both is, and shall be your servant
for ever. Thus said, he taking her by the hand, kissed it with great
devotion, his tongue and wits were so rapt and tied, as the Lady perfectly
perceived this alteration, and seeing it to proceed of love, replied on this
manner.

Then my Siluanus, there needs at this present no farther circumstaunce, but
for that I am well assured, there are some that will be offended with my
choice, but especially the Duke my father, who will conceive some great
displeasure against me: there rests then that this our contract be kept very
secret, until it please God to appoint the time, that the rest of our
determinations, may without danger be consummate and accomplished. In the
mean time, trustyng that your desire is Godly, and that the freendshipp you
pretend to bear me, is founded upon virtue, and to be concluded by Marriage,
receive me for your Spouse and lawful wife, you shall have such part in me,
as without any regard to the obedience and duty that I owe to my Parents I
am yours, being ready and disposed to obey you, so far as my honor may
permit me.

These two lovers now groundyng themselves, the one in the others fidelity,
could not so cunning* dissemble and cloak their affections, but that it was
easily perceived by their secret glaunces, and countenaunces conueighed from
the one to the other (and as we have a Proverb) (it is ill haltyng before a
creeple) so there were many about the Court, that were so well studied in the
school of Love, that they were able to have co^menced Masters of Art, and
could easily conjecture from whence those rowlyng looks did proceed, that
being now assured of that which before was but suspected, the brute was spread
about the Court, of the love that was between Siluanus and Valeria, that in
the end it came to the Duke her Fathers ear, who taking the matter very
grievously, that his daughter to whom the inheritance of the Dukedom remained
after his decease, should so meanly bestow her love of a fondlyng found in
the Woods. And mindyng to find a remedy for the matter, willed Siluanus that
in pain of his life, within twenty days he should depart the Court, and
never after to be seen within the jurisdictions of the Dukedom of Vasconia.

Valeria now having intelligence what had happened, had no leisure to vex or
molest her self, when time rather required a speedy remedy, for the
incounteryng of those mishaps, devised with Siiuanus to conueigh her self
away, contented rather to live in the fellowship of an honest loving housband,
with whom she should hold faithful and loyal company, with what estate and
Fortune so ever it might please GOD to appoincte, then to live without him,
beautified with the graces and foolish names of honor and pre-eminence.

Siluanus, contented to satisfy her desire, with the hazard of his life,
yielded to her request, and before the twenty days were expired, so cleanely
conueighed him self and Valeria away, that when they were missyng, the Duke
wist not which ways to send after them. Wherefore in a great fury, he spared
not to send out great companies, which postyng every way, made inquiry and
search after them, but all in vain: for Siluanus had so disguised himself and
Valeria, that without any manner of trouble, they quietly passed the Country,
and having freede them selves from out the danger of the Duke, desiring that
the day of their Marriage might now be prefixed, the which by mutual consent,
was presently determined, and by great Fortune (or rather conduction by the
providence of God) the^ happened to arrive in the Country Village, where Duke
Sappho y^ was father to Siluanus, had remained all this while Sexten of y^
Parish. In this Village, because it was a place free from resort, whereby they
might remain unknown, and in the better safety, they purposed as well to
celebrate their Marriage, as for a time to make their aboade, till matters were
better quieted, and that they might at leisure resolve, what course were best
for them to take. Siluanus now having conferred with the Priest, the Mariag^
day was appoincted, where the poor Belringer taking the vewe of this new
married couple, fell in a great likyng of Siluanus, not for that he knew him to
be his son, for thereof he could have no manner of suspicion, as well for that
he deemed he had been devoured in the Woods, by some wild beast, as also
because his name was changed, but whether it were by the instigation or
secrecy of Nature, or otherwise by the will and pleasure of God, to bring to
pass that, which afterward happened in effect, this poor Sexten I say, lead
by the secret motion of his own affections, proffered Siluanus that if his
service might any ways stand him in steed (for that he was a stranger in
the place) he should use him in any respect, and should find him ready to
stand him in such stead, as his poor ability might any ways permit.

Siluanus in like case having forgotten his Father, being separated from him
in his infancy, yet nothing despising his freendly offer, craved his help for
the hieryng of a Chamber, for some reasonable rent, till time that he might
better provide for himself. The Sexten very glad that he had so good
opportunity to pleasure him, brought him with his wife to his own house, where
he lodged him in the best room that he had, profferyng not only his house,
but all that was in it to be at their disposition and pleasure. This new
Married couple now gladdyng and sporting themselves, with all such sweet
imbracementes, as they can better describe, which have been possessed with the
like delights: but as some will say, it is the man's part to be first wearied
in those Venerall sportes, so Siluanus having now well feasted himself, with
that sweet repaste, had leisure to bethink him of his own estate: began
inwardly to grow into great sorrow and heaviness, not so much for himself,
as for his wife, who for his sake had disposest her self from so great honor,
abandonyng her friends, contented to yield her self a thrall to Fortune.

These cogitations did so nippe him, that he could not so well dissemble his
greef, but that his wife perceived some disquietnesse in his mind, and
therefore very grievously she demanded of him, to show her the cause of his
coffeehouse, which by outward appearaunce, seemed inwardly so much to
molest him.

Siluanus hearing his Ladies request, answered in this wise, my dear wife,
the sweetest companion that ever man did possess, for so much as you so
earnestly desire to understand, what it is that so much withdraws my
delights, I will not let to bewraie the truth, which is this, when I
consider with my self, of your present estate and condition, who from the tip
and height of dignity, have not spared for my sake to surrender your self, to
become a subject to all mishaps, besieged on every side, with the future
assaults of ordinary Fortune: It makes me therefore to have the greater
care, by what means I might endeavor my self, to maintain and continue your
estate, though not according to your worthiness and calling, yet according to
your well contentment and liking. And hereupon conceiving in my head diverse
imaginations, no means but one in my fancy seems best, which is, that I
go to the Court of the Emperor Claudius, who at this present is leading a
great band, to encounter the Turk, at whose hands I doubt not, but to
receive some good entertainment, and besides the honor and reputation, I may
gain by good desert, I may likewise reap such living and good likyng of the
Emperor, that in despite of Fortunes teeth, we may live hereafter a quiet
and honorable life, to our great joy and comfort. But when I did consider
the beloved company of you dear wife, I feared to bewraie that, which now I
have disclosed, not knowing in what part you would take it, that I should so
suddenly depart. Lo here the cause of my disquietnesse, which you desire so
instantly to know.

The Lady which was wise, perceiuyng the great love that her housbande did
bear her, when he had stayed him self from talk, with glad and merry
countenance, answered in this wise.

Ah Siluanus, the exampler of all virtue and gentleness, let death and fortune
do what they list, for I coumpt my sel^ more then satisfied of all that is
past, by the only enioiyng of your presence, contentyng my self to be a
partaker of your misfortunes, and have no doubt but that I can so moderat my
affections, that during my life, I will rest better contented with that which
your ability will permit be it never so mean, then otherwise to be honored
with names and titles of nobility in Princely state or port having not your
presence. Disquiet not your self therefore, but persevere in your determination,
and that sorrow which shall assail me by reason of your absence, I will
sweeten and lenefie with contentation to see your commendable desire appeased:
and the pleasant memory of your valiant factes shall beguile my pensive
thoughts, hoping that our next meetyng shall be more joyful and glad, then
this our partyng shall be either heavy or sad.

The Ladies answer did wonderfully quiet the mind of Siluanus, and calling
his Host the Sexten unto him, whom he had made partaker of his determinations,
he departed, leauyng his wife such money and Iewelles as they had remainyng:
And coming to the Court of the Emperor Claudius, he was very well
entertained, and the rather for that the Emperor had great need of men to
supply his Army, which had sustained sondrie conflictes, and diverse
overthrows, for the Turk did wonderfully incroche upon the Emperor, and had
taken sondrie Cities, Tounes, and Castelles from him, and was like still every
day more to prevail then other, that now the Emperor began to repent him,
of the slender accoumpte he had made of Soldiers in the time of peace, for
that he had too few that were sufficient to serve him in his Wars: For in
steed of Experience, Valiaunce, and Policy (which three ought to be
governors, commanders and cheef officers in a Camp) he was glad to prefer
Vainglorie, Foolishhardinesse, and Rashness: Simple sottes that were more
fitter to wait in Gentlewomans chambers, then to be made Captains, or leaders
in the Wars.

The Emperor now standing in great distress for want of men, for those that
he had made greatest account of in the time of peace, were now able to stand
him in no steed in the time of wars: and those that had braued it up and
down the Court in the new cuttes, strange fashions, their hair fri^^led,
lookyng with such grisly and terrible countenaunces, enough to make a wiseman
believe they were clean out of their wits, now in the time of Wars, were
glad to run under a Gentlewomans Farthyng all to hide them.

The Emperor (I say) being thus perplexed, called to his remembrance the
injury that he had done Sappho, whom he had banished only to satisfy the
wills of those that were about him, which he knew did hate him more of
spite, then for any occasion the Duke had given. Without any farther delaie
therefore, the Emperor sent sondrie messengers into every part of
Christendom to make inquiry, that who so ever could find the Duke, should
be worthily recompensed, and those Proclamations were spread through every
Region, in City, Town, and Village. In so much that in this Parish where
the Duke remained Sexten (as you have heard) the Priest made inquiry on
Sondaie in the Church, as the custom is) that where as about fourteen or
fifteen years sithence, the Duke of Mantona was banished by the Emperor,
which was procured rather by envy, then for any deserte, as now it was
proved, who so ever therefore could give any intelligence of the same Duke,
should be very liberally recompensed by the Emperor.

The Sexten now hearing these news, did think it more better to live still in
his Sextens room, where he remained without envy, then to become again the
Duke of Mantona, subject to the spite of hateful persons. But calling to his
mind his wife and daughter, which he thought remained yet alive (although he
knew not where) and for the great love that he bare to Siluanus, whose wife
remained in his house (as you heard) seeing that Fortune offered him so good
opportunity to pleasure them, only for their sakes, resolved himself to go to
the Emperor. But first comfortyng his gest Valerya, whom for a time he should
leave in his house, only with such servants as her self had about her: he
told her that he was well assured where to find this Duke, that was so much
inquired after, and that he doubted not, (if it were but in respect of his good
news) he should work Siluanus, her housbande into some credit with the Duke,
who might likewise procure his better preferment with the Emperor.

And thus the Sexten departed, and with all conuenience came to the Court of
the Emperor, to whom when he had made himself known, he was most honorably
received and great joy and gladness was made throughout the whole Court: the
Emperor now in consideration of the injury he had done him, did not only
restore him to his former room and dignity, but also advanced him in honor
and estimation, to be preferred before all other next unto himself.

Thus after many benefits received of the Emperor, the Duke prepared himself,
accompanied with many his friends, to go to the Emperors Camp, of the
which he was made General, where he knew well how to behave himself, and
giuyng out new ordinances, he appointed certain such as he himself knew
worthy, and gave them charge, amongst the rest, seeing Siluanus who all this
while remained in the Camp, whom the Duke did very well know, although
Siluanus, did little suspecte that a poor Sexten of a Parish, should become a
General to an Emperors Army. The Duke perceiuyng himself to be unknown to
Siluanus, was contented so to remain for a time, but yet desirous to see what
was in him, he gave him the leadyng of certain Horsemen, with the which
Siluanus served so valiauntly, and there with all had so happy success, that
every man extolled up to the heavens, the worthiness of Siluanus. This pleased
the Duke passing well, and the Duke having now sondrie times incountred with
the power of the Turks, and had given them many overthrows, he was now
preparyng a great force, for the recovery of the City of Cayoe, the which
the Turks had taken before from the Emperor. And calling Siluanus unto him,
he said: God grant young Gentleman, that your end agree with your good
beginning, then making Siluanus to kneel he dubbed him knight, and made him
Colonel of twenty Ensigns.

Siluanus after he had dooen his reverence, thanked the Duke of the honor and
favor, which it had pleased him to do him, promisyng to do so well in
time to come, as he should not be deceived in his conceived opinion, whereof
he gave assured testimony at the assault that was given to the City before
mentioned, where he behaved himself so valiantly, as he was the first that
mounted upon the walls, and by his dexterity and invincible force, made way
to the Soldiers in the breach, whereby they entered and took the City,
killyng and driuyng out their enemies before them. In many such like attemptes
Siluanus still showed him self so noble and valiant, that his praise and
renown was sounded in every place.

The Duke now having recovered again al such Cities, Towns, and other
Fortes, which the Turk had before taken from the Emperor, and there with all
had banished the Turks from out the bounds, and borders of the Empire, and a
League agreed upon between the Emperor and the Turk. The Army being
broken up, and Soldiers discharched, every man well recompensed for his
service, according as he had deserved. Siluanus likewise, who by his
worthiness, having not only made himself famous to the world, but also had
well lined his purse with good store of gold, bethinkyng him now of his fair
Lady, came to the Duke to have taken his leave, but the Duke mindyng now to
perform the good that he meant to Siluanus, was resolved in his mind, that
Siluanus with his wife should be his gestes, as well at Mantona where he was
Duke, as they had been before, where he was but a Sexten, said to Siluanus as
follows.

Sir Knight, what have is this, that you would so suddenly withdraw your self
from out my company, belike you have some fair wife, to whom you make such
speed to be gone, but sir content your self to bear me company to the
Emperors Court, where I doubt not but you shall receive some better
recompense for your service so happily begun, for it is not requisite, but
that the virtue of valiaunce, ought to be rewarded and cherished by Princes,
that be aided in their necessity, with the diligence of such virtuous and
noble Gentlemen as your self. Siluanus greatly comforted with these w^^^des of
the Duke, was well pleased to wait upon him. Thus they took their journey
toward the great City of Cherona, which was in the vttermoste borders of
the Emperors Dominions, there the Duke purposed to stay a while, to recreate
himself with the rest of his company.

Now it fortuned that the valiant acts, and hautie enterprises of Siluanus
were so renowned and spread, that the fame therefore came to the ears of the
Duke of Vasconya, that was father to Valerya the wife of Siluanus, who with all
possible speed made such haste, that he came to Cherona, where he found
Siluanus in the company of the Duke of Mantona, to whom turnyng himself, he
said as follows.

Sir Duke, the only hope that I have, that you will not let to extend Justice
upon the mischeeuous and ungracious acts of wicked men, does let me at this
instaunt to forbear with mine own hands, to avenge the wrong that I assure
my self, to have received of this Traitor Siluanus.

The company were wonderfully abashed with these words, but especially the
Duke of Mantona, who loved Siluanus more dearly then any other.

But the other going still forwards in his tale said, if the heart break
that afflicts the soul of a woeful father, whose house is made desolate by
loosyng his child, by the mischeeuous inticementes of a Thief, if this
president I say, move you not to minister such speedy revenge, as the Law
does prescribe, I suppose that all impunitie of vice and sin has place on
your behalf. And there withal staiyng his talk, but yet by his gesture and
countenance so enraged, that he seemed like a man that were besides himself.

The Duke of Mantona now perceiuyng the matter, that Valerya was the daughter
of the Duke of Vasconia, whom he supposed to have been of some mean birth and
parentage, was wonderfully sorry for Siluanus, whose fact by the Law deserved
death, and seeing the Duke in such a fury, he wiste not by what means to
work Siluanus safety, for to entreat the Duke he thought it but vain, and
to bring Siluanus to answer the fact, he knew the Law would condemn him,
and therefore knowing where Valeria did remain, whom he knew did love
Siluanus as her own life, and thinkyng that her tears might lenifie and
soften the hardened heart of the Duke her father. He therefore privily sent for
her, to be brought immediately to the City of Cherona, in the mean time he
committed Siluanus into safe custody, and desired the Duke at his request to
stay himself a while, and he should have such Justice on Siluanus, as himself
would require.

Matters being thus pacified for a while, I will in like case let them rest
for a time, and will now discourse how it befell to the Duchess Messilina,
with her daughter Phylene.

You have heard before how by constraint of weather at the Sea, they were
driven to this City of Cherona, where the Duke now remained, and at her first
coming, falling to her work as before she had done at Taryffa, a rich
Merchant that dwelt in the Town, taking the vewe of this new come workewoman,
fell into so great a likyng with her, that only to have access to come into
her company, he bestowed more money in cloth to make him Shirtes and
Handcarchifes in one week, then he was able to wear out in three years
after, which he put to her to make, whereby he became something well
acquainted with her, but to the end that she might think her self somethyng
the better beholding unto him, he proffered her a more convenient house then
that she was in, which he would furnishe with all manner of household stuff
for a reasonable rent. She being very glad of so good an offer, became his
Tenant. The Merchant now perceiuyng his time did so well serve him, without
any great circumstaunce, declared unto her the great good will he bare her,
but Messilina so delaied him with such wise and reasonable aunswers, that from
time to time the Merchant himself could not importunatly crave that which
with such modesty, she so honestly denaied him.

Now there lay in this City of Cherona, the old Duchess of Petrona, who
having inteligence of Messilina to be so good a workewoman, she sent for her,
to whom she put sondrie parcelles of work, which she so well finished to the
liking of the Duchess, that from time to time she still plide her with the
like, whereby Messilina, with her daughter Phylene, had continual recourse to
the Pallas of the Duchess, where Arabianus the only son of the Duchess of
Petrona, (and inheritour of the Dukedom, but that he was under age) did mark
and behold the beauty and good grace of this young Seamester Phylene, was so
clogged and fettered in the bands of love, that all other thoughts seemed
loathsome unto him, and every other joy displeasaunt, in respect of the
pleasure that he suffered, by thinkyng of his fair Phylene, wherefore baityng
himself with hope, and tickled only by love, he determined what soever
happened to love her.

Which being perceived by his Mother, she began very sharply to rate him,
blamyng him that would so indiscretly place his love, not waiyng his estate and
birthe, as come of Princely race, and now would make him self a fable to the
world, to like of such a one so far unworthy his degree.

Arabianus falling down upon his knees, most humbly desired his Mother to
bear with all that was paste, and although it were truth that she had said,
that he deemed her for her birthe to be unworthy his degree, yet she deserved
for her beauty to be compared to the greatest Dame, and brauest Minion else
where. And whereas other girls by artificial means and trumperies, do
enforce that which the heavens have denaied them, yet Phylene had no other
ornament then that which Nature had enlarged in her: and otherwise for her
virtue, wisdom, and modesty, he knew it to be such by report of many, as
she might be a Lantern to the greatest Dame that lived.

Notwithstanding Madame, for so much as you do take my fact in so ill part,
considering the reverence, that I owe to the place which you hold on my
behalf, and the duty and obedience that God will and has commanded, that
children should bear to those that have begotten and borne them: if it please
you to pardon me of this that is past, I protest that from henceforth, I will
be more wise and better advised, how I enter into any thing that might turn to
any such consequence, or any manner of ways to offend you.

The Duchess knowing all to be true that her son had said, very well
pleased with his speeches, remained satisfied, thinkyng in her mind in deed,
that if Phylene had bin the Daughter but of some mean Gentleman, her son
should never have sought farther for a wife.

From this time forwards, although Arabianus by the persuasion of his Mother,
had vowed to revolt and let slip the love that he bare to Phylene, yet he
could not so clearly loose his likyng, but that he did manifest some part of
his good will, by gifts and good countenaunces which still he bestowed upon
Phylene, causing his Mother likewise to bestow many liberal rewards upon
Messilina, thus the Mother and the Daughter perceived them selves a thousand
times beholding to the old Duchess and her son.

In this mean space the Merchant before mentioned had buried his wife, and
knowing no other but that M^ssilina his Tenant had been a widow, he began now
a fresh suit, and with great importunity requested her in the way of
Marriage, and so hardly he laid unto her, that Messilina not knowing otherwise
how to rid him, confessed unto him that she had a housbande alive and therefore
might not marie.

The Merchant thinkyng these to be but delays to shift him of, came to this
point, that if hereafter he could prove her by her own confession to be a
widow, that then before witness she would take him for her lawful housbande,
and till that time he would no farther trouble her till he had made his proof,
she being glad to be at rest, thinkyng that he should work very wisely to
make her confess her self to be a widow, agreed to his request, and witness
was had in the matter. The Merchant now lettyng his matter rest a time for his
better purpose, in the end coming unto her, he told her, that although she
were so discourteous to forsake his freendshippe in every respect, first in the
way of good fellowshippe, and after in the way of Marriage, whereby he was
driven to go seek farther, but now having found a wife in the Country, to
whom he was assured, and meant presently to be married, yet for the old
freendshippe that he bare her, considering that he would presently remain in
the Country altogether, and forsake the City, therefore for her better
security, and assurance of her dwelling, he would make her a Lease of the
house that she dwelt in, for one and twenty years, if it might do her any
pleasure, without paiyng any penie Income.

Messilina giuyng him great thanks, took his offer very courteously, and
the Lease was put to making, which the Merchant signed and delivered, and
herewithall desired her single Obligation, for the performaunce of some small
rent, were it never so little, that she might acknowledge him to be her
Landlorde, the which she never denaied to give.

The Obligation was made in this manner, Know all me^ by these presents, that
I Messilina Widow, and so forth, with words in manner and form of every
Obligation. This Obligation thus made, was signed and delivered by Messilina to
the Marchaunte, who had now gotten that so long he had sought for, and by
virtue of this Obligation, craved Messilina to be his wife, she denaiyng his
demand, but what could that prevail, when he had her own hand and seal to
show, whereby she confessed her self a Widow, and then by her own agreement
(as you have heard before) she must yield her self to be his wife.

This matter was long in fendyng and prouyng, in so much that the Duke being
now in the Town, ministeryng of Justice to such as would crave it, the
Marchaunte brought the matter before the Duke, who hearing the manner of the
Bargain, and so many witnesses to affirm the same, gave Sentence that the
Marchaunte ought in deed to have her. But Messilina falling at the feet of
the Duke, desiring him with tears to defer his Judgment: the Duke now
taking better vewe of the woman, knowing her both by her voice, and also by
lookyng well on her face, perceived assuredly that it was his own wife, he
called again to the Merchant to see obligation, which when he had received,
he said in this manner.

Master Merchant, this obligation which you have delivered me, now I have
perused with better advise, I find it to be neither sufficient nor lawful,
for this woman that you would make a Widow, without doubt is Married, and has
a housebande, now she being under covert barn, you Obligation is vnpleadable,
and I know not whom you should blame, whether your self, or the Scriuener. And
here withal being replete with great joy and gladness, taking his wife up in
his arms, very lovingly embraced her, he said.

Ah my dear and loving Wife, how much am I bound, to render innumerable
thanks to the almighty GOD, that when all hope was paste, have yet again
recovered my greatest hope and comfort. Messilina likewise perceiuyng her lord
and housebande, clasping her hands about his neck, was not able to speak a
word for joy and contentation: The company that stood by, amazed to see
this sudden hap, were likewise very joyful to see this freendly meeting.
The Merchant seeing how he had been deceived, tare his Obligation, and
departed all ashamed. The Duke now desirous to see his Daughter Philene, caused
her Mother to send for her, who not knowing her Father, otherwise then by
report, fell down on her knees to crave his blessyng: The Duke taking her up,
kissing her with Fatherly affectiou, could not stay his tears, in remembering
her brother Aurelianus, whom he deemed to be dedde.

These news were suddenly spread throughout the City of Cherona, in so much
that Arabianus having now intelligence, that Philene was the daughter of the
noble Duke Sappho, certifiyng his Mother the truth which he had learned,
without any great deliberation, both the Mother and the son, coming to
visit the Duke and his company, where they were very well welcomed, but
especially to Messilina, to whom the old Duches and her Soonne, both had been
very bountiful: And when a while they had passed the time with pleasant
discourses of all that had passed, the Duches of Petrona craved Philene in
Marriage for her Son. The duke being made privy to the matter, knowing
Arabianus to be come of great descent, and to be endued with large and fair
possessions, seeing him likewise to be a toward young Gentlemanne, would not
stand against it, but referred the matter to his Daughters likyng. Philene who
had been greatly bound to the courtesy of the young Duke, and had received many
gifts and good turns at his hands, would not do as a number of these nise
Dames, that will many times make dainty of that they would fainest come by,
gave her free consent. There was then no more to do, but to prepare for the
Marriage, which was presently solemnized with great pomp and glory.

By this Valeria (whom as you have heard before, the duke had sent for) was
come to Cherona, who was privily lodged by the Dukes commandment, in a
privy place. The day now being come, that Siluanus was brought to his
answer, he could not denaie the fact wherewith he was charged, but that he
had stolen Valeria from her father, by which confession the Law condemned him
to dye. There were many that knew the nobleness of Siluanus, that began to
entreat the Duke or Vasconia to remitt the fact, but all in vain, for the
more they entreated, the more he hastened to see execution.

The Duke of Mantona seeing his great obstinacy, did think it hye time to
find a remedy for Siluanus, if it might be, therefore he said, sir Duke,
were it possible that this condemned manne, who is like (so far as I can see)
to bear the whole brunte, and yet might be enticed to this fact by your
Daughters means, or at the least, your daughter must be half partner of
this fault, and yielded with her good will to come away, for otherwise it had
been unpossible for him, to have brought her from out your Court, which if it
be true, if you will needs see Justice so duly executed in the one, I can
not see how your daughter can go quite, but must be as well partaker of the
punishment, as she was in the fact, by yeeldyng her consent.

The Duke of Vasconia answered, as it is the office and duty of every good
Iusticer, to know the valor and difference, between virtue and vice, to the
end that all virtuous acts may be honored, and the contrary chastised and
punished: Otherwise he is not worthy the name of a righteous Judge, but of a
cruel and traitorous Tiraunt, wherefore sir Duke, you sittyng here in the
place of Justice, to minister equity and right, to every one that calls.
Then I desire that I may have the Law extended upon this wretch Siluanus, as
for my daughter that you speak of, as I know not where she is, so I do not
desire to learn what is become of her, but this I protest, that if ever I may
find her, rather then she should escape unpunished, I will not let with mine
own hands, to do execution upon her, according to her demerites, and the
filthiness of her fact: from henceforthe denouncing her to be any child of
mine, and make no better accoumpt of her, otherwise then to be a filthy
strompet, unworthy of me her father, or to challenge her descent from such a
stock.

The Duke of Mantona was now troubled worse then before, for where as he had
some hope, that the humble suit of Valeria, should something have moved her
father to compassion, (...) thought that her sight, would rather increase his
rage and fury: Again he thought, that to bring her into his presence, if he
continued in one mood, he might work Valeria so great prejudice, as he
would be hartelie sorry to see. Yet thinking with himself, that it was
impossible, that a Father should be void of good Nature, to see the utter
ruin of his child without any remorse: He caused Valeria to be sent for, who
being conducted to the place, seeing her Father and the rest of the company,
she began to conjecture that all was not well. But when Siluanus saw his
Valeria, wondering by what means she was brought to so evil a banquett,
remembryng what words her father before had protested, she began with a
piteous voice to cry out.

O my dear beloved wife, the only cause of my joy and quiet, what evil
Fortune has conducted thee to this place, what froward Faates have forced
thee, that thou should be made companion of my mishappes. O frail and
inconstaunt Fortune, how have thou fronted my honest desires, with such
crooked spite, that where I covet the countenance of greatest credit, there I
am forced to hazard the loss of life and alwhat crooked aspecte has governed
my proceadinges, that the hoped time I spente in this Warlike service, should
thus conclude with his contrary, and I forced as it were by Faate to follow
the unhappy event of the same, wherein I do confess my Predestinate follies.
But such are the so^derie dealinges of this life, as those that tend their
steps to monsterous mountains, do sometime scarce conclude with mean Moole
hills, the sondrie conflictes of Fortune, masking my hope with a show of
happy reward, has not only wracked me, but it threateneth the sequel of
worse success: That instead of happy and quiet life, my days shall be a
bridged with most shameful and vile Death. O Valeria, Valeria, the joy and
comfort of my life, I shall no more see that incomparable beauty of thine,
which darkeneth and observes the Rays and Beams of the Sun.

Then tourning himself to the Duke of Vasconia, he said, I most humbly
beseech your Grace, to have compassion upon me, not for that I would consume
my life in your displeasure, I make offer of the same to your merciful will
and disposition, choosing rather to die, and to leave your Grace satisfied and
contented, then to live a happy life, your Princely mind displeased, and
albeit, the right good intent, and unstained conscience is free from fault,
yet the judgment of men has farther relation, to the exterior apperance,
then to virtues force. Is it a sin to Marry? Is it a fault to fly and
avoid the sin of Whoredom? What Laws be these then, where the Marriage
bed and joined Matrimony, is pursued with like severity, as Murder, Theft,
Adultrie. But seeing the fault of this mishap, to a rise by my predestinate
evil luck I most humbly beseech you, to mitigate your rage, and to conceive
no sinister opinion of this your worthy daughter, whose smallest greef, is my
double pain: as for my self I am well pleased with my misfortune, contented to
Sacrifice my life, only to receive your clear acquitaunce for my offense,
and will make satisfaction with the price of my blood.

The Duke of Vasconia bending his brows, answered: No Traitor no, it is not
thy life that shall appease my fury, but I will so cool the Whorishe heat of
your Minion, for whom you seem so much to plead, that I will make her an
example to all others, for dooyng of an act so detestable. But what abuse have
they committed, under the title of Marriage, thinkyng without remorse of
conscience, by that means to continue their mischeef, and their promise and
faith, that was made under a Bushe, must serve for a cloak and Visarde for
their most filthy Whoredom. But what if their Marriage were concluded, and
confirmed by God himself? Is Siluanus a man worthy to be alied, or mingled
with the royal blood of the house of Vasconia, no, no, I vow I will never
take sound nor restfull sleep, until I have dispatched, that infamous fact
from our blood, and that villain Whoremonger with his trull, be used according
to their deserts.

Valeria now knowing how matters were sorted out, and hearing this cruel
Sentence, pronounced by her Father, fell down upon her knees, and bitterly
criyng out, she said: My dear father, most humbly I beseech yon, since no
other thing may appease your ire, then the life of the offender, let not this
Gentleman abide the penance of that, which he never committed, be revenged on
me, by whom the fault (if a woman's faith to her housebande, may be termed a
fault) is done. And let this unfortunate Gentleman depart, who God knows is
innocente of any other crime, then what he was brought into, only by my
provocation. And as she was about to have proceeded farther in her talk, her
Father interrupted her, saying.

Have you found your tongue now pretiepeate, then we must have an Almon for
Parrat: how durst thou Strompette challenge me to be thy Father? That without
regard, either of my renown, or of the honor of my house, thou art content to
be abandoned from this noble Estate, and to become a Fugitive and a stranger,
to follow a Roge up and down the Country, no Minion no, think not that any
Feminine ^latterie, shall stay me from doing thee to death, nor your darlyng
that stands by you, shall escape with his life, verelie beleeuyng, that in
time it shall be known, what profit the world shall gain, by purging the
same of such an infecte^ plague: and I do hope besides this, that in time to
come, men shall praise this deed of mine, who for preseruyng the honor of my
house, have chosen rather to do to death two offenders then to leave the one
of them alive, as less faulty or giltlesse then the other.

Valeria once again falling frustrate before her Father, said: I most
humbly beseech you, for that all other comfort is denaied me, that I may
crave this only grace at your hands, for the last good that ever I hope to
receive, which is, that you being thus greeuouslie offended with me, do
vengeance at your pleasure upon her, who willingly yields her self to the
Death, with the effusion of her blood, to satisfy your ire, grant only that
Siluanus, who is innocent and free from fault, may go quite.

But her father no longer able for anger to hear her speak, cries out to the
Duke, to hasten the execution, the Duke of Mantona, whose heart did bleed in
his beallie for sorrow, perceiuyng it folly to delay longer time, gave
Sentence of death, and present execution to be made, although he took so
great sorrow for them, as if his Daughter Philene should have borne them
company: but he was not able to help it, the laws and ordinances of the
Country would not otherwise permit. And thinking to take his last farewell
of Siluanus, he said: O Siluanus, the glory and honor of all young Gentlemen
that ever were, that be now, or shall be hereafter this, whose virtue, valliaunce,
and worthy exploites, do glister emongst the multitude, as the Sun beams
do upon the cirquet of the Earth. Oh that thy hard Fortune should conduct
thee to such distress, that only by thine own valiaunce and prowess,
haste escaped so many dangers, emongst thy thronged enemies, and now thy ruin
and overthrow, should be thus wrought, amiddest thy assured friends, that
knows not how to help it. What heaps of cares has besieged me on every
side? To think that I should crave thy company, whereby thou art brought into
the midst of so great mischeef, which otherwise might have escaped this
mishappe: and thou Valeria would God thy unfortunate host, which departed
from thee, thinking to do thy housebande pleasure, had remained with thee a
poor Sexten still, till this present day.

The rest of the company that stood by, hearing the duke to make so great
lamentation, was likewise stricken into a marvelous greef and sorrow, in so
much that every one that durst speak, cried to the Duke of Vasconia for
pardon, and that he would remitt the offense, and what pity it were, if he
should seek the death of so noble a Gentleman, as Siluanus had showed him self
to be: But the Duke perseueryng still in one mind, asked the^, with what face
they could make request for a verlet of no reputation, whom he had found in the
wooddes, and brought him up to that estate he was come to, not knowing who was
his Father, but by seemyng some poor Country Cloune, and forgettyng himself
from whence he sprung, neglecting so many benefits, which he had bestowed upon
him, would enter into those things, so far unseemly and exceading his
degree.

The Duke of Mantona, giving good ear to this tale, remembering his Son
Aurelianus, whom he had lust in the Woods about those parts, questioned
with the Duke, of the time, and what apparel the child had on at that
present, who in all things showed a trothe as it was: He demanded farther,
how he knew his name to be Siluanus, or whether he had any other name, yes
(quoth the Duke of Vasconia) his name he said was Aurelianus, which my self
changed to Siluanus, because I found him in the Woods.

Herewithall without any farther stay, the Duke of Mantona running hastily
upon Siluanus, imbrasyng him in his arms, criyng: O my son, my son, and
with this sudden joy, the tears trickling down his cheeks so fast, that he
was not farther able to speak one word.

The Duke of Vasconia much amazed to see this sight, but a great deal more
glad, that Siluanus had found out such a father, and now nothing at al
offended with his daughters choice, came likewise with cheerful countenance,
and imbrased Siluanus, desiring does the Duke his Father, and himself to
forgive what was past, and taking Valerya by the hand, he delivered her to
Siluanus, promisyng him for her dowry 40000. Franckes in gold presently to
be paid, and after his descease to remain for his inheritour.

Siluanus better pleased with Valeria her self, then with all the rest that was
promised, gave him great thanks, and so did the Duke his father.

All the company were replenished with the greatest joy that might be, to see
this sudden sight, and thus they departed to the Pallas where the Duke kept
his abode, where Siluanus was welcomed, to his mother, to his sister, to
Arabianus, and to all the rest, where there was great feastyng and triumph,
and a bond of everlasting amity between the houses of the Duke of Mantona,
the Duke of Vasconya, and the Duke of Petrona, and after a while they had
feasted and sported them selves, they rode altogether in company to the
Emperors Court, who received them with so great honor as he could devise,
and making himself a partaker of their mirth, wonderyng to here the hole
discourse how things had happened, when after a while he had feasted them, and
showed them as great pleasures as might be devised, he bestowed of them all
large and bountiful gifts, but especially of the two young Ladies Valerya and
Phylene, and this agreeing amongst themselves, to meet once a year at the
least to sport and make them selves merry, for this season they departed,
every one where it liked them best.

Of Apolonius and Silla.
The Argument of the second History.
Apolonius Duke having spent a years service in the wars against the Turk,
returning homeward with his company by Sea, was driven by force of weather to
the I Will of Cypres, where he was well received by Pontus Governor of the same
I Will, with whom Silla daughter to Pontus, fell so straungely in love, that after
Apolonius was departed to Constantinople, Silla with one man followed, and
coming to Constantinople, she served Apolonius, in the habit of a man, and
after many pretty accidents falling out, she was known to Apolonius, who in
requital of her love married her.

THere is no child that is borne in to this wretched world* but before it
does suck the mothers milk, it takes first a soope of the Cupp of error,
which makes us when we come to riper years, not only to enter into actions of
injury, but many times to straie from that is right and reason, but in all
other things, wherein we show our selves to be most dronken with this
poisoned Cup, it is in our actions of Love, for the Lover is so estraunged
from that is right, and wandereth so wide from the bounds of reason, that he
is not able to deem white from black, good from bad, virtue from vice: but
only led by the appetite of his own affections, and groundyng them on the
foolishness of his own fancies, will so settle his likyng, on such a one, as
either by deserte or unworthiness, will merit rather to be loathed then loved.

If a question might be asked, what is the ground in deed of reasonable love,
whereby the knot is knit, of true and perfect freendship? I think those that
be wi^e would answer: Deserte, that is, where the party beloved, does
requite us with the like, for otherwise, if the bare show of beauty, or the
comeliness of personage, might be sufficient to confirm us in our love.
Those that be accustomed to go^ to Faires and Markettes, might sometimes fall
into love with twenty in a day: Deserte must then be (of force) the ground
of reasonable love, for to love them that hate us, to follow them that fly
from us, to faue on them that froune on us, to currie favor with them that
disdain us, to be glad to please them that care not how they offend us: who
will not confess this to be an erroneous love, neither grounded upon wit nor
reason. Wherefore right courteous Gentlewomen, if it please you with patience to
peruse this History followyng, you shall see Dame Error so play her part,
with a Leishe of Lovers a Male and two Females, as shall work a wonder to
your wise judgment, in notyng the effect of their amourous devises and
conclusions of their actions. The first neclectyng the love of a noble Dame,
young, beautiful, and fair, (who only for his good will, played the part of
a Seruyng man, contented to abide any manner of pain only to behold him. He
again setting his love of a Dame that despising him, (being a noble Duke) gave
her self to a Seruyng man (as she had thought) but it otherwise fell out, as
the substance of this tale shall better discribe. And because I have been
somethyng tedious in my first discourse, offending your pacient ears, with the
hearing of a circumstaunce over long. From hence forth, that which I mind to
write, shall be done with such celericie, as the matter that I pretend to
pen, may in any wise permit me, and thus follows the History.

During the time that the famous City of Constantinople, remained in the
hands of the Christians, amongst many other noble men, that kept their
abidyng in that florishyng City, there was one whose name was Apolonius, a
worthy Duke, who being but a very young man, and even then new come to his
possessions which were very great, levied a mighty band of men, at his own
proper charges, with whom he served against the Turk, during the space of one
whole year, in which time although it were very short, this young Duke so
behaved himself, as well by prowess and valiaunce showed with his own hands,
as otherwise, by his wisdom and liberalitie^ used toward his Soldiers,
that all the world was filled with the fame of this noble Duke. When he had
thus spent one years service, he caused his Trompet to sound a retraite, and
gatheryng his company together, and imbarkyng themselves he set sail, holdyng
his course toward Constantinople: but being upon the Sea, by the extreamitie
of a Tempest which suddenly fell, his fleet was deserved some one way, and
some an other, but he himself recovered the I Will of Cypres, where he was
worthily received by Pontus Duke and governor of the same I Will, with whom he
lodged, while his Ships were new repairing.

This Pontus that was Lord and Governor of this famous I Will, was an ancient
Duke, and had two children, a son and a daughter, his son was named Siluio,
of whom hereafter we shall have further occasion to speak, but at this instant
he was in the parts of Africa, seruyng in the Wars.

The Daughter her name was Silla, whose beauty was so perelesse, that she had
the soueraintie amongst all other Dames, as well for her beauty as for the
nobleness of her birth. This Silla having heard of the worthiness of
Apolonius, this young Duke, who besides his beauty and good graces, had a
certain natural allurement, that being now in his company in her fathers
Court, she was so strangely attached with the love of Apolonius, that there
was nothing might content her but his presence and sweet sight, and although
she saw no manner of hope, to attain to that she most desired: knowing
Apolonius to be but a geste, and ready to take the benefit of the next Wind,
and to depart into a strange Country, whereby she was bereued of all
possibility ever to see him again, and therefore striued with her self to
leave her fondenesse, but all in vain it would not be, but like the foul
which is once limed, the more she strives, the faster she tieth her self. So
Silla was now constrained perforce her will to yield to love, wherefore from
time to time, she used so great familiarity with him, as her honor might
well permit, and fed him with such amourous baits, as the modesty of a maid
could reasonably afforde, which when she perceived, did take but small effect,
feelyng her self so much out raged with the extreamitie of her passion, by the
only countenance that she bestowed upon Apolonius, it might have been well
perceived, that the very eyes pleaded unto him for pity and remorse. But
Apolonius coming but lately from out the field, from the chasing of his
enemies, and his fury not yet thoroughly desolued, nor purged from his
stomach, gave no regard to those amourous entisementes, which by reason of
his youth, he had not been acquainted with all. But his mind ran more to
hear his Pilotes, bring news of a merry wind, to serve his turn to
Constantinople, which in the end came very prosperously: and giuyng Duke
Pontus hearty thanks for his great entertainment, taking his leave of himself,
and the Lady Silla his daughter, departed with his company, and with a happy
gaale arrived at his desired Port. Gentlewomen according to my promise, I will
hear for breuities sake, omit to make repetition of the long and dolorous
discourse recorded by Silla, for this sudden departure of her Apolonius,
knowing you to be as tenderly hearted as Silla her self, whereby you may the
better conjecture the fury of her Fever.

But Silla the further that she saw her self bereued of all hope, ever any
more to see her beloved Apolonius, so much the more contagious were her
passions, and made the greater speed to execute that she had premeditated in
her mind, which was this: Amongst many servants that did attend upon her,
there was one whose name was Pedro, who had a long time waited upon her in her
Chamber, whereby she was well assured of his fidelity and trust: to that
Pedro, therefore she bewraied first the ferue^cie of her love borne to
Apolonius, coniuryng him in the name of the Gods of Love her self, and
bindyng him by the duty that a servant ought to have, that tendereth his
Mistress safety and good likyng, and desiryng him with tears tricklyng down
her cheeks, that he would give his consent to aid and assist her, in that she
had determined, which was for that she was fully resolved to go to
Constantinople, where she might again take the vewe of her beloved Apolonius,
that he according to the trust she had reposed in him, would not refuse to give
his consent, secretly to conuaie her from out her fathers Court, according as
she should give him direction, and also to make himself pertaker of her
journey, and to wait upon her, till she had seen the end of her determination.

Pedro perceiuyng with what vehemency his Lady and Mistress had made request
unto him, albeeit he saw many perilles and doubts, depending in her pretense
notwithstanding, gave his consent to be at her disposition, promisyng her to
further her with his best advice, and to be ready to obey whatsoever she
would please to command him. The match being thus agreed upon, and all
things prepared in a readiness for their departure: It happened there was a
Gallie of Constantinople, ready to depart, which Pedro understanding came to
the Captain, desiryng him to have passage for himself, and for a poor Maid
that was his Sister, which were bound to Constantinople upon certain urgent
affairs, to which request, the Captain granted, willing him to prepare
aborde with all speed, because the Wind served him presently to depart.

Pedro now coming to his Mistres, and telling her how he had handeled the
matter with the Captain: she likyng very well of the devise, disguisyng her
self into very simple attire, stole awate from out her fathers Court, and came
with Pedro, whom now she calls Brother aboorde the Gallie, where all things
being in readiness, and the wind seruyng very well, they launched forth with
their Oores, and set sail, when they were at the Sea, the Captain of the
Galleye taking the vewe of Silla, perceiuyng her singular beauty, he was
better pleased in beholding of her face, then in taking the height either of
the Sun of Star, and thinkyng her by the homeliness of her apparel, to be
but some simple maiden, calling her into his Cabin, he began to break with
her after the Sea fashion, desiryng her to use his own Cabin for her better
ease: and during the time that she remained at the Sea, she should not want a
bed, and then whisperyng softly in her ear he said, that for want of a
bedfellowe, he him self would supply that rome. Silla not being acquainted
with any such talk, blusshed for shame, but made him no answer at all, my
Captain feelyng such a bickeryng within himself, the like whereof he had
never endured upon the Sea: was like to be taken prisoner aboorde his own
Ship, and forced to yield himself a captive without any Cannon shot,
wherefore to salve all sores, and thinkyng it the readiest way to speed, he
began to break with Silla in the way of marriage, telling her how happy a
voyage she had made, to fall into the likyng of such a one as himself was, who
was able to keep and maintain her like a Gentlewoman, and for her sake would
likewise take her brother into his fellowship, whom he would by some means
prefarre in such sort, that both of them should have good cause to think
them selves thrice happy, she to light of such a housband, and he to light of
such a brother. But Silla nothing pleased with these prefermentes, desired him
to cease his talk, for that she did think her self in deed to be too
unworthy such a one as he was, neither was she minded yet to marry, and
therefore desired him to fix his fancy upon some that were better worthy
then her self was, and that could better like of his courtesy then she could
do: the Captain seeing himself thus refused, being in a great chafe, he said
as follows.

Then seeing you make so little account of my courtesy, proffered to one that
is so far unworthy of it, from henceforthe I will use the office of my
authority, you shall know that I am the Captain of this Ship, and have
power to command and dispose of things at my pleasure, and seeing you have so
scornfully rejected me to be your loiall housband, I will now take you by
force, and use you at my will, and so long as it shall please me, will keep
you for mine own store, there shall be no man able to defend you, nor yet to
persuade me from that I have determined. Silla with these words being stroke
into a great fear, did think it now too late, to rewe her rash attempt,
determined rather to dye with her own hands, then to suffer her self to be
abused in such sort, therefore she most humbly desired the Captain so much
as he could to save her credit, and seeing that she must needs be at his will
and disposition, that for that present he would depart, and suffer her till
night, when in the dark he might take his pleasure, without any manner of
suspicion to the residue of his company. The Captain thinkyng now the goole
to be more then half won, was contented so far to satisfy her request,
and departed out leauyng her alone in his Cabin.

Silla, being alone by her self, drue out her knife ready to strike her self
to the heart, and falling upon her knees, desired God to receive her soul, as
an acceptable sacrifice for her follies, which she had so wilfully committed,
crauyng pardon for her sins, and so forth continuyng a long and pitiful
reconciliation to GOD, in the midst whereof there suddenly fell a wonderful
storm the terror whereof was such, that there was no man but did think the
Seas would presently have swallowed them, the Billows so suddenly arose with
the rage of the wind, that they were al glad to fall to heauing out of water,
for otherwise their feeble Gallie had never bin able to have brooked the Seas,
this storm continued all that day and the next night, and they being driven
to put romer before the wind to keep the Gallie ahed the Billowe, were driven
upon the maine Shore, where the Gallie brake all is pieces, there was every
man providing to save his own life, some gate upon Hatches, Boordes, and
Casks, and were driven with the waves to and fro, but the greatest number were
drouned, amongst the which Pedro was one, but Silla her self being in the
Cabin as you have heard, took hold of a Chest that was the Captains, the
which by the only providence of GOD brought her safe to the Shore, the which
when she had recovered, not knowing that was become of Pedro her man, she
deemed that both he and all the rest had been drouned, for that she saw no
body upon the Shore but her self, wherefore, when she had a while made great
lamentations, complainyng her mishappes, she began in the end to comfort
her self with the hope, that she had to see her Apolonius, and found such
means that she brake open the Chest that brought her to land, wherein she found
good store of coin, and sondrie suits of Apparel that were the Captains, and
now to prevent a number of injuries, that might be proffered to a woman that
was left in her case, she determined to leave her own Apparel, and to sort
her self into some of those suits, that being taken for a man, she might pass
through the Country in the better safety, and as she changed her apparel,
she thought it likewise convenient to change her name, wherefore not readily
happenyng of any other, she called her self Siluio, by the name of there own
brother, whom you have heard spoken of before.

In this manner she travailed to Constantinople, where she inquired out the
Palace of the Duke Apolonius, and thinkyng her self now to be both fit and
able to play the seruyng man, she presented her self to the Duke, crauyng his
service, the Duke very willing to give succor unto strangers, perceiuyng him
to be a proper smouge young man, gave him entertainment: Silla thought her self
now more then satisfied, for all the casualties that had happened unto her in
her Journey, that she might at her pleasure take but the vewe of the Duke
Apolonius, and above the rest of his servant was very diligent and attendaunt
upon him, the which the Duke perceiuyng, began likewise to grow into good
likyng with the diligence of his man, and therefore made him one of his
Chamber, who but Siluio then was most neat about him, in helpyng of him to
make him ready in a morning, in the setting of his ruffes, in the keeping of
his Chamber, Siluio pleased his Master so well, that above all the rest of his
servant about him, he had the greatest credit, and the Duke put him most in
trust.

At this very instaunt, there was remainyng in the City a noble Dame a widow,
whose housbande was but lately deceased, one of the noblest men that were in
the parts of Grecia, who left his Lady and wife large possessions and great
livings. This Ladies name was called Iulina, who besides the abundance of her
wealth, and the greatness of her revenues, had likewise the sovereignty of
all the Dames of Constantinople for her beauty. To this Lady Iulina,
Apolonius became an earnest suter, and according to ye manner of woers, besides
fair words, sorrowful sighs, and piteous countenaunces, there must be
sendyng of loving letters, Chains, Bracelettes, Brouches, Rings, Tablets,
Gemmes, Iuels, and presents I know not what: So my Duke, who in the time that
he remained in the I Will of Cypres, had no skill at all in the art of Love,
although it were more then half proffered unto him, was now become a scholar
in Loves School, and had already learned his first lesson, that is, to speak
pitifully, to look ruthfully, to promise largely, to serve diligently, and to
please carefully: Now he was learning his second lesson, that is to reward,
liberally, to give bountifully, to present willingly, and to write lovingly.
Thus Apolonius was so busied in his new study, that I warrant you there was
no man that could challenge him for plaiyng the truant, he followed his
profession with so good a will: And who must be the messenger to carry the
tokens and letters to the Lady Iulina, but Siluio his man, in him the Duke
reposed his only confidence, to go between him and his Lady.

New Gentlewomen, do you think there could have been a greater torment
devised, wherewith to afflicte the heart of Silla, then her self to be made
the Instrument to work her own mishapp, and to play the Attorney in a
cause, that made so much against her self. But Silla altogether desirous to
please her Master, cared nothing at all to offend her self, followed his
business with so good a will, as if it had been in her own preferment.

Iulina now having many times, taken the gaze of this young youth Siluio,
perceiuyng him to be of such excellent perfect grace, was so entangled with
the often sight of this sweet temptation, that she fell into as great a likyng
with the man, as the Master was with her self: And on a time Siluio being sent
from his Master, with a message to the Lady Iulina, as he began very
earnestly to solicet in his Masters behalf, Iulina interruptyng him in his
tale, said: Siluio it is enough that you have said for your Master, from
henceforth either speak for your self, or say nothing at all. Silla abashed
to hear these words, began in her mind to accuse the blindness of Love,
that Iulina neglecting the good will of so noble a Duke, would prefer her
love unto such a one, as Nature it self had denaied to recompense her likyng.

And now for a time, leauyng matters dependyng as you have heard, it fell out
that the right Siluio in deed (whom you have heard spoken of before, the
brother of Silla,) was come to his Fathers Court into the I Will of Cypres, where
understanding, that his sister was departed, in manner as you have heard
coniectured, that the very occasion did proceed of some liking had between
Pedro her man (that was missing with her) and her self, but Siluio who loved
his sister, as dearly as his own life, and her rather for that as she was his
natural sister, both by Father and Mother, so the one of them was so like the
other, in countenance and favor, that there was no man able to descerne the
one from the other by their faces, saving by their apparel the one being a
man, the other a woman.

Siluio therefore vowed to his Father, not only to seek but his sister Silla,
but also to revenge the villainy, which he conceived in Sedro, for the
carriyng away of his sister, and thus departing having travailed through many
Cities and Towns, without hearing any manner of news, of those he went to
seek for, at the fast be arrived at Constantinople, where as he was walking in
an euenyng for his own recreation, on a pleasant green yard, without the
walls of the City, he fortuned to meet with the Lady Iulina, who likewise
had been abroad to take the air, and as she suddenly cast her eyes upon
Siluio, thinkyng him to be her old acquaintance, by reason they were so like
one an other, as you have heard before, said unto him, sir Siluio, if your
haste be not the greater, I pray you let me have a little talk with you,
seeing I have so luckely met you in this place.

Siluio wonderyng to hear himself so rightly named, being but a stranger,
not of above two days continuance in the City, very courteously came
toward her, desirous to hear what she would say.

Iulina commanding her train something to stand back, said as follows.
Seeing my good will and freendly love, has been the only cause to make me so
prodigal to offer, that I see is so lightly rejected, it makes me to think,
that men be of this condition, rather to desire those things, which they can
not come by, then to esteem or value of that, which both largely and
liberally is offered unto them, but if the liberality of my proffer, has made
to seem less the value of the thing that I meant to present, it is but in your
own co^ceipt, considering how many noble men there has been here before, and
be yet at this present, which has both served, sued, and most humbly
entreated, to attain to that, which to you of my self, I have freely offered,
and I perceive is despised, or at the least very lightly regarded.

Siluio wonderyng at these words, but more amazed that she could so rightly
call him by his name, could not tell what to make of her speeches, assuring him
self that she was deceived, and did mistake him, did think notwithstanding, it
had been a poinct of great simplicity, if he should forsake that, which
Fortune had so favorably proffered unto him, perceiuyng by her train, that
she was some Lady of great honor, and vewing the perfection of her beauty,
and the excellency of her grace and countenance, did think it impossible
that she should be despised, and therefore answered thus.

Madame, if before this time, I have seemed to forget my self, in neglecting
your courtesy which so liberally you have meant unto me: please it you to
pardon what is past, and from this day forwards, Siluio remains ready
pressed to make such reasonable amends, as his ability may any ways permit,
or as it shall please you to command.

Iulina the gladdest woman that might be, to hear these joyful news, said:
Then my Siluio see you fail not to Morrow at night to suppe with me at my own
house, where I will discourse farther with you, what amends you shall make me,
to which request Siluio gave his glad consent, and thus they departed very
well pleased. And as Iulina did think the time very long, till she had reapt
the fruit of her desire: So Siluio he wished for Harvest, before Corn could
grow, thinkyng the time as long, till he saw how matters would fall out, but
not knowing what Lady she might be, he presently (before Iulina was out of
sight) demanded of one that was walkyng by what she was, and how she was
called, who satisfied Siluio in every poinct, and also in what part of the
town her house did stand, whereby he might enquire it out.

Siluio thus departing to his lodging, passed the night with very unquiet
sleapes, and the next Morning his mind ran so much of his Supper, that he
never cared, neither for his Breakfast nor Dinner, and the day to his seemyng
passed away so slowly, that he had thought the stately Steedes had been
tired, that draw the Chariot of the Sun, or else some other Joshua had
commanded them again to stand, and wished that Phaeton had been there with a
whippe.

Iulina on the other side, she had thought the Clock setter had played the
knave, the day came no faster forwards, but six a clock being once stricken,
recovered comfort to both parties: and Siluio hastening himself to the
Palace of Iulina, where by her he was friendly welcomed, and a sumpteous supper
being made ready, furnished with sondrie sorts of delicate dishes, they
satte them down, passing the Supper time with amourous looks, loving
countenaunces, and secret glaunces conueighed from the one to the other,
which did better satisfy them, then the feedyng of their dainty dishes.

Supper time being thus spent, Iulina did think it very unfitly, if she
should turn Siluio to go seek his lodging in an euenyng, desired him
therefore, that he would take a bed in her house for that night, and bryngyng
him up into a fair Chamber, that was very richly furnished, she found such
means, that when all the rest of her household servants were a bed and
quiet, she came her self to bear Siluio company, where concludyng upon
conditions, that were in question between them, they passed the night with
such joy and contentation, as might in that convenient time be wished for,
but only that Iulina, feedyng too much of some one dishe above the rest,
received a surfett, whereof she could not be cured in forty weeks after, a
natural inclination in all Women which are subject to longyng, and want the
reason to use a moderation in their diet: but the morning approaching, Iulina
took her leave, and conueighed her self into her own chamber, and when it was
fair day light, Siluio making himself ready, departed likewise about his
affairs in the Town, debatyng with himself how things had happened, being
well assured that Iulina had mistaken him, and therefore for fear of further
euilles, determined to come no more there, but took his journey toward other
places in the parts of Grecia, to see if he could learn any tidings of his
sister Silla.

The Duke Apolonius having made a long suit, and never a whit the nerer of his
purpose, came to Iulina to crave her direct answer, either to accept of him,
and of such conditions as he proffered unto her, or else to give him his last
farewell.

Iulina, as you have heard, had taken an earnest penie of an other, whom she
had thought had been Siluio the Dukes man, was at a controversy in her self,
what she might do, one while she thought, seeing her occasion served so fit, to
crave the Dukes good will, for the mariyng of his man, then again, she could
not tell what displeasure the Duke would conceive, in that she should seem to
prefer his man before himself, did think it therefore best to conceal the
matter, till she might speak with Siluio, to use his opinion how these matters
should be handled, and hereupon resoluyng her self, desiryng the Duke to pardon
her speeches, said as follows.

Sir Duke, for that from this time forwards I am no longer of my self, having
given my full power and authority over to an other, whose wife I now remain
by faithful vow and promise: And albeeit, I know the world will wonder when
they shall understand the fondness of my choice, yet I trust you your self
will nothing deslike with me, sith I have meant no other thing, then the
satisfiyng of mine own contentation and likyng.

The Duke hearing these words, answered: Madame, I must then content my self,
although against my will, having the Law in your own hands, to like of whom
you list, and to make choice where it pleases you.

Iulina giuyng the Duke great thanks, that would content himself with such
patience, desired him likewise, to give his free consent and good will, to the
party whom she had chosen to be her housbande.

Naie surely Madame (quod the Duke) I will never give my consent, that any
other man shall enjoy you then my self, I have made too great account of you,
then so lightly to pass you away with my good will: But seeing it lies not in
me to let you, having (as you say) made your own choice, so from hence
forwards I leave you to your own likyng, always willing you well, and thus
will take my leave.

The Duke departed toward his own house very sorrowful, that Iulina had
thus served him, but in the mean space that the Duke had remained in the house
of Iulina, some of his servants fell into talk and conference, with the
servant of Iulina, where debatyng between them, of the likelihood of the
Marriage, between the Duke and the Lady, one of the servants of Iulina
said: that he never saw his Lady and Mistres, use so good countenance to
the Duke himself, as she had done to Siluio his man, and began to report with
what familiarity and courtesy, she had received him, feasted him, and lodged
him, and that in his opinion, Siluio was like to speed before the Duke, or any
other that were suitors.

This tale was quickly brought to the Duke himself, who making better inquiry
in the matter, found it to be true that was reported, and better considering of
the words, which Iulina had used toward himself, was very well assured that
it could be no other then his own man, that had thrust his Nose so far out
of joint, wherefore without any further respect, caused him to be thrust into a
Dongeon, where he was kept prisoner, in a very pitiful plight.

Poor Siluio, having got intelligence by some of his fellows, what was the
cause that the Duke his Master did bear such displeasure unto him, devised
all the means he could, as well by meditation by his fellows, as otherwise by
petitions, and supplication to the Duke, that he would suspende his Judgment,
til perfect proof were had in the matter, and then if any manner of thing did
fall out against him, whereby the Duke had cause to take any grief, he would
confess himself worthy not only of imprisonment, but also of most vile and
shameful death: with these petitions he daiely plied the Duke, but all in
vain, for the Duke thought he had made so good proof, that he was thoroughly
confirmed in his opinion against his man.

But the Lady Iulina, wonderyng what made Siluio, that he was so slack in his
visitation, and why he absented himself so long from her presence, began to
think that all was not well, but in the end, perceiuyng no decoction of her
former surfette, received as you have heard, and findyng in her self, an
unwonted swellyng in her beallie, assuryng her self to be with child, fearyng
to become quite banckroute of her honor, did think it more then time to seek
out a Father, and made such secret search, and diligent inquiry, that she
learned the truth how Siluio was kept in prison, by the Duke his Master, and
mindyng to find a present remedy, as well for the love she bare to Siluio, as
for the maintenance of her credit and estimation, she speedily hasted to the
Palace of the Duke, to whom she said as follows.

Sir Duke, it may be that you will think my coming to your house in this
sort, does somethyng pass the limits of modesty, the which I protest
before GOD, proceaded of this desire, that the world should know, how justly
I seek means to maintain my honor, but to the end I seem not tedious with
prolixitie of words, nor to use other then direct circumstaunces, know sir,
that the love I bear to my only beloved Siluio, whom I do esteem more then
all the Iewelles in the world, whose personage I regard more then my own life,
is the only cause of my attempted journey, beseechyng you, that all the whole
displeasure, which I understand you have conceived against him, may be
imputed unto my charge, and that it would please you louyngly to deal with
him, whom of my self I have chosen rather for the satisfaction of mine honest
liking, then for the vain preheminences or honorable dignities looked after
by ambicious minds.

The Duke having heard this discourse, caused Siluio presently to be sent for,
and to be brought before him, to whom he said: Had it not been sufficient for
thee, when I had reposed my self in thy fidelity, and the trustiness of thy
service, that thou should so traitorously deal with me, but since that time
haste not spared, still to abuse me with so many forgeries, and perjured
protestations, not only hateful unto me, whose simplicity thou think to
be such, that by the plotte of thy pleasant tongue, thou would make me
believe a manifest vntrothe, but most habominable be thy doings in the
presence and sight of God, that have not spared to blaspheeme his holy name, by
calling him to be a witness to maintain thy leasynges, and so detestably
would forswear thy self, in a matter that is so openly known.

Poor Siluio whose innocence was such, yt he might lawfully swear, seeing
Iulina to be there in place, answered thus.

Most noble Duke, well understanding your conceived grief, most humbly I
beseech you patiently to hear my excuse, not mindyng thereby to aggrauate or
heap up your wrath and displeasure, protestyng before God, that there is
nothing in the world, which I regard so much, or do esteem so dear, as
your good grace and favor, but desirous that your grace should know my
innocence, and to clear my self of such impositions, wherewith I know I am
wrongfully accused, which as I understand should be in the practicing of the
Lady Iulina, who stands here in place, whose acquitance for my better
discharge, now I most humbly crave, protesting before the almighty God, that
neither in thought, word, nor deed, I have not otherwise used my self, then
according to the bond and duty of a servant, that is both willing and
desirous, to further his Masters suits, which if I have otherwise said then
that is true, you Madame Iulina, who can very well deside the depthes of all
this doubt, I most humbly beseech you to certify a troth, if I have in any
thing missaied, or have otherwise spoken then is right and just.

Iulina having heard this discourse which Siluio had made, perceiuyng that he
stood in great awe of the Dukes displeasure, answered thus: Think not my
Siluio, that my coming hither is to accuse you of any misdemeanour toward
your Master, so I do not denaie, but in all such Imbassages wherein toward
me you have been employed, you have used the office of a faithful and trusty
messenger, neither am I ashamed to confess, that the first day that mine eyes
did behold the singular behavior, the notable courtesy, and other innumerable
gifts wherewith my Siluio is endued, but that beyond all measure my heart was
so inflamed, that impossible it was for me, to quench the fervent love, or
extinguishe the least part of my conceived torment, before I had bewraied the
same unto him, and of my own motion, craved his promised faith and loialtie
of marriage, and now is the time to manifest the same unto the world, which
has been done before God, and between our selves: knowing that it is not
needful, to keep secret that, which is neither evil done, nor hurtful to
any person, therefore (as I said before) Siluio is my housbande by plited
faith, whom I hope to obtain without offense, or displeasure of any one,
trusting that there is no man, that will so far forget himself, as to
restrain that, which God has left at liberty for every wight, or that will
seek by cruelty, to force Ladies to marry otherwise, then according to their
own likyng. Fear not then my Siluio to keep your faith and promise, which
you have made unto me, and as for the rest: I doubt not things will so fall
out, as you shall have no manner of cause to complain.

Siluio amassed to hear these words, for that Iulina by her speech, seemed
to confirm that, which he most of all desired to be quite of, said: Who
would have thought that a Lady of so great honor and reputation, would her
self be the Ambassador, of a thing so prejudicial, and uncomely for her
estate, what plighted promises be these which be spoken of* altogether
ignorant unto me, which if it be otherwise then I have said, you Sacred Gods
consume me straight with flashyng flames of fire. But what words might I use
to give credit to the truth, and innocence of my cause? Ah Madame Iulina, I
desire no other testimony, then your own honesty and virtue, thinkyng that
you will not so much blemishe the brightness of your honor, knowing that a
woman is or should be, the Image of courtesy, continency, and shamefastness,
from the which so soon as she stoopeth, and leaves the office of her duty
and modesty, besides the degraduation of her honor, she thrusts her self
into the pit of perpetual infamy, and as I can not think you would so far
forget your self, by the refusal of a noble duke, to dim the light of your
renown and glory, which hitherto you have maintained, amongst the best and
noblest Ladies, by such a one as I know my self to be, too far unworthy your
degree and calling, so most humbly I beseech you to confess a trothe (...)
those vows and promises you speak of, which speeches be so obscure unto me,
as I know not for my life how I might understand them.

Iulina somethyng nipped with these speeches said, and what is the matter that
now you make so little account of your Iulina, that being my housbande in
deed, have the face to denay me, to whom thou art contracted by so many
solemn oaths: what art thou ashamed to have me to thy wife? how much
ought thou rather to be ashamed to break thy promised faith, and to have
despised the holy and dreadful name of GOD, but that time constrains me to
lay open that, which shame rather wills I should dissemble and keep
secret, behold me then here Siluio whom thou have gotten with child, who if
thou be of such honesty, as I trust for all this I shall find, then the thing
is done without prejudice, or any hurt to my conscience, considering that by
the professed faith, thou did accoumpt me for thy wife, and I received
thee for my spouse and loyal housbande, swearing by the almighty God, that no
other then you have made the conquest and triumph of my chastity, whereof I
crave no other witness then your self, and mine own conscience.

I pray you Gentlewomen, was not this a foul oversight of Iulina, that would
so precisely swear so great an oath, that she was gotten with child by one,
that was altogether unfurnished with implementes for such a turn. For Gods
love take heed, and let this be an example to you, when you be with child,
how you swear who is the father, before you have had good proof and knowledge
of the party, for men be so subtle and full of slight, that God knows a
woman may quickly be deceived.

But now to return to our Siluio, who hearing an oath sworn so deuinely that
he had gotten a woman with child, was like to believe that it had bin true in
very deed, but remembryng his own impediment, thought it impossible that he
should commit such an act, and therefore half in a chafe, he said. What
law is able to restrain the foolish indescretion of a woman, that yields
her self to her own desires, what shame is able to bridle or withdraw her
from her mind and madness, or with what snaffell is it possible to hold her
back, from the execution of her filthiness, but what abomination is this,
that a Lady of such a house should so forget the greatness of her estate, the
aliaunce whereof she is descended, the nobility of her deceased housbande, and
makes no conscience to shame and slander her self, with such a one a I am,
being so far unfit and unseemly for her degree, but how horrible is it to
hear the name of God so defased, that we make no more account, but for the
maintenance of our mischifes, we fear no whit at all to forswear his holy
name, as though he were not in all his dealinges most righteous true and
just, and will not only lay open our leasinges to the world, but will
likewise punish the same with most sharp and bitter scourges.

Iulina, not able to endure him to proceed any farther in his Sermon, was
already surprised with a vehement grief, began bitterly to cry out vtteryng
these speeches followyng.

Alas, is it possible that the sovereign justice of God, can abide a mischief
so great and cursed, why may I not now suffer death, rather then the infamy
which I see to wander before mine eyes. O happy and more then right happy
had I bin, if inconstant fortune had not devised this treason where in I am
surprised and caught, am I thus become to be entangled with snares, and in the
hands of him, who inioiyng the spoils of my honor, will openly deprive me of
my fame, by making me a common fable to all posterity in time to come: ah
Traitor and discourtious wretch, is this the recompense of the honest and
firm amity which I have borne thee, wherein have I deserved this discourtesie,
by loving thee more then thou art able to deserve, is it I arrant thief is it
I, upon whom thou think to work thy mischiues, do thou think me no
better worth, but that thou may prodigally waste my honor at thy pleasure,
did thou dare to adventure upon me, having thy conscience wounded with so
deadly a treason: ah unhappy and above all other most unhappy, that have so
charely preserved mine honor, and now am made a pray to satisfy a young man's
lust, that has coueted nothing but the spoil of my chastity and good name.

Here withal the tears so gushed down her cheeks, that she was not able to
open her mouth to use any farther speech.

The Duke who stood by all this while, and heard this whole discourse, was
wonderfully moved with compassion toward Iulina, knowing that from her
infancy she had ever so honorably used her self, that there was no man able
to detect her of any misdemeanour, otherwise then beseemed a Lady of her
estate, wherefore being fully resolved that Siluio his man had committed this
villainy against her, in a great fury drawyng his Rapier he said unto Siluio.

How can thou (arrant thief) show thy self so cruel and careless to such
as do thee honor, have thou so little regard of such a noble Lady, as
humbles her self to such a villain as thou art, who without any respect
either of her renown or noble estate, can be content to seek the wrack and
utter ruin of her honor, but frame thy self to make such satisfaction as she
requires, although I know unworthy wretch, that thou art not able to make
her the least part of amends, or I swear by God, that thou shall not escape
y^ death which I will minister to thee with my own hands, and therefore
advise thee well what thou do.

Siluio having heard this sharp sentence, fell down on his knees before the
Duke crauyng for mercy, desiryng that he might be suffered to speak with the
Lady Iulina aparte, promising to satisfy her, according to her own
contentation.

Well (quod the Duke) I take thy word, and there with all I advise thee that
thou perform thy promise, or otherwise I protest before God, I will make thee
such an example to the world, that all Traitors shall tremble for fear, how
they do seek the dishonoring of Ladies.

But now Iulina had conceived so great grief against Siluio, that there was
much a do, to persuade her to talk with him, but remembryng her own case,
desirous to hear what excuse he could make, in ye end she agreed, and being
brought into a place severally by them selves, Siluio began with a piteous
voice to say as follows.

I know not Madame, of whom I might make complaint, whether of you or of my
self, or rather of Fortune, which has conducted and brought us both into so
great adversity, I see that you reciue great wrong, and I am condemned
against all right, you in perrill to abide the brute of spightfull tongues, and
I in danger to loose the thing that I most desire: and although I could
as^edge many reasons to prove my sayings true, yet I refer my self, to the
experience and bounty of your mind* And here with all loosyng his garments
down to his stomach, and showed Iulina his breasts and pretty teates,
surmountyng far the witness of Snow it self, saying: Lo Madame, behold
here the party whom you have challenged to be the father of your child, see I
am a woman the daughter of a noble Duke, who only for the love of him, whom
you so lightly have shaken of, have forsaken my Father, abandoned my Country,
and in manner as you see am become a serving man, satisfiyng my self, but with
the only sight of my Apolonius, and now Madame, if my passion were not
vehement, and my torments without comparison, I would wish that my fained
greefes might be laughed to scorn, and my dissembled pains to be rewarded
with floutes. But my love being pure, my travail continual, and my greefes
endless, I trust Madame you will not only excuse me of crime, but also pity
my destresse, the which I protest I would still have kept secret, if my
fortune would so have permitted.

Iulina did now think her self to be in a worse case then ever she was before,
for now she knew not whom to challenge to be the father of her child: wherefore,
when she had told the Duke the very certantie of the discourse, which Siluio
had made unto her, she departed to her own house, with such grief and
sorrow, that she purposed never to come out of her own doors again alive,
to be a wonder and mocking stock to the world.

But ye Duke more amassed, to hear this strange discourse of Siluio came unto
him, who^ when he had dewed with better consideration, perceived in deed that
it was Silla the daughter of Duke Pontus, and imbrasing her in his arms, (...)

Oh the branch of all virtue, and the flower of courtesy it self, pardon me I
beseech you of all such discourtesies, as I have ignorantly committed
toward you: desiryng you that without farther memory of ancient greefes,
you will accept of me, who is more joyful and better contented with your
presence, then if the whole world were at my commandment. Where has there
ever been found such liberality in a Lover, which having been trained up
and nourished amongst the delicacies and banquettes of the Court, accompanied
with trains of many fair and noble Ladies living in pleasure, and in the
midst of delights, would so prodigally adventure your self, neither fearing
mishapps, nor misliking to take such pains, as I know you have not been
accustomed unto. O liberality never heard of before. O fact that can never be
sufficiently rewarded. O true Love most pure and unfeigned: Here with all
sendyng for the most artificial woorkmen, he provided for her sondrie suits of
sumpteous Apparel, and the Marriage day appointed, which was celebrated with
great triumph, through the whole City of Constantinople, every one praising
the nobleness of the Duke, but so many as did behold the excellent beauty of
Silla, gave her the praise above all the rest of the Ladies in the troop.

The matter seemed so wonderful and strange, that the brute was spread
throughout all the parts of Grecia, in so much that it came to the hearing of
Siluio, who as you have heard, remained in those parts to enquire of his
sister, he being the gladdest man in the world, hasted to Constantinople,
where coming to his Sister he was joyfully received, and most lovingly
welcomed, and entertained of the Duke his brother in Law. After he had
remained there two or three days, the Duke revealed unto Siluio, the whole
discourse how it happened, between his sister and the Lady Iulina, and how
his sister was challenged, for gettyng a woman with child: Siluio blushyng with
these words, was stricken with great remorse to make Iulina amends,
understanding her to be a noble Lady, and was left defamed to the world
through his de^ault, he therefore bewraied the whole circumstaunce to the Duke,
whereof ye Duke being very joyful, immediately repaired with Siluio to the house
of Iulina, whom they found in her Chamber, in great lamentation and mournyng.
To whom the Duke said: take courage Madame, for behold here a Gentleman, that
will not stick, both to father your child, and to take you for his wife, no
inferior person, but the son and heir of a noble Duke, worthy of your
estate and dignity.

Iulina seeing Siluio in place, did know very well that he was the father of her
child, and was for ravished with joy, that she knew not whether she were
awake, or in some dream. Siluio imbracyng her in his arms, crauyng
forgiveness of all that past: concluded with her the marriage day, which was
presently accomplished with great joy, and contentation to al parties: And
thus Siluio having attained a noble wife, and Silla his sister her desired
housbande, they passed the residue of their days with such delight, as those
that have accomplished the perfection of their felicities.

FINIS.
Of Nicander and Lucilla.
The Argument of the third History.
Lucilla, a young maiden, endued with singular beauty, for want of a convent
dowry, was restrained from mariyng her beloved Nicander, in the end, through
the great magnificence of the courteous* young prince Don Hercules, the only
son and heir of Alfonso duke of Ferrara she was relieved with the sum of
2000* Crounes, the which money being received by the father of Nicander the
marriage was performed to the great contentation of the noble young prince, but
especially to the two young lovers, Nicander and Lucilla.

IN the time that Alfonso first (...) that name, and third Duke of Ferrara
gout^^ed that state, there was in the City of Ferrara, a gentle young
gentlewoman, named Lucilla, borne of a noble Family, but by the frowardness
of blind Fortune reduced to great poverty, then her virtues did deserve: whose
beauty appeared to be such, in the prime and flower of her years, as it
filled with marvel, all those that cast their eyes upon her. Of this
Gentlewoman was fervently enamoured, a gallant young Gentleman, whose name was
Nicander, and in like sort borne of noble blood. And desired nothing more, then
to be joined with her in Matrimony. But she being, as it is said, poor,
though of noble Parentage, and endued with singular virtues: The Father of the
young Gentleman disdained her, who (as for the most part, we see old men,
naturally inclined to coue^ise) regarding rather the wealth that their
daughters in law, are to bring into their families, then either birthe,
virtue, or gifts of the mind, could in no wise be persuaded, or entreated to
content his son in that behalf, and to suffer him to enjoy his Love, by
taking her to wife: alledgyng that the first thing that was to be considered in
marriage, was the dowry, and the woman. For that the virtues of the women, do
not enriche the houses wherein they came (said he) but the quality of goods
and wealth, that they brought with them.

The coueteous disposition of the father of Nicander, was cause that these two
young folk languished in miserable love: For although their flames were of
equal force and hea^e, yet the young gentlewoman being of a very honest mind,
nor the young gentleman, never thinking upon any other mean^^ then honestly to
enjoy his desire, without touch or breach of her honor: and the obstinate
wilfulness of the old man being cast, as a bar or block, between the
unity and concord of their two minds: they lived in great tormente, each
consumyng, and as it were melting away with desire, for love of each other
Whilst their mutual love continued in this sort each day, with less hope
then other, through the obstinacy of the ^ld^tarle, it happened that Don
Hercules the Dukes only son and heir, being then in the freshest time of
his youth, passing by the streate where this gentlewoman dwelt, saw her
standing in her door, apparailed in White, which kind of attire increased
greatly her natural beauty. And considering somewhat curioustie, the
comeliness and excellency of her personage, together with her perfection of
beauty, he received with such force into his imagination, the first
impression of them both, that from thence forward, her lively Image seemed
continually to be before his eyes: by the consideration whereof he grew by
degrees, to conceive so vehement a desire, to enjoy the singularity which he
saw in her, that he thought it impossible for him to live, if he did not
attain it.

And often times discoursyng to himself thereof, he would say, what injury
has Fortune dooen unto this fair Gentlewoman, that as Nature has been
liberal, in bestowyng of beauty upon her, meet for any great Princes, she
has not likewise caused her to be borne of some king or mighty prince which
if she were, I would never cease, till I had found the means to get her to
be my wife, and so enjoy her as mine own, with the safety of her honor,
and with the satisfaction and contentment of my Father.

But in the end, although he saw her degree, to be far unequal to his, to
wish, or to procure any such match: Yet ceased he not by all the means he
could, to win her good will, and now by one devise, and now by an other, to
induce her to love him, and to yield to his fervent desire. But all in vain.
For where many others would have taken it, for a great good Fortune, that such
a Prince, should have fallen in love with the^: Lucilla considering the
baseness of her degree, in respect of the high estate of her new Lover,
reputed it to be a great mishap unto her, as she that considered, that she
could not nourishe, or entertain any such Love, but with the harm and
prejudice of her honor. Besides that, she feared least that Nicander should
once perceive, that this young Prince hunted after that hau^t, he would forsake
her, for fear of farther displeasure, wherefore to avoid both
inconveniences, where (...) then, she was w^nte to show her self, sometime at
the Door, some^^^e at the Windows, she now retired her self in such sort,
that she could never be seen but on the Sundaies and holy days, as she went
to a little Church, nere adioinyng to the house. Wherefore Nicander not a
little meruailyng, and greatly troubled in spirit, fearing that Lucilla
(wavering as women use to do) had forsaken him, and turned her affection else
where: as one full of gelousie and greef, for fault of better comfort, he
would watch his times, and follow her to that Church: there to feed his
fancy with a look or two, which yet amid his misery, he seemed to esteem
as a releef, without the which he could not live. Finally, not being able to
endure those tormen^es, that this absence and strangeness of his Lady caused
him to feel: he sent unto her a conueniente messenger with a letter,
containing this effect.

The Bird which long has lived in pleasant feeld,
Esteems no whit his Cage of wreathed gold:
The dulted note, wherewith he pearst the Sky,
For greef of mind, he can not then unfold.
Yet lives he still, but better were to die,
More worse then death, even such a life have I.
The Turtle true, of his deceased may,
Bewailes the want* he reakes no more of bliss:
The swellyng Swanne, does hardly brook the place,
When he his best beloved bird does miss.
Such is my joy, Nicander needs must die.
Lucilla does his wonted presence fly.
How can I live, that double death possess,
How should I joy, that drenched am in thrall:
What food may feed, or bear a pleasant taste,
Where as the heart, lies bathed still in Gall.
If this be life, then life be far from me,
And welcome death, to se^ Nicander free.
What cause my dear, has thy Nicander wrought,
That makes thee shun, in whom thou should delight*
What moves thy mind, to ^ewe thee up so close,
And keep thee from, thy best beloved fight.
If I offended have, then charge me when and how,
Nicander shall him clear, or to thy mercy ^ow.
If no offense, but fond conceit has taken hold,
Condemn him not, that shows his giltlesse hand:
Who hitherto has never meant the thing,
That justly might, against your honor stand*
If guilty I, I ask no other grace,
Give doom of Death, and do my suit deface.
I say no more, but as I do deserve,
So show the fruit, of my deserved hire:
Seem not so strange, unto thy faithful freende,
Whose absence setts, my scorchyng heart on fire.
But as my love to thee, no tongue can tell,
Esteem the like of me, and so farewell.
Thine own Nicander.


The young Gentlewoman who had fixed all her thoughts, and settled all the
contentmentes of her heart, only upon Nicander, neither desiryng any thing in
the world, so much as to please and content him: Felt an intolerable
perplexity of mind, in that she saw him grieve thus, at her late
strangeness, and yet thought it better that he should complain, then come by
any knowledge of the love, that Don He^cules did ^eare her, wherefore hidyng
from him the matter, replied in ^his sort.

The Bird which is restrainde,
Of former hearts delight:
I must confess, twixt life and death,
Does alwaie combat fight.
So does the heart compelled,
By heste of Parents will:
Obaye for fear, yet forste by love,
Continues constant still.
No absence by consent,
My dear Nicander I:
Have wrought to work thy woe, from thee,
Like Cressed falce to fly.
Ne shall I live to loathe,
What may content thy mind:
Hap life or death, as true as Steel,
Thou shall Lu^illa find.
Thy ears shall never hear,
Nor eyes shall never see:
That any wight shall reap the fruit,
Which planted was for thee.
(...) thy self my dear,
To take against thy will:
Our absence in good part till time,
May bette^ hap fulfill.
And therewithal receive,
This pledge to cure thy pain:
My heart is thine, preserve it well,
Till we two meet again.
Ever thine Lucilla.


This sweet answer mitigated not a little, the mood of the young Gentleman,
and so he framed himself the best he could, to tolerate the absence of his
Lucilla. On the other side Don Hercules, who in like manner found himself
deprived, of the sight of that young Lady, whom he loved extremely, was very
much discontented, and perceiving that neither messages, nor fair offers,
with large gifts sent unto her, whereof never any were accepted, could once
move her to show her self courteous unto him, of so much as a look: And
considering the poverty, wherein her mother lived, now in her latter years,
began to imagine that it would be much easier for him, by offering her
liberally, wherewithal to Marry her daughter, to persuade her to yield her
into his hands, then to win the young Gentlewoman to his desire.

Wherefore having sent a fit person to Lucillas Mother, to let her
understand, that if she would be con^ent, that the young Prince might enjoy
her daughter, he would give her such a dowry in recompense of his pleasure,
that no Gentleman of what degree soever, should for her poverty refuse to take
her to wife: whereas if she refused y^ good offer, she should thereby be
constrained through necessity, either to bestow her upon some Artificer or
Craftesman, or if she would needs Marry her to a gentleman, she must give her
to some such as was so poor, as that she sh^^ld li^e all the days of her
life in want and misery, the which in effect would be nothing else, but to be
cruel toward her own daughter in (...) that good hap which he did offer,
besides the favor that he should be able to show, in furthering her marriage,
to both their end less comfortes. The mother being often solicited, and
sommoned to this effect: and on the one side punished with poverty, and on the
other charged with years, both which pressed her very much, after diverse
discourses made to and fro with her self, lastly she said. And whereto ought I
to have regard, but to the wealth and profit of my daughter, which both she
shall reap abondantly, if by y^ giuyng her self unto this young Prince, he
does bestow upon her that dowry, which he has promised. And although in
doing thereof there be some touch and spot to my daughters honor and mine, yet
shall it be so recompensed with the benefit of her dowry, that the profit
will be greater then the harm. And if therein be any offense, the ^lame
thereof is not to be imputed unto me, but unto my evil Fortune, that has
brought me into this miserable necessity. Besides that my daughter being now
already xviii. years of age, and of most singular beauty, and my self
already so old, that from day to day* I may look to go to my grave, I
might happen to dye, and leave her without any government or oversight, and
she stirred with those appetites, whereto young folks are inclined, through the
frailty of her sex, and the poverty wherein I shall leave her, be brought
to yield her self into the hands of some such one, as would not have due
regard unto her calling, but bring her unto the spoil. And after these and
such like discourses, sondrie times had: with her self finally, she sent him
word, that if it would please him, she would gladly speak with him herself:
which he having understood, caused her to be brought one euenyng, into a
place where they two alone might talk, and there having given her
opportunity, to say what she would, thus she began.

Sir, the weapons wherewith necessity, and my poverty has assaulted me, have
been so sharp and so pearcing, that although I have endeavored all the ways I
could devise, to resist and defend my self from (...) I have bin forced to
yield, as vanquished and overcome, and constrained to do that with my daughter,
as to think of it only I am so abashed, that I dare not for shaine lift up
(...) eyes, to behold you. But for as much as no other thing has persuaded me
thereunto, but the desire which I have to get her a dowry, wherewith I may
afterward bestow her honestly, I beseech you to be content, to extend your
liberality in such sort, as she may have that large dowry, which it has
pleased you to promise me.

Thereof I assure you (said the Prince) and larger to then has been spoken of
to you besides: And also I will minister such releef unto you for your own
state* that you shall have cause to give me thanks for the same. Then replied
the old gentlewoman, and said: Since that you perceive (sir) that no desire to
make Marchaundize of my daughter, but (...) poverty, whereunto my froward
Fortune has brought me, does drive me to this exigent. I do likewise
beseech yo^, that you will come unto my Daughter, at such time as I shall
devise most convenient, with as much regard unto her credit as may be
possible. I will therein be ruled (...) by you (answered the young Prince) and
look in what sort you will appoinct me to come, ^o shall it be.

The first thing then sir (quod she) that I think requisite, is that you come
alone without any company, when I shall assign you the time, so that the
thing rest secret between you and me, and my daughter, and no occasion be
given to publish it, whereby my daughter might seese her good name.

This courteous young Prince was therewithal well content, and that being
concluded and agreed upon, she said further, I know (sir) the honesty of my
Daughter to be such, that if I should open my lips unto her, of any such
matter, she would not only reiecte any persuasion, that I might use unto her,
but also (...) her self out of my house. And therefore least that should
happen, and to the end that you may have your desire, and she have a dowry,
wherewith she may be married, if not withal the honor that the state and
calling, wherein she was borne does require, yet with the least harm that
may be possible, since my hard hap is such, and that my poverty does
so constrain me: I have determined to do herein as you shall hea^e.

My daughter uses to lie in a low Chamber near unto the streate door of my
house, in the which Chamber I my self in like sort am wont to lie, whenever
we two remain alone in the house, as oftentimes we do: and commonly I rising
early in the morning about such business as I have, do leave my daughter in
bed, where she sleeps some times two hours or three after that I am gone.
Tomorowe morning therefore will I rise and leave her alone in that Chamber, and
will set open the streate door, so as you shall not need but to pushe at it,
and the chamber door likewise. You shall come very early as we have concluded
all alone, and entryng into the Chamber, there shall you find my daughter, and
abide with her as long as it shall please your self. But I do once again
(sir) beseech you as I have done before, that the matter may pass secret,
and not to be imparted to any other then to us three, to the end, that where I
suffer my self to be led through necessity to do that which I do, and with
an intent to place my daughter in marriage, by the mean of that dowry which
you do give her, the case being known, we reap not eternal shame and
infamy.

At this devise the young Prince paused a while, thinkyng it strange that he
should go to a young maid, that not only was unwilling, but also not so much
as made privy of his coming, did what he could to refuse that mean, and to
persuade the mother to devise some better. But at the last seeing none other
could be found more fit for the purpose, being pricked forward with the
vehemency of that appetite, which love had stirred up in him, considering
himself to be a Prince, and a gallant young Gentleman, and that he should be
alone with his love, thought that it should not be hard for him to win her to
his will: and so content to do as the old Gentlewoman had devised. And being
parted each from other, he began to attend the coming of the next morning
and all that night, which seemed longer unto him then a hole year, he lay with
his thoughts and imaginations, in the arms of his Lucilla. As soon as the
day began to peep, Don Hercules all alone as he had promised to the mother,
went to the house of his Lady, and findyng the doors open according to
promise, entered into the Chamber wherein Lucilla lay, and having barred the
door, approached nere the bed wherein she lay.

It was in the Month of Iulie, which season in that Country is extreme
hot: by reason whereof Lucilla tumblyng from one side of the bed unto the
other, had rolled of all the clothes wherewith she had been covered: so as she
had left her self all naked, and in that sort he found her, with Coralles
about her neck and her arms, which with the difference of their ruddie
color did set out and beautify greatly the excellent fairness of her white
body. She lay a sleep upon her back, with her hands cast over her head,
(as for the most part young women are wont to do): so that forthwith the young
Prince discoured her from top to toe: and considering with a greedy eye all
her whole body, not only he commended her to him self so naked, as he had
done whilst she was apparailed, but also did so singulary well like her in
that state, that he thought he saw rather some divine thing, or some Goddess
come down from Heaven, to heap him with happiness, then a mortal creature:
and began to allow and commend his own judgment, in that he had placed
his love upon so excellent and rare a piece. And therewith bowyng down him
self to give her a kiss, and so to awake her. Behold she opened her eyes,
which right well resembled two fair shinyng Stars. And where she was used
to see none other body in that Chamber but her mother when she waked, now
seeing this young Prince standing this over her, and findyng her self in that
sort all naked, she gave a great skritche, and said.

Out alas sir (for she knew him straight way) what evil hap has brought
you hither at this time? And in so saying as one wonderfully ashamed to be
seen in that plight, she wrapped about her one of the sheets, and began with
a loud voice to call her mother.

But perceiving that her mother would not hear, and that she called in vain,
she began to imagine that she was consentyng unto his coming thither, and
lamentyng with tears that trickled down her cheeks, like drops of dew
hanging upon Roses, in a May morning, she said: Alas now I see my mother
also has betrayed me. Which thing the young Prince understanding, said unto
her. Trouble not your self, nor grieve not (fair Damsel) at my coming
hither, but rather rejoice, that your singular beauty, has so inflamed me, as
one in a manner forgettyng my estate, have been contented to come hither all
alone, as a private man to enjoy your company, if it will please you to
accept my good will, which though a thousand other Dames of this City, do
wish and would be glad of, yet have I deemed none of them worthy thereof but
your self. And seeing your Mother, who has that power over you, that in reason
she ought to have over her child, and knows best what is for your good and
commodity, does consent hereunto: you (in my judgment) are not but to show
your self in like sort content. For in giuyng your self to me, you do not
abase or cast your self away upon any vilde person: but show your self
courteous unto a Prince, whom your beauty has made thrall: and in whom you
shall find nothing but grateful courtesy, to your benefit and satisfaction.

And with these and other like words stetched forth his hand toward her
breasts, that were like two little balls of Iuorie, and drawing nere her to
kiss her, she with her hand thrus^yng him modestly back, said thus.

Sir I beseech you, by the Princely nobility that is in you, and by that love
which you say you bear me, that it will please you, not to force me, or to
seek at my hands any thing against my will: and that since my mother, who
ought to have been the cheef defender of mine honesty, has abandoned and
forsaken me, you will yet of your courtesy vouchsafe, to give me the hearing
of a few words, which the special care I have of mine honor does force me
to express.

The courteous young Prince at this request, stayed him self proceedyng any
further: and not being desirous to have her, but with her own good will,
stood still to hear what it was that Lucilla would say unto him: yet ever
hopyng, with fair means to win her at the last. And she weepyng very
tenderly, began to say unto him in this sort.

I am very sorry (most noble Prince quod she) that Fortune has been so much
mine enemy, that she has made me a woman, far unworthy and unmeet for
you: For that you being so great a Prince as you are, and I so mean a
Gentlewoman: I see so great a space and distaunce between your high estate,
and my low degree, that between us there can be no portion, or convenient
equality: For the which cause (sir) I considering mine own estate, and not
mindyng to exceed my calling, have a good while since chosen Nicander to be my
Lover, who in respect of his blood, though he be richer then I, is no whitte
nor more nobly borne then my self am. By reason of which conformity of blood
and birth, our love is likewise grown to be equal, and equal the desire in
us both, he to have me to his wife, and I to have him for my housbande. But
the covetousness (let it be lawful for me to say so) of his father is
such, that although he knows me to be a Gentlewoma^ borne, yet because I am
not of that wealth as to bring him so great a dowry, as his riches perchance
require, he despises me, and will not yield by any persuasion his good will
and consent, that we may match together according to our desire.
Nevertheless (sir) I considering how fervently this young Gentleman loves me,
and that already we are in mind united and knit together, with consent, faith
and love, do yet believe assuredly, that GOD of his special goodness and
favor, will grant us his assured grace, that we may one day be joined
together in the holy state of Matrimony. Which thing if it should happen and
come to pass, I not having any thing else to bring with me for my dowry but my
virginity, am determined and fully resolved (by Gods help) to give it unto
him, as pure and unspotted as I brought it from my mothers womb. And if my
unhappy chance and Fortune be such, as that I cannot have Nicander to my
housband, I have concluded with my self (by the grace of God never to couple my
self to any man living: but to give and vow me wholly unto almighty GOD, and
in his service to spend my days a virgin, in continual Fasting and Prayer.
Therefore (most excellent Prince) if Honesty, if Justice, if Religion, have
that power and force in your noble mind, which in reason they ought to have,
I do beseech you, and for that loves sake that you say you bear me, that you
will preserve and keep unstained my honesty, and that it would please you with
the sound discourse of reason, to temper that fervent appetite which has
brought you hither, to the prejudice and breach of my honesty and credit. In
doing whereof you shall show your self to be, in deed that noble Prince that
the highness of your birthe and blood does promise you should be, whereas if
you should force and violate me a Virgin, and a weak maiden without defense,
there could thereof ensue naught else to me but dishonor and reproach, and
withal small praise would it be unto your excellency, when it shall be said
that you had overcome a simple Damsel. And here being interrupted with sobbes
and tears exceedyng for the grief of her mind, casting down her eyes for
shame and sorrow, she held her peace, attendyng what her hap and the goodness
of the Prince should dispose of her, in whose courtesy she had reposed all her
hope and confidence.

This young Prince understanding the honest desire of Lucilla, first praised her
greatly to himself for the chastnes of her mind, and being moved with the
magnanimity of his noble mind, though he were pricked with the sharpest darte
of the blind boys quiver, and that his ardent appetite did still stir him to
the accomplishment of his desire, yet conquering him self with reason, he
turned all the love which erst he bare vnt^ this young Lady, into compassion
of her estate, and thus he said unto her. The virtue and honesty of thy mind
fair Damsel do require, that I should make no less account of thine honor,
then if I were come hither to no other intent, then to defend it against any
other that should go about to stain or spot it. Therefore not only thou
need not to fear any violence at my hands, but also may hope that I
will not fail to further this thy chaste purpose, so that thou may enjoy
that young Gentleman which thou have chosen for thy housbande, with all the
honor and satisfaction that appertains to the honesty of thy mind. And
therefore, (...) nothing else does let thee from the gettyng of him but the
poverty of thy state, whereunto thy froward Fortune has unworthily brought
thee: I will my self supply in that behalf, that wherein she has failed, and
correct with my liberality, the injury that she has done thee. And having
so said, he himself opened the door and called her mother, who had gotten her
self into a Chamber, and there sat bewailyng the misery of her state, wherein
she had bin driven in such sort to prepare a dowry for her daughter.

She being come he said unto her. Gentlewoman, if erst I came hither as a
lover unto your daughter, now I will depart and leave her as if I were her
brother, leauyng her honor no less safe and untouched then I found it, for
so deserves her virtue that I should deal with her. And for as much, as I
perceive she is in love with a young Gentleman whom I well know, and is in my
opinion very worthy of it, and that (...) in like sort is in love with her,
and that only the want of a reasonable dowry is the cause that she can not
become his wife as she desires. I am content to bestow upon her for her
contentment, that sum for her dowry which I had purposed to have given her
in recompense of my co^tentation, to the end that this her honest desire may
have that effect, which is most convenient to so great and well grounded an
affection, and that her great honesty and virtue do deserve. Therefore send
you this day unto my Treasorer, and he shall forth with disburse unto you
2000. pound, which shall be the dowry of this your gentle and honest daughter.

And turnyng himself toward the young Gentlewoman, he said unto her. And as
for you fair Damsel (quod he) I crave nothing else now at your hands, but
that you keep this faith of yours, wherewith you are lincked unto your lover
inuiolate and unspotted, even as I do leave you inuiolate and unspotted in
your mothers hands. How great the joy of the mother was, when she saw the
honesty of her daughter (as it were) resaued out of this young Princes hands,
by the force of her own virtue, may better he imagined then expressed with
words. But above all joys, the joy of Lucilla exceeded all other: when she
understood that through the magnificence and liberality of the noble young
Prince, she was to have her Nicander for her housbande.

And tournyng her eyes full of modesty toward him she said, I could not
(Sir) have had any more certain and infallible token of your love toward me,
then that which now of your great courtesy and bounty you have showed me:
which I acknowledge to be so great, that I am bound to yield your
excellency my most humble and infinite thanks. But for as much as words do
fail me wherewith I might do it, I must beseech you, that it may rest in
your discrete Judgment, to consider how much I confess my self to be your
debtor, when words do fail me, to yield you at the least thanks for so
great a benefit. This only will I say unto your Grace, that the
remembrance of so noble an act shall never wear out of my mind: and that I
will so long as I live, pray unto almighty GOD, so to preserve and maintain
your noble person, as you of your goodness have saved mine honesty: And so
to grant you the accomplishment of all your noble desires, as you have offered
me to make me content of mine, by having my Nicander to be my housbande: Unto
whom, as well because I have ever been so disposed, as for that it has pleased
your excellency to command me, I will always keep sound and unstained
that faith, which through your courtesy shall join me to him in marriage.

The Damsel seemed unto the Prince at that instaunt to be in manner greater
then she was in deed, when she once stood assured of the sauegarde of her
honesty: and delighting no less in the excellency of her mind, then he had
before done in the beauty of her body, he departed from her.

And having caused the two thousand pound to be paid unto her mother as he
had promised: he went unto the Duke his father, and told him all that had
passed between Lucilla and him: the manner whereof liked so well the Duke, that
he concluded with himself, that all the virtues that ever had been before that
time in his progenitors, would be most excellently joined in him.

This young Prince required his father, to send for Nicanders father, and to
persuade him to agree, that his Son might match with Lucilla, since that she
was provided and furnished with so reasonable a dowry: which thing the Duke
did with a very good will, for that he knew that if his son should have
taken in hand, to persuade the old man to any such matter, it might have
stirred some suspicion in his head, why the Prince should so do? And having
sent for him accordyngly, when he was come, the Duke after some familiare
speeches of course and courtesy, told him he was desirous that his son
Nicander should take Lucilla to be his wife, who as well for her birthe, as for
the rare gifts of her mind, (as he had learned) was worthy to be wife to any
great Lord. The old Gentleman answered, that although she had those virtues
and gifts which he spoke of, and were very well ^orne, yet had she not any
dowry convenient, or agreeable to his wealth, whereby she might deserve to
be matched with his son. Yes Marie said the Duke, for I my self because I
would not have so great virtue as is in her, to be oppressed by Fortunes
spite, have bestowed upon her two thousand pound to serve for her dowry.

The old man hearing of such a sum, was very well content to do as the
Duke would have him, and the next day through the liberality of the Prince,
the marriage was concluded and knitte up, which had so long been delaied and
hindered by the coueteousnesse of the old man, and the pouertrie of Lucilla,
with the infinite joy and contentment of the two young Lovers, who had long
wished and desired that happy day.

What virtue, or what continence of Alexander, or of Scipio may be compared to
this? Scipio abstained from the young Gentlewoman which was presented unto him
in Spain: Alexander from Darius his daughter. But it was very easy for either
of them so to do: as well because they were in the fury of War, and the
soundes of Drums and Trumpets: as for that those women were of a strange
Nation, and enemies unto them, and never before that time seen of any of the^,
much less desired. Whereas this young prince, who even bathing as it were in
bliss, living at his ease and pleasure, in the flower of his youth, and in
the heat of his amourous flames, had a young Gentlewoman of a rare beauty, not
of strange Nation, or any otherwise to be hated, but extremely beloved, in his
hands, and voluntarily yielded, and committed unto him by her own mother: and
yet not only tempered himself and refrained to defile her chaste and honest
body, but also bestowed liberally her dowry upon her, to the end that an
other might enjoy her, and be her housebande, whom she had chosen to love and
like of: did without all question far excede all human courtesy, in so
Noble and so virtuous an act. Whereby he made apparaunt, that although he were
pricked forward, with the sharp spurs of Love, and his sensual appetite,
yet was he of that highness of courage, and of that constancy of mind, that
he was able not only to co^quer himself, but also to subue the forces of Love,
whereunto both mortal^ men's valor does commonly yield, and the very
power of the Gods themselves (if we shall believe the Fables of the ancient
writers) has showed it self often times inferior.

And thus this honest Damsel Lucilla, by the means of her Chastity, the
virtue and excellency whereof, did win and Master the heart of that young
Prince, much more then the perfection of her bodily beauty had done before,
obtained the thing she most desired and ioyed in, which was to have Nicander
to her housebande. With whom she lived ever after in great contentment and
happiness: still nourishyng with kind and loving demeanor each to other,
that feruente affection, which from their first acquaintance, had taken full
possession of both their liberties.

FINIS.
Of Fineo and Fiamma.
The Argument of the iiij. History.
The hard adventures of Fineo, with his beloved Fiamma, who after sondrie
conflictes of Fortune, were in the end sold as slaves to the King of Tunise,
who seeing their perfect love, caused them to be Married, and after honoring
them with sondrie presents, sent them home to Sauona, whereby their Parents
and friends, they were joyfully received.

IN Genoua, one of the fairest and most famous Citees in Italy, there was
sometime a young gentlewoman of excellent beauty, called Fiamma, that was in
love with a young Gentleman of Gauona (a City Subject unto the State of
Genoua, and distaunte from thence about thirty miles) whose name was Fineo,
and their Love being mutual, and tendyng to no other end, then to be linked
and joined together by Marriage, they would not long have stayed, to bring
their honest desires to a good end and conclusion, had not the Father of the
Gentlewoman refused his consent, and showed himself contrary to this their
love and good will. For he mislikyng with the match, either for that he
purposed to place her better, or because he would not have her Married to any
man, that should carry her out of Genoua, did often times chide and reprehende
his Daughter, for castyng her affection upon that young Gentleman, that was a
stranger unto them, and in effect but a subject, though he were both of
blood and richesse equal unto them.

But for all that the father could do, or any other of her friends, the fire
which love had kindled in this young couples breasts, slaked no whit at all,
but still increased, both hopyng in the end, to win her friends good will,
and attain the fruits of their desired love. This young Damsel had to her
brother a stout and valiant young gentleman, who being offended greatly that
Fineo should continue his love toward his sister, and follow the pursuit of
that, which he knew well enough, her fre^des were unwilling to yield unto: had
caused him to be spoken unto, and to be warned that he should desist, and leave
to solicit her: but he for all that ceased not, but continued his suite:
wherefore this brother of hers determined, to make him leave of, by force and
dint of Sword. For although there were at that time a very straight law in
the city, that no man should were his sword, and pain of death appointted
for him, that should hurt any man with any weapon: yet both these Gentlemen
wear their swords, for that they both had charge of soldiers, that lay
then in garrison for defense of the City.

And having one day met Fineo in the streate alone, and himself being very
well accompanied with other gentlemen he began to give him evil language: and
being a gentleman of great courage, and though he were a stranger there,
(...) being able to endure to be injured in words, said to him boldly and
roundly again, that if they two were alone, he durst not use those speeches
unto him, for he would well give him to understand, that he was no man to take
wrong at his hands, and that time and occasion would serve one day (he
doubted not to make him know, that he had offended one that would bear no
Coals. Whereupon his adversary having drawn forth his Sword, whilst he
was yet speaking, ran feercely upon him, thinkyng to have stricken him: But
Fineo also a very lusty gentleman and quick of eye, and nimble of hand,
drew out his sword, and not only warded the blow of his enemy, but also
hurt him, though but lightly in the hand. Forthwith they that were with the
young gentlewomans brother, environed him, and took him prisoner, and delivered
him into the hands of the Magistrate, or cheef officer of the City. And the
penalty being such, as is before mentioned, for hurtyng of any man within the
City, and especially a ge^tleman, Fineo was condemned to lose his hedde.

Nevertheless, he being very well freinded, and supported by many principal
gentlemen of the City, they labored so much for him, that they obtained,
that he should not be behedded: but that his penalty should be converted unto
an other punishment, very little better if it were no worse. For having bound
him fast hand and foot, they laid him in a small Boat, and in very stormy
weather, set him in the maine sea, and there left him to the rule and
government of Fortune, and to the disposition of God, and mercy of the waves
and winds. The boat was a long while beaten and tossed, by the rage and fury
of the Seas, and poor Fineo under diverse and sondrie storms and shapes, had
before his eyes a thousand times the presence of Death. Yet in that fearful
and mortal peril, he ceased not to call upon the name of his dear Fiamma,
and in that extreamitie and imminent danger, did he yet in manner glorify
himself, and think himself happy, that he should end his life for the love
of his Lady.

Whiles he was thus tossed and tormented, still lookyng for none other but
present death. the Tempest began to cease, and the storm and rage of Seas to
be assuaged. When lo he discovered a Fregate of Moors that went a roauyng,
and were then (...) gone abroad, to spy whether the Storm which was then
past, had not happily prepared for them, some occasion of gain and booty.
These Moors had no sooner discovered this little boat, thus fleetyng at all
adventures, but hoping to find therein some prey for their prfiote, they made
toward it: And having at the boordyng thereof, found Fineo bound hand and
foot, and perceiving by his countenance and apparel, that he was no very
base person, they untied him, and set him in their Fregate as a slave to
row, until such time as they should determine further what to do with him:
who although that servitude and captivity, were grievous unto him, yet
considering with himself, that it was better for him to be in the power of men,
though they were Infidells, then in the power of Seas and Winds: he comforted
himself, that yet if he lived, he might still hope throngh the goodness of
God, one day to be so hapie, as to enjoy his Ldie and Love: he framed himself
to bear with pacie^t mind, that heavy yoke of his captivity.

Fiamma having understood the unfortunate accident happened to her Lover,
beleeuyng certainly that he was dedde, and that she should never see him
again. Wherefore she her self resoluyng, that she would no longer live, gave
her self to devise what kind of death she were best to choose, and in doubt
thereof she passed some few days, dissemblyng still in the house her sorrow
and greef, with a merry and cheerful countenance, as though she had clean
forgotten, and not once remembered her Lover Fineo. But in the end, after long
debatyng with her self, she resolved to dye the same kind of death, and to make
that end, which she imagined Fineo had done.

There was an other Gentleman of the City, who was no less enamoured of this
Gentlewoman, then Fineo was: who supposing that now since she saw there was no
remedy for her, to recover her lover, whom both she and all the City,
accoumpted certainly to be dedde: he might perchance by suit obtain her good
will, and so procure her to be his wife, with the consent of her friends. And
therefore not long after the mischaunce of Fineo, he caused her father to be
dealt withal for the bestowyng of his daughter upon him: and the Father being
willing enough to agree thereunto, and having questioned with his daughter
thereupon, and findyng her to give sober and obedient answer with few words,
presupposing that she was willing to do as he would have her, made promise of
her unto this young Gentleman, and agreed upon the dowry, and all other
circumstaunces necessary, for the coupling of two such persons together.

The night that went before the day appoincted for their Marriage, Fiamma
calling unto her a Moore, that was slave in her fathers house, and had the
keepyng of a small Boat of the Gentleman's, wherein when he list to disport
himself, he was wont to take the air upon the sea, in time of fair weather,
and to go to their houses of pleasure, whereof that coast is very plentiful,
and them of exceadyng beauty. Which Moore had lived so many years in that
thraldom, that he was now become so old, as she thought, she needed not to
fear any force or violence at his hands, she began to persuade him, to put
on a desire to deliver himself out of Captivity, so as he might live the rest
of his years in liberty, and at his ease: whereunto findyng him ready and
willing, if the means or occasion were offered him: she gave him in hand a good
round sum of money, which she had laid together, and made him promise to
carry her into the Sea in the Boat, whereof he had the custody, and
afterward to do, that whatsoever it were, that she should command him.

This wicked and faithless Moore, seeing himself not only to purchase his
liberty, but also make so great again of ready money, that he was not like
at any time after, to live in want or poverty, was only thankful in his
mind toward the young Gentlewoman, but straight way began to purpose and to
devise, to make a greater gain of her own person, by carriyng her unto the
king of Tunise, and sellyng of her unto him at a very high prise. And with
this entention, the mischeeuous knave assured her, that he would do in all
points, as she would have him. Wherefore, when all the rest of the house were
in their first fleape, the Damsel with this wretched Moore, went out of her
fathers house, and gather into the Boat, and the weather being very fair, the
knave began to row, and make sail along the coaste toward Ligorno, from
which by break of the day, they were not very far. When this young
gentlewoman, saw that she was now so far from home, that she needed not to
fear, to be driven back again to Genoua, she willed the Moore to row to y^
shore, and to land himself, and then to shoue of the Boat again: for that her
determination was so to dye, swallowed up with the waves of the sea, as she
supposed her Fineo to have been. But the wicked knave, who had a father fetch
in his head, and thoughts far differed from the Gentlewomans, made her
believe that they were yet nere unto Genoua, and advised her to be content,
that they might go somewhat farther, to the end that her father if he sent
after them, might not overtake them.

Nevertheless, she having often times urged him to do as she erste bad him,
and he still protracted the time, and shiftyng her of with one tale or an
other: she began to suspect his drift. The Morning therefore being well spent,
she made as though she would have looked over the Boat side, into the Water,
or have washed her hands in the Sea, and on the sudden would have cast her
self over boarde. But the crafty Moore suspectyng her intent, caught hold of
her about the middle, and not only held her from throwing her self into the
Sea, but also bound her fast hand and foot, and whereas she of her courtesy,
had both set him at liberty, and liberally bestowed good store of wealth
upon him, he as a treacherous Infidel, bereued her of her liberty, making
her an unfortunate Slave under his disposition, and being moved with a greedy
covetous mind, thought that too little which she had given him, and therefore
determined (as is before said) to sell her person, and to increase his goods
by that means.

The desolate Damsel, when she saw her self so used by that villain, full of
woe and grief, ceased not to rebuke the vilde Caitiue, that little regarded
her speeches, the breach of his Faith and promise, and blamyng her self for
trustyng of him: and then repented when it was too late, that she had not
obeyed her Father, and followed the advice of her friends, she began to
curse her Destiny, and her cruel Fortune, and to cry out upon the Heavens,
that had made her become the vnfortunatest young woman, that ever loved man.

And whilst she was thus lamentyng her hard hap, and the Moore as fast as
he could with his Owres, labouryng to speed his voyage: A little Foiste or
Galley of Moors, that went prollyng up and down the Coaste, having espied
the small Boat, drew nere unto it, and boorded it. And having found this
young Gentlewoman being bound therein, they would have taken her away: but
the old knave offering to resist them, and to keep her out of their hands,
they took her away from him perforce, and wounding him very sore. And asked of
her in their language, from whence she came, and what she was: but she not
understanding them, could make them no answer, but only with tears and
weepyng, make them to understand, that she was a woeful and unfortunate
damsel. But the old Moore feelyng himself wounded to death, before he died
told them, both of what place and Parentage she was, and laid before them
by plain reason, how great a booty they might accoumpte they had made that
Morning, if they did carry her unto the king of Tunise (as he had thought to
have done) and sell her unto him. He being dedde, they dispoiled him, and took
from him all that, which Fiamma had given, and so he having thought by
treachery, and breakyng of his faith, to make great gain, lost both his
life, and all that which he had gotten, of the unadvised and evil counseled
young Gentlewoman. And having placed her in their Foiste, and comforted her as
well as they could, they took their way straight toward Tunise.

It fortuned that the other Fregate of Moors, that had found and taken Fineo
(as is already said before) met with this other. Foiste or Gallie, wherein
Fiamma was, and assaulted it, and having fought together a good while) for that
the other resisted, and defended them selves stoutely) in fine, the Fregate
wherein Fineo was) who in the encounter, and during the fight, had showed
great valor among the rest) overcame the other, and took from them all that
they had: so that Fiamma and Fineo were both now together, in the compass of
one small vessel. And although in that extreamitie of both their evil
fortunes, it was a great comfort for these two Lovers to see one the other,
and that both longed and desired extremely, to embrace each other, and to tell
the one to the other their accidents, and unfortunate adventures.
Nevertheless Fineo made signs to Fiamma, that in nowise she should take
knowledge, or acquaintance of him, and accordyngly she dissembled and made no
show, but as one had never seen him.

Fineo for the valor and courage, which he had showed in the battle, was
delivered of his chains, and much made of among the Moors, until such time
as they had conducted both him and her (as they did very shortly after) unto
the king of Tunise. Who having seen and considered Fineo, and understood by
the Pirates, that his comely personage was accompanied with great valor,
brought him, and took him to his service, in good place nere his own person.
And being moved with the beauty of the young Gentlewoman, bargained for her
likewise, for a great sum of money, and caused her to be put in the Cube,
which is a place where he keeps his Concubines (as the Turk does his in
his Serraqlio) among a great many of other women, and esteemed her very
much, for that the Rouers (who had learned of those other that they overcame)
all that which the old Moore had declared unto them, of her calling and
condition, did assure him that she was a Gentlewoman, borne of a noble Family
in Genoua.

Fineo by his service and discrite behavior, became in short time very dear
unto the king, so that in less then the space of one whole year, the king of
special trust, gave him the charge of the gate of the Cube, which office the
kings of Tunise are never wont to give, but unto such as are in singular
favor about them: In the which Fineo to his great contentmente, had the
commodity daiely to see his Fiamma, and she had no less comfort and
satsfaction, to behold and look upon him, which opportunity they enjoyed,
and handeled so discritely, that they never gave any cause of suspicion to any
person, of their fervent good will and affection.

The manner or custom of the King, was to cause his Concubines to come unto
him, and to lie with them by order as they had been bought, or come to his
hands: By reason of which custom, for that there were very many bought
before the coming thither of Fiamma, there was already a whole year and
half, well nigh paste after her sale, and yet her turn was not come to be
called for. But remainyng now but three others, to be brought unto the king
before her. Fineo considering to his intolerable greef, that she was ere it
were long, to be likewise called for, began to be tormented with incredible
passion, and an guishe of mind: and his woe increased ten thousand fold, by
fear and imagination which he conceived, that she being above all the kings
Concubines far the fairest, when he had once enjoyed her, he would take her
to be one of his wives, which fear did no whit less tormente and afflicte
Fiamma, then it did her Lover.

Whilst both these young Lovers lived in this sort, there chanced to arrive
at Tunise a Ship of Sauona, with certain Merchants of that City: who seeing
Fineo there, and knowing him, were wonderfully amcruailed findyng him alive,
for that he had been lamented at Sauona, of all his friends for dedde. Fineo
likewise knowing those Merchants, and having authority and means to
pleasure them in the Court, welcomed them, and made much of them in friendly
sort: and demanding of the state and welfare of his father, and brother and
other friends, they certified him that they were all well, and that when they
should understand that he was alive, and in so good a case, they would be
very joyful, and think them selves happy, if they might hope to see him
once come again, as they doubted not but one day he would and might.

These Merchants having dispatched their business departed thence, and by
them Fineo wrote letters to his Father, and to his brother, certifiyng them of
his being at Tunise, and how that Fiamma was with him, and that he desired to
deliver himself (...) of bondage, and her with him: Which thing he thought he
might easily bring to pass, if his brother would come thither, and withal
described unto them a plot, which he had cast for the execution of his intent
and desire.

They being returned safe unto Sauona, delivered the letters unto the father
and brother of Fineo, who with the rest of of his friends, and in effect all
the whole City, were very glad that his Fortune had not been altogether so
froward toward him, as they had supposed.

And his brother according to his instructions, prepared a very pretty
Fregate, very well appoincted and furnished with Marchaundize, among which
there were many trifles, and things of price meet for Ladies and Gentlewomen.
And being arrived therewith a a Tunise, Fineo brought them unto the King, whom
they presented with some things of small price, which were very grateful,
and acceptable unto him, and among other speeches they said, that they had
aborde many pretty things for Dames and Ladiee, which thing the king
understanding, commanded Fineo that the cheifest of them might be brought into
the Cube, to show such things as they had unto his Concubines: by which
occasion he gatte that opportunity which he looked for, to confer and deal
more privately with them without suspicion, and to give the better order, for
the accomplishement of as much as he had devised.

Fineo and his brother therefore being come into the Cube showed forth among
those women, such wares as they had brought, to please their fancies, and gave
unto them all, some one trifle or an other, as a gentle present to the first,
and the brother of Fineo presented Fiamma among the rest, with a very fair
Purse, richly embrodered with Gold and Pearl, in the which there was
enclosed a letter, written by Fineo, by the conrentes whereof, she might
understand at large, all that which he did wish, and would have her to do,
to make their escape together, and to ridd themselves out of that thraldom and
captivity. As Soon as the two brethren had done that they came for, and were
departed, Fiamm by their manner gatheryng, that the gift of that Purse,
contained some Mystery, withdrewe her self into a secret place, and having
opened it, she found therein the letter, which when she had read, she thanked
Almighty God, that of his goodness had showed her the way, to deliver her
self out of Captivity, and from becommyng dishonestly the Concubine of an
Infidel king.

And when this appointed day, for the performyng of their purpose was come:
Fiamma in the night when all was silent, and others slept, came to a window
barred with Iron, where Fineo and his brother were attendyng for her: Who with
certain instruments, which they had brought for that purpose, brake and
wrested the Grate of the window, and taking her away with them, they got her
into their Barque, and hoissed sail, and directed their course with a merry
Wind, toward the coaste of Italy, which served them very fair all that
night long, and the most part of the next day. In the morning Fiamma being
missed, and Fineo likewise, the king (was advertised of their escape) who
perceiuyng the Merchants to be gone also, rested assured that it was a set
match made, for the stealyng Fiamma away. And being full of rage and
despite toward them all, caused certain Galleis and other light vessels
to be armed in all haste, and to be sent after the^, giuyng straight charge and
Commission to his Captains, that either they should bring Fineo and the
Damsel, with the chief of the Merchants alive unto him, because he would
cause them all three to be buried alive: or that they could not get them
alive, they should bring their three heddes, for that he would have them be set
over the Cube, for an example and a terror to all others.

But before those Galleis and other vessels, could be in a readiness to
depart: Fortune not having yet her fill of persecutyng and afflictyng these
two poor Lovers, caused a contrary wind, with an extreme storm and
tempest to arise, by force whereof, the vessel wherein they were, was not
without great danger, driven back again to Tunise, with so much greef and
sorrow of all them that were in it, as they may imagine, that know the
cruelty and barbarousnesse of that people. But in the beginning of the storm,
the brother of Fineo dispairyng of his life, as he that was assured, either to
be drouned by rage of the wind and seas, or else to die in torment, if he
returned into the hands of those Infidelles, gat himself into his Cockboate,
and therein hazarded his life: and after much ado, and a thousand perilles
of present death, recovered the coaste of Italy at the last, and returned
home to Sauona full of woe with heavy tidings, declaryng unto his father, that
either the Fregate would be lost, or else driven back again to Tunise, where
he was well assured, that both his brother, and the young Damsel his Lover,
should be murdered in most cruel manner.

At which doleful news, the father, as if he had seen his son lie dedde
before him, began to weep and lament, complaining of his hard Destiny, that
caused him to live so long, or reserved him to see those cruel and bitter
days.

Fineo seeing himself brought to so hard an exigent, for that their vessel was
now driven back nere unto Tunise, and knowing that he should feel the smarte
of his fault, and the kings anger in sharpest manner and sort: being
determined to live no longer, and to prevent the cruelty of the king drew out
his sword, and would there with have stricken him self to death. But Fiamam
catchyng him by the arm: Alas Fenio (quoth she) what shall become of me if you
be dead? Shall I remain behind to endure the cruel torments, that I know
this Infidel has prepared for me? Yet rather since that death must needs
deliver us of our misfortunes, before you execut upon your self this your
determination, ride me out of the world, and deliver me from the pains,
which already I feel in my imaginacion, wherewith I assure my self they will
bring me to a shameful death. And with these words offering her breast unto
him, she requested him to strike her with his Sword. But Fineo bad her be of
good comfort, for your beauty (my Fiamma said he) being so singular as it
is, I know will save you, and therefore you need not fear, and I alone
should be the man that they would plague, and torment to death for us both,
and therefore (my dear) suffer me to dye before, and content thy self to live,
and vouchsafe sometime to remember thy unfortunate Fineo when he is dedde.

Whilst they were thus talkyng and debatyng, which should first dye, the
people which the King had sent out to apprehende them, came and boorden their
Fregate, and took them both, whom they bound in Chains, and brought on
land to the presence of the king. Who as soon as he beheld the beauty of
Fiamma, felt his former wrath and cruelty intended to relente, and in much
milder manner, then the two Captives hoped or looked for, he said unto her:
tell me what moved you, I pray you fair Damsel to run away, and fly from
me, at whose hands you had no cause to look for any other entreatie, then
loving and freendly? Fiamma who in that year and a half, that she had been in
the Cube, had learned the language indifferently well: made answer unto him.
That no cause or meaning to fly from him, but her earnest desire to enjoy
Fineo, whom she had loved, and chosen for her housband many years before, had
forced her to do that which she had done: And herewith she told him, the
beginning of their acquaintance and love, and how many perilles and dangers
they had run through, still hopyng one day, to come unto that happy hour,
wherein their troubles should have an end, and that they might be honestly
united, and enjoy one an other: And finally, castyng her self down at his
feet, with abundance of tears, she besought him with all humility to
pardone her, if she had offended him, and withal to forgive Fineo since that
long and faithful love, had made them to procure the accomplishement of their
desires.

The tears of Fiamma, and the only name of Love were of such force and
virtue, in the heart of the king, though he were barbarous, and cruel of
Nature, that the Ire and hatered, which he had conceived against them before,
was then converted and changed into pity, and compassion of their
misfortunes: and where before he had appointed a cruel death to be their
punishementes, he now determined to overcome with his courtesy, the
frowardness of their perverse Fortune and to make them, after so many
perilles and dangers contented and happy, and to see an end at last of
their miseries by making them to enjoy their long hoped for desires.
Wherefore, having caused the^ to be both forthwith unbound, he took from his
own finger, a marvelous fair and precious Rubie, and giuyng it unto Fineo,
he said unto him: since your Fortune has been such, that after so many
strange adventures, and through such dangers, you are fallen into my hands:
I for my part will not be he, that will extinguishe, or quench the flames of
so fervent and constaunt Love, or unloose or dissolve the bands, wherewith
your hearts be bound and knitt together. And therefore Fineo, I do not only
pardon you both, but also I will have thee, before thou depart hence, to
wedde this Damsel with this Ring, and to cake her for thy wife, and that she
henceforthe enjoy thee for ever as her housebande. It is not to be demanded,
whether the two Lovers, (who looked for none other of the kings courtesies
then death) were glad to hear him use those speeches, yea or no. But both
being fallen on their knees, and in humblest manner, having yielded their
thanks unto his Majesty. Fineo in his presence Wedded Fiamma, and took her
for his wife, to the unspeakable joy and contentation, of both their hearts
and minds. And the king to honor their Marriage, caused a sumptuous feast to
be prepared, with no less charge and abundance of all things, then if he
had Married a Daughter of his own, to some great Lord, or cheef manne of
that Country.

And after certain days, the two young Married Lovers, being desirous to
return into their own Country, he gave them very rich and costly
presents, and sent them honorably accompanied home to Sauona: Whose
arrival was no less marvelous, then joyful to the Father and Brother of
Fineo, and to all the City, they having been assuredly esteemed, and
accoumpted as dedde. Afterward they sent to Genoua to Fiammas Father and
Brother, certifiyng of all that had happened, who then perswadyng themselves,
that God and Nature had created those two young folk, to be matched and joined
together in Wedlock, were well contented with that, which they saw was Gods
will should be. And being gone both to Sauona, the Father embraced and
accepted Fineo for his Son in Law, and the Brother for his Brother in law.
And the two young Lovers lived ever after, in great happiness and felicity:
giuyng by this success of their hard Fortune, an assured argument, and a
notable example, whereby we may learn, that though froward Fortune do for a
while, cross and molest the desires, and travails of men, yet in the end
she can not let, but that of necessity those things must come to pass,
which GOD by his Divine providence, wherewith he rules the whole world, has
appoincted shall take effect.

FINIS.
Of two Brethren and their wives.
The Argument of the fifth History.
Two brothers making choice of their wives, the one choose for beauty, the
other for riches, it happened unto them after they were married, the one of
their wives proved to be of light disposition, the other a common scolde, in
what manner they lived with their housbandes, and how in the end the first
became to live orderly and well, but the other could be brought by no devise,
to any reason or good manner.

GEntlewomen, before I will proceade any farther in this History, I must
desire you to arm your selves with patience in readyng hereof, that if you
find any thing that might breed offense to your modeste minds, take it in
this sort, that I have written it only to make you merry, and not to set
you a snarryng or grudgyng against me, for although I mean to present you with
a Chapter of Knauerie, yet it shall be passable, and such as you may very
well permit, and the matter that I mind to write, is upon this question,
whither a man were better to be married to a wise Harlot, or to a foolish
ouerthwarte and brauiyng woman, this question I know will seem very doubtful
unto some, and yet in my opinion very easy to be answered, and to speak my
mind without dissimulation of both those evils, I think the first is least,
and therefore is to be chosen: and herein I could allege for my better
proof, an example of the ancient Romans, who in all their gouernmentes were
most wise and politic, emongst whom the infirmity of the first was borne
withal, because it proceeded of the frailty of the flesh, but the courage of
the second was ever condemned, for that it did abound from a wicked and
mischeuous mind. And in common reason, it is not less noisome for a man, to
live accompanied with a wife, who although she will some time fly out, can so
wisely, dissemble with her housbande, that he shall never so much as suspecte
her, whereby he shall receive no coffeehouse in his mind, then to be
bedfellowe with Xantippa a common scold, who daiely and hourly will be
checking, taunting, and railing at him, in such sort, that he shall think
himself most blessed and happy, when he is farthest from her company, but for
your better confirmation, I have set forth this History of two brethren, the
one of them married to a wenche, that could so cunningly behave her self
toward him, that he had thought she had believed there had been no other God
but himself, and yet by your leave, she would take reason when it was proffered
her, but what of that: the heart never greeues, what the eyes see not. The
other was married to a Dame, that from her nauill douneward was more chaste and
continent, but otherwise of her tongue such a devil of Hell, that the poor man
her housbande could never enjoy merry day nor hour, although he devised many
a pretty remedy, as by the readyng of the process of this tale you shall
better perceive, which follows in this sort.

There was sometime remaining in a famous City two brethren, the eldest
(according to the custom of the place) enjoyed his fathers goods and
possessions after his death, whereby he was well able to live, the youngest had
neither lands nor livings, saving that his Father had trained him up in
learning, whereby he was able to govern himself, in all manner of companies
where soever he became. These two brethren being weary of their single lives,
disposed themselves to marriage: The eldest being of himself well able to live,
sought a wife only for her beauty, without any other respect either to her
conditions or riches, and as the proverb is (he that seeks shall find) so in
the end he lighted on a Gentlewoman, called by the name of Mistres Doritie,
whose beauty in deed was very excellent, and there withal has a passing
ready wit, Marie her trainyng up had not been after the best, nor worst
manner, but as a man might say, after the common sort: this gentlewoman he
Married, who could so well handle him with kissynges, cullynges, and other
amarous exercises, that her housband thought himself, the most fortunate man
that lived, to light on such a wife, although she cunningly armed his head
with horns, as after you shall hear.

The second brother left (as you have heard) without maintenance or living,
sought for a wife only to releue his want, and fortuned to hit of a widow in
deed with great wealth, but in conditions so overthwart, and so spiteful of
her tongue, that the poor man had not been Married fully out a month, but he
more then a thousand times, cursed the Priest that married him, the Sexten that
opened the Church door when he went to be married, yea, and his own unhappy
legs that had carried his body to be yoked to so great a mischeef. But
because I do mind more orderly to tell you the manners of these two
Gentlewomen: I will first begin with Mistres Doritie, whose housbande after
they had been a while married, fortuned to fall sick, and then according to
that Country manner, a Doctor of Physic was presently sent for, who coming
many times to visit his pacient, began to behold and contemplate the lively
beauty of this gentlewoman, and lent her many rolling look, and secret
countenaunces, in such sort that Mistres Doritie being well practiced in the
Art of Love, and seeing Master Doctor to be a man as sufficient, to content a
Gentlewoman in her Chamber that was whole, as to minister Medicines to those
that were sick, did not only requite him again with look for look, but she
yielded him a large usury, and paid him more then forty in the hundred:
Master Doctor who was likewise skilful enough, could well perceive whereto
those looks did tend: Upon a time being alone in her company, he said unto
her as follows.

Mistres Doritie, if the experience which I have learned in Phisickes art,
might crave credit, and make my tale to be the better believed, assure your
self then that I mind to say nothing, but that that shall be to your own
behoof, and the reason that makes me to enter into this discourse, is the
pity that I take to see so proper a gentlewoman as your self, should be so
deceived in a housbande, who although you shall find him both honest, gentle,
and loving, yea, and peradventure may content you with such rightes, as
appertain to the Marriage bed, yet assure your self he shall never be able
to get you with child, considering your Natures and complexions be so far
different the one from the other, whereby you are like for ever to remain
without issue, and one of the greatest comfortes that may happen unto us in
this world, is to see our selves as it were regenerate and borne a new in our
children, and barrenness in the ancient time, has been accounted not only
infamous, but also most hateful amongst women, in so much that Sara gave her
own Handmaide to her housband, because she could not her self conceive a
child: but I would wish women more wit then to follow Saras example. God
defend their should be so foolish to give their Maidens to their Housbandes,
I would wish them rath^^ them selves to take their men: it has been ever
holden for the greater wisdom, rather to take then to give, and sure they
shall find it more for their own profits, that if their housebands want be
such, that he is not able to get a child, to take help of some other, that
may supply his imperfections, but I trust I shall not need to use many
persuasions, considering that every wise woman will think, that I have reason
on my side: Thus Mistres Doritie, you have heard the sum of my tale,
protestyng, that if my service may any ways stand you in stead, I am as
ready to obey, as he over whom you have power to command.

Mistres Doritie, who all this while had well pondered his words, knew very
well how to whett Master Doctor on, and the more to set his teeth on edge,
answered him thus: I perceive Master Doctor you are something pleasantly
disposed, and hereafter when I shall find my housbandes infirmity to be such
as you have said, I mean to send for you, desiryng you, that you would not
be out of the way, to help me when I have need.

The Doctor knew not well how to understand these words, whether they were
merrily spoken, or otherwise in disdain of his former talk, answered thus.
Alas Mistres Doritie, pardon me if my words seem any thing offensive unto
you, assuryng you that in this mean space, that I have made my recourse to
your housbande, (whose health by the sufferance of God, I have now well
restored) am my self fallen into a Fever so extreme, as neither Galen,
Hypocrates, Auicen, Plinij, nor any other that ever gave rules of Physic,
could yet prescribe a Medicine for the malladie, or diet to suppress the
humor that feeds it: I shall not need to use long circumstaunce in the
matter, knowing your wisdom to be such, that you can well conceive the
sum of all my greef, it is your beauty that is like to breed my bane, and
has already driven me into the greatest depth of danger, unless some
plaintes of pity may prevail, to yield remorse to him, that vows himself to
do you service during life.

Mistres Doritie seeing the matter sorted out as she looked for, could tell well
enough how to handle master Doctor, and to make him the more eger, she delaied
him of with doubtful speeches, but yet fed him still with such entising and
pleasant countenaunces, that ministered great hope of comfort to his desease,
she answered thus.

And could you then find in your heart (Master Doctor) to deceive your very
friend of his dear and loving life, how can you offer him so manifest an
injury, to whom you are so lately linckt in so great a league of freendship,
as is between my housband and your self, I can not think master Doctor, that
it is good will that has caused you to move this suit unto me, but rather to
see how I were disposed, or peradventure you use these words for exercise
sake, knowing the fashion of you men to be such, as by praisyng of our
beauty, you think to bring us into a fools paradize, y^ we will give credit
straight way, that you love us so soon as you shall but tell us the tale: but
for my part (Master Doctor) although I want wit to encounter you with words,
so likewise I want will to believe any thing that you have said, to be otherwise
the^ words of course.

These speeches did engender such a number of swetee and sour alterations in
Master Doctor, that for his life he wiste not how to understand them: one
while they were like to drive him to despair: an other while they somethyng
quieted him with hope, but in the end determining to follow what he had
begone, he said.

Sweet Mistres, most humbly I desire you to account of me, not according to my
deserts, which as yet are none at al, but according to the dutiful service,
which hereafter I vow faithfully to do unto you, and for the better
testimony of my words which (as you say) seem to be of such ordinary course,
I desire no other credit may be given them, then shall be agreeable to my
deeds, when it shall please you to command: but alas for the injury which
you speak of, that I should offer to your housband, who in deed I make
account to be my very freende, what is he I pray you, that is able to
prescribe laws to love? And as love is without law, so is it without respect,
either of freende or foe, father or brother, rich or poor, mighty or weak,
virtuous or vicious: the examples are so many and general, that I should but
waste the time to repeat the^. But (Mistres Doritie) I protest the very cause
that makes me to move this matter unto you, is for no ill will that I bear to
your housband, but for the good will I bear to your sweet self, you may use
your housbande as your housbande, and me as your freende, glad to stand at
reuersion, when your houseband may take his fill of the banquet, and be glutted
with more then enough: farther, if you make so great account of your
housbandes good likyng as you say, what wives be ever better beloved, or more
made of by their housbandes, then those that have discretion to help their
friends when they need. But what sottishe opinion is this, which so many does
hold, that they think it so great an injury for a man, to seek the wife of
his freende, when he is attached by love, whose arrest, neither Gods nor men
have bin ever able to resist. But I pray you (Mistres Doritie) if I might ask
you this question, would you not think your good will better bestowed upon your
housbandes freende then his foe, if you love your housbande, I am sure you will
say I have reason, what should I longer trouble you then with circumstances: I
know you are wise, and now I desire you for the good will that you bear to
your housebande, to pity me his freende, whom I trust you will restore with
one drop of mercy, and the rather for your housbands sake.

How think you Gentlewoman, be not these gentle persuasions to be used by a
Doctor, Marie he was no Doctor of Deuinitie, and therefore you need not
follow his doctrine, unless you list your selves, but this pitiful
Gentlewoman, seeing Master Doctor at such desperate points, for fear of
damning of her own soul, that so dear a friend to her housbande as Master
Doctor was, should perish and be so wilfully cast away through her default,
she received him for her friend, and so I pray God give them joy.

But it fortuned afterward, this Gentlewoman to light into the company of a
Lawyer, who perceiving this Dame to be of such excellent beauty, joining
himself some thing nere her, he said: Gentlewoman, although I have no skill in
the art of Paintyng, yet assure your self, your form and passing beauty, is
so surely engraven and fixed in my mind, that although your self were absent,
I could draw your perfect cou^terfecte, saving that I think all the
Apothecaries in this City, were not able to furnishe me with colors, to make
the perfect distaine of the beauty in your face.

Mistres Doritie knowing whereto these speeches pretended, answered: In deed
sir, it should seem you would prove a passing Painter, that can so cunnyngly
Painte forth with words, that which I know is too far unworthy of so
excellent a florishe, as you would give it. Mistres (quod the Lawier) if I have
committed any offense, in these words which I have spoken, it is in that I
have taken upon me to praise your beauty, and not able to give it such due
commendations, as I see it does deserve, the sight whereof does so captiuate
my affections, and has so creepled all my senses, that it has caused me in
manner to forgette my self, no marvel then though my tongue does fail, and is
not able to express the perfection of you, unto whom with vow of continual
service, I subject my life, living, and liberty, if it please you to accept of
it.

This Gentlewoman, that had yet but one friend to trust upon, besides her
housbande, began to think that store was no sore, and therefore determined
not to forsake his friendly offer, but first she demanded of him of his
faculty, and what trade of life he used, to which he answered, that he was a
Gentleman appertaining to the Law. It may well be so (quod she) for I
perceive by your experience, that this is not the first Plea that you have
framed. And yet believe me (quod the Lawyer) I was never brought before to
plead at Beauties bar, but since my hap is such, I humbly hold up my
hands, desiryng to be tried by you courtesy and mine own Ioyaltie,
contenting my self to abide such dome and judgment, as it shall please you to
appoinct, being the cheef and Sovereign Judge your self, she repliyng, said:
Seeing you have constituted me to give Sentence at my pleasure, it is not the
office of a good Iusticer, to be parciall in his own cause, and therefore this
is the hope you shall look for at my hands, that if hereafter in your deeds,
I shall see as plain proof of perfect good will, as your words by pretense
importe likelihood of earnest Love, you shall find me ready to render such
recompense, as shall fall out to your own contentation and likyng. This
comfortable answer, very well pleased him, and within a very little space
after, he so handeled the matter, that he had entered his action in her Common
place. Thus what between Master Doctor on the one side, who was still
ministryng of Physic unto her, so long as there were any Drugges remainyng in
his Storehouse, and the Lawyer on the other side, who sufficiently enstructed
her with his Law: they used such hau^t unto this Gentlewomans company, that
the one began to grow suspicious on the other, and each of them desirous to
have her several to himself, began in the end to enuaigh the one against
the other: the Doctor against the Lawier, and the Lawier against the Doctor,
and to tell her to her face what they suspected, the one against the other. But
Mistres Doritie being very angry with them both, that would so narrowly
look into her doings, did think it had been sufficient for reasonable men,
that she had received them into her favor, and as often as it had pleased them
to come, she welcomed them as themselves did desire, and what can a man desire
any more, then to drink so often as he shall be a thirst? But with fair
speeches she contented them both for a time: but she thought in the end, to
find a remedy for that mischief.

And thus it fell out, that a Soldier, who was lately returned from the
wars, I guess about the same time, that King Henry the fifth was returned,
from the winnyng of Agincourt feelde: this Soldier I say, brauyng it out
about the streates of the City (as commonly the custom of Soldiers is, to
spend more in a month, then they get in a year (as he roomed to and fro, and
fortuned to epsy this blasing star lookyng out at a window, was suddenly
stricken into a great maze, to se^ ^his Lamp of light, then ever he had been in
the feelde, to see the Ensigns of his enemies, and was so far euercharged
with her love: that but for fear to have been marked by the passers by, he
would have stood still gazyng and lookyng upon her: but learning in the end,
that she was the Mistres of the house, he began to devise how he might make her
understand the feruencie of his Love, on which he determined to write unto
her: But then he knew not how to begin his Letter, because Soldiers are
very seldom accustomed to endite, especially any of these loving lines: And to
speak unto her, he was likewise to learn how to use his terms, neither
wiste he how to come into her presence, but you shall see Fortune favored him:
For in an Euenyng as he passed through the streate, she was sittyng alone in
her door to take the air, and coming unto her, not knowing for his life how
to begin his tale: In the end, Mistres (quod he) I pray you is your housbande
within? No surely sir (quod she) he is abroad in the Town, but I know not
where: And I would gladly have spoken with him (quod the Soldier) if he had
bin within: Believe me sir he is not within (quod she) but if it please you to
leave your arrande with me, at his coming home I will show him your mind. In
faith Mistres (quod the soldiour) my arrande is not great, I would but have
craved his help in chusyng me a wife, because I perceive he has some
experience in the faculty, or else I think he could never have chosen so well
for himself. If your arrande be no other then this (quod Mistres Doritie) you
may at your own leisure come and do it your self, and as for my housbandes
experience that you speak of, although peradventure it be not fittyng to your
fancy, yet I am well assured that he has made his choice of such a one, as
he himself very well likes. I believe it well (quod the Soldier) and if
without offense I might speak it, I swear so God help me, I like his choice
so well, that I would think my self more then a thousand times happy, if I
might be his half, or if my unworthiness deserved not so great a p^^^on, I
would crave no more then your self would willingly bestow on me, accordingly
as you should see me able to deserve it. Why sir (quod Mistres Doritie) I do
not understand whereunto your speeches does tend, neither what part you
would have me to give you, when I have already bestowed of my housbande, both
my hand, my heart, my mind, and good will. Alas Gentlewoman (quod the
Soldier) these be none of them that I would crave, there is yet an overplus
which you have not yet spoken of, which if you please to bestow of a
Soldier, I should think my self the happiest man alive, whose love and good
likyng toward you is such, that I trust in time to come, your self will judge
me worthy, for my well deseruyng zeal, to have deserved hire. Soldiers are
seldom seen (quod Mistres Doritie) to march under the banner of Venus, but
what so ever you be, do you think to overthrow my virtues, with the assault
of your wanton persuasions, or would you make me believe that you love me as
you say, when you have no more respect to the hurt of my soul. Gentlewoman
(quod the Soldier) I am not able to encounter you with words, because it
has not been my profession, nor trainyng up, but if you doubt of my love and
good likyng: Please it you to make trial, command any thing that your self
shall think requisite, which if I do not perform to the uttermost, then
esteem my love in deed to be but feined, and where you think that I go
about to seek the prejudice or hurt of your soul, believe me I never meant
it.

Mistres Doritie, who had been well acquainted before with many suitors, had
never been apposed with such a rough hewn fellow, that was so blu^t and
plain, as well in his gesture, as in his terms: Began to think with her self,
that he might well be a Soldier, for she knew that they had little skill in
the courting of Gentlewomen, yet she perceived by his countenance, the
vehemency of his love he bare unto her, and perceiving his plainness, she
began to think him more fitter for her diet, then either Master Doctor, or
Master Lawier, that could not be contented the one with the other, when she
gave them both so much as they could crave, and therefore thinkyng with her
self, that to loose any longer time were but a poinct of folly, taking the
Soldier by the hand, she led him up into a Chamber, where other speeches
were passed between them in secret, which I could never yet understand, and
what they did farther when they were by themselves, gentlewomen I pray guess
you, but this I must advertise you of, that before they came forth of the
Chamber again, the Soldier had pleased Mistres Doritie so well, that both
Master Doctor, and Master Lawier, were put quite out of conceit, fo that
from that time forwards when they came of their visitation, the Gentlewoman
was not well at case, or she had company with her, or she was not at home, that
they could no more speak with her: which turned them both into a wonderful
agony. The Doctor had thought she had forsaken him for the love of the Lawier:
The Lawier he thought as much by the Doctor, that in the end not knowing
otherwise how to spit out their venime against her, they devised each of them
a letter, which they sent her. The first of these letters delivered unto her,
came from the Doctor, which letter he left vnpointed of purpose, because that
in the readyng of it, it might be poincted two ways, and made to seem either
to her praise or dispraise, but Mistres Doritie her self in the readyng of it,
poincted it as I have set it down, and follows in this sort.

And who would have thought mistres Doritie, that for the loving
aduertisementes given you by your friend, you could so lightly have shaken him
of, if I burdened you with any thing that might seem grievous unto you, think
it was Love that led me unto it, for that I protest inwardly in my mind, I
never did esteem you otherwise then for as honest a gentlewoman as lines this
day in Bridewell. I have heard say some have been scourged more upon evil
will, then for any deserts whereof they might justly be accused, so if it be
my hap to suffer undeserved penance, I must impute it to my own misfortune,
but yet contrary to my expectation, considering how I have ever taken you to
be given in your coditions to practice unseemly, filthy, and detestable
things: I know you have ever abhorred to live chastely, decently, and orderly:
you have ever been trained up to be wanton, proud, and incontinent: you never
took delight in that was good, honest, or conmendable: you wholly gave your
self to lewdness, lust, and Lechery: you were an open enemy to virtue: a
friend to vice. What should I say, I do but waste the time in the setting of
you forth, and therefore will leave you like as I found you.

This Letter brought Mistres Doritie into such a fury when she had perused
it, that she swear by no Beggars she would be so revenged upon the Doctor, that
she would make him a spectacle to all the Physicians in the world, how they
should abuse an honest gentlewoman while they lived. And in the midst of her
Melancholy, her dearest freende the Soldier happened to come in, whom she
made partaker of all her secrets, showing him the Letter which Master Doctor
had sent her: and as they were deuisyng how to use reuengement, a Messenger was
knockyng at the door, to deliver a letter from the Lawyer, the tenure whereof
follows in this manner,

May this be the reward of my true and faithful Love, which so firmly I
have borne thee? Or is this the delight of thy daliaunce, which so many times
thou haste used with me? So carelessly to shake me of, as though I had committed
some notable abuse, when in deed I have loved thee a great deal more, then I
perceive thou art worthy of. Oh feminine flattery. O fained faunyng. O
counterfect courtesy. O deep dissimulation: But what hope is otherwise to be
looked for in these Kites of Cressides kind. Or what constancy may any man
think to find in a woman? No no, if a man may generally speak of their
sex, you shall never find them but counterfect in their courtesy, fained in
their friendship, dissembling in their deeds, and in all their actions most
dangerous, for men to deal withal? For if she have a fair face, it is ever
matched with a cruel heart, their heavenly looks with hellishe thoughts:
their modest countenaunces, with merciless minds: they have wit, but it is
in wiles: if they love, it is too vehement: when they hate, it is to the death.
But good God, with how many fopperies are they accustomed to feed fools, I
mean such as be Louemakers and Suitors unto them, whom they delaie with as
many devises, as they be in number that seeks to serve them. Some they lure
with looks: some they practice with promises: some they feed with flattery:
some they delay with deliance: some they wind in with wiles: some they keep
with kisses: some they diet with dissimulation. One must wear her Glove, an
other must wear her Garter, an other must wear her Colors: an other shall
wear the spoil of as much as she can get from all the rest by cousonage, and
yet to see how dainty these darlinges, will seem to those that be not
acquainted with their customs, were able to dashe a young man out of
countenance: I warrant you, they can make it more nice then wise: more coie
then comely, more fine then honest. And to whom do they make the matter most
dangerous, but to the^ that deserves best to be rewarded: For where they see
a man that is drouned in affection toward them, over him they will triumph,
and can tell how to ride the fool without a snaffle: one while they will
cross him with froward language, then again comfort him with some fained
look. Now she drives him into desperation with frounyng face, by and by she
baits him again with banquettes of uncertain hope, such is their evil
nature (as I say) that they will show them selves most squemishe and dainty,
to him that loves them most entirely, and him that seeks them least
dishonestly, him they reward with their coldest courtesy. For better proof,
let a man seek to win one of these tender pieces, that goes for a maid,
honestly, and in the way of Marriage, and I warrant you she will make the
matter more coye and nice to him that means good earnest, then to an other
that comes but to try and prove them. And what signs of shamefastness will
they seem to make, when a man does but touch them: fainyng them selves to be
too young, when (in deed) if they once past the age of fifteen years (if they
were not a feared of breeding of bugges in their belly) by their good wills
they would never be without the company of a man. Thus to conclude, their
nature is openly to scorn all men, be their loves never so honest, and
secretly to refuse no man be his lust never so leude. Full aptly did Solomon in
his Proverbs compare you to Wine, that can make us so dronken which your
devises, that notwithstanding we see the snares with our eyes, which you have
set to entangle us, we can not shun the bait, which we know will breed
our bane. Thus much Mistres Doritie, I have thought good to signify unto you,
whose discourtesie at this time has caused me so generally to enuaie against
your whole Sex, not otherwise mindyng to accuse your self perticularly,
knowing that if you should otherwise have used me then you have, you should
have degressed and swarued quite from your kind, and so I leave you.

Gentlewomen I beseech you forgive me my fault, in the publishyng this
infamous letter, I promise you I do but signify it according to the copy,
which this unhappy Lawier sent to Mistres Doritie, and when I had well
considered the blasphemy that he had used against your sex, I cut my pen
all to pieces, wherewith I did copy it out, and if it had not been for the
hurtyng of my self, I promise you I would have cut and mangled my own fingers,
wherewith I held the pen while I was writing of it: and trust me according to
my skill, I could well have found in my heart, to encounter him with an
answer in your defense, but then I was interrupted by an other as you shall
well perceive. For the Soldier, which you have heard spoken of, that was
remainyng with Mistres Doritie, when he had perused this Letter, was put into a
wonderful chafe, and in the midst of his fury, he uttered these words.

Ah most vilde and blasphemous beast, what art thou that with such
exclamations, go about to defame those, whom by all honest humanity and
manhood, we be willed specially to love, honor, and reverence, what art thou?
A man, a devil or a subtle Lawyer, yea surely, and so thou may well be,
and herein haste thou showed thy self no whit at all to degresse from thy
profession. For as at the first the Laws were constituted to minister Justice,
and to give every one his right, so now are they made by the practice of a
number of Petty foggers, the instruments of all iniquity and wrong. Even so
that worthy sex, which at the first were given unto man by the almighty God
himself, to be his cheifest comfort and consolation. See here the practice of a
wicked Caitife, who with his eloquence would persuade us, that they were our
greatest ruin and desolations: Ah wicked wretch that thou art, how think
thou to escape, thus to blow forth thy blasphemy, against those blessed
ones, whom God has perfited above all other creatures. For at their first
creation, they were made of the most best and purified metal of man, where
man him self was framed but of slime and dross: what reason then that being
at the first framed most pure and perfect creatures, but that they should
continue their first perfection to the end of the world. And like as at the
first they were made more excellent then man, where should we now seek for
grace, virtue, and goodness, but only in the feminine sex, according to
their singular creation.

I trust this is so evident that there is no man able to denaie it, and enough
to prove, that as women at the first were created most perfect, so they have
still remained the storehouse of all grace virtue and goodness, and that if
there be any thing found in us men that is worthy of commendation, we are
only to give thanks to women from whom we receive it, as being descended
from out their entrails: but with how great and manifold miseries, should we
men be daiely afflicted, were it not for the comfort we find at women's
hands, for besides that by their industry we be notified, made more clendly,
and kept sweet, who otherwise of our selves we should become to be most
filthy and loathsome creatures, so at all times and seasons they be so
necessary and convenient about us, that it were impossible for us to be
without their blessed companies. First, in our health they content us with
their familiarity, in our sickness they cherishe us, in our mirth they make
it more abound, in sorrow their company does beguile our pensive thoughts,
in pleasure they be our chief delights, in pain their presence breeds
comfort our grief, in wealth what greater treasure then to enjoy our beloved,
in want what greater wealth then a loving and faithful wife, in peace we labor
still to get their likyng, in wars they make us show our selves more
valiant: but how is it possible that women should behave themselves, but that
there are some will find fault with them: First, if she be familiare, we judge
her to be light, if she seem any thing strange in her co^uersatio^ ah we say
she is a dangerous Dame* if merry, we thin^ her to be naught, if sad, we
say she is more grave then honest, if she be talkatiue, we say she is a
tatlying houswife, if silent, we say she is a sheep, if clendly in her
apparel, we say she is proud, if plain or homely, we say she is a doudie
or a slut, if they denaie us their courtesy when we sue unto them, we say
they be cruel Tigers, Bears, and Bugges, if they have compassion of us, we
discredit them amongst our companions.

But see here the cunnyng of a Caitife, that would wreast the words of Solomon
to the dispraise of women, because in his Proverbs he compares them to Wine,
but to interpret the words of Solomon by Solomon himself: in an other place
of the same Proverbs, he wills Wine should be given to comfort those that
be feeble and weak, now compare these places together and see what harm he
has done to women, and in my opinion, he could not more aptly have made a
comparison, for as Wine is a comfort to these that are feeble and weak, so
are women our greatest solace, both in sickness and in health: But if any will
say that Wine makes us dronken, and from reasonable men to become more brute
then beasts. I answer that the fault is not to be imputed to the Wine, but
to the beastliness of him that takes more then enough, for there is nothing
so precious for our behoofes, but by our own abuse we make it seem most vile
and loathsome: And thus granting master Lawier his comparison to be true, he
has done little hurt, saving he has showed himself a diligent scholar to his
Master the devil, who is father of all lies, in maintaining so manifest a lie
against such harmless creatures.

There were many other speeches pronounced by this Soldier in the behalf of
women, which I have forgot to recite. But I pray Gentlewomen how like you by
this Soldiour, do you not think him worthy a Sargantes fee for his answer:
in my opinion, you ought to love Soldiers the better for his sake.

But to return to Mistres Doritie, those two letters had so vexed her, that
there was nothing in her mind but how she ^^ght be revenged. Her freende the
Soldier promised for her sake, that he would so cudgill both Master Doctor,
and the Lawier, that they should not in one month after be able to lift their
arms to their heads, saving he wist not how to get them into a place
convenient, for that it was dangerous to deal with them in the open streates.
Mistres Doritie giving him twenty kisses for his courtesy, told him she would
devise to bring them into some place where he might work his will.

Presently after, Mistres Doritie sent for Master Doctor, whom she knew very
well how to handle, and in a mild manner she began greatly to blame him, that
being wise as she knew him to be, would so rashly judge of her, for that he
might well know that there was some great cause, that moved her to use him as
she had done, otherwise then he had coniectured: and thus with many other like
speeches, she so smothed the matter with Master Doctor, that she made him
believe her housbande had some suspicion in their familiarity, and that by his
commandment she had abstained his company for a time, the which (Master
Doctor quod she) I did for no evil will that I bear you, but for a time to
bleare my housebandes eyes, thinkyng in the end so to have handled the matter,
that we might have continued our accustomed freendship, without any manner of
suspicion: And then drawyng forth the letter, which the Doctor had sent her
(she said): But see Master Doctor your good opinion conceived in me, lo,
here the reward that I have for my courtesy bestowed of you, thus to rail and
rage against me, as though I were the most notable strumpet in a Country.

The Doctor knowing in what form he had wright the letter, and desirous again
to renew his late acquaintance, answered, that he never writ letter unto
her, whereby he had given any occasion for her to take any greef. No have?
(quoth Mistress Doritie) read you then here your own lines, taking him the
letter, which the Doctor as I told you before, had left vnpointed, and
therefore in the readyng, he pointed it after this manner.

And who would have thought (Mistress Doritie) that for the loving
aduertisementes given you by your freende, you could so lightly have shaken
him of, if I burdeined you with any thing, that might seem grievous unto you,
think it was Love that led me unto it, for that I protested inwardly in my
mind, I did never esteem you otherwise, then for as honest a Gentlewoman as
lives at this day. In Bridewell I have heard say, some have been scourged
more upon evil will, then for any deserts whereof they might justly be
accused: So if it be my hap to suffer undeserved penance, I must impute it
to mine own misfortune, but yet contrary to my expectation, considering how I
have ever taken you to be given in your conditions: to practice unseemly,
filthy, and detestable things, I know you have ever abhored: To live
chastely, decently, and orderly, you have ever been trained up: to be wanton,
proud, and incontinente, you never took delight: In that was good, honest, or
commendable, you wholly gave your self: to lewdness, lust, and Lechery, you
were an open enemy, to virtue a freende, to vice: what should I say, I do
but waste the time in setting you forth, and therefore will leave you like as
I found you.

I pray you Mistress Doritie (quoth the Doctor) where is this railyng and
raging you speak of, I trust I have written nothing that might discontent you.
Mistress Doritie perceiuyng the Knauerie of the Doctor, and seeing the matter
fell out so fit for her purpose: First giuyng him a freendly busse she said.
Alas my dear freende, I confess I have trespassed, in misconsteryng of your
lines: But forgive me I pray you, and now have compassion of her, whose love
toward you is such, that it is impossible for me to live, without your good
likyng, and seeing that my housebandes Jealousy is so much, that you can have
no longer access to my house, but it must needs come to his ear, by such
spy and watch as he has laid, neither my self can go abroad to any place,
but I am dogged, and followed by such as he has appoincted: But now if your
love be but half so much toward me, as I trust I have deserved, and
hereafter do mean to requite. I have already devised a mean, how for ever I
might enjoy my desired friend, without either let or molestation of any one,
seem he never so much to be offended at the matter.

The Doctor the gladdest man in the world to hear these news, answered: And
what is it then that should make you stagger, or doubt of the fredndship of
your loving Doctor, no not if thereby I should hazard the loss, both of life
and goods.

Alas (quoth Mistress Doritie) GOD defend I should work you so great a
prejudice, and I beseech you use no more such speeches unto me, that I should
go about to put you into any such peril, the remembrance whereof is more
grievous unto me, then if I had felt the force of a thousand deaths, and now
behold my determination, and what I have devised: You have a house not far
hence standing in the feeldes, which you keep for your solace, and recreation
in the time of Summer: to this house I have devised, how you may so secretly
convey me, that you may there keep at your pleasure to your own use, and to
my great contentation, where I may at pleasure enjoy him, more dearly
beloved unto me, then the balls of mine own eyes. And herewithall she gave
him an other Judas kiss, that the Doctor desired her of all friendship, not to
be long in her determination, for that he was ready to follow her direction,
when soever it would please her to command: yea, if it were presently he was
ready.

Mistress Doritie, who have driven the matter to that pass she looked for,
said: Naie Master Doctor, there rests yet an other thing, my housebandes
Jealousy (as I told you) is such, that there must be great circumspection
used, in the conueighyng of me away, and therefore give ear to that I have
devised: I have in my house a certain Male with stuff, that is left with me,
to be sent by the Carriers into the Country, whereof my housebande does
know very well, this stuff I will cause to be secretly taken forth, and to
be sent to the Carriers, trust up in some other thing, without any knowledge to
any, saving to my Maid, that shall work this feate her self, whose
trustiness I know to be such, as there is no suspicion to be had in the
matter, the which when she has done, she shall trusse up me in the same Male,
then see that you fail not to morrow in the Evening about eight of the clock,
disguised in a Porters weed, to come to my house to enquire for the same Male,
which you shall say, you will bear to the Carriers, my Maid who shall of
purpose, be ready to wait for your coming at the hour, shall make no bones
to deliver you this Male, and thus without either doubt or Jealousy of any one,
you may carry me into the feeldes, where for your better ease you may take
me forth, and disguising our selves we may walk together, to your house
aforesaied, where I may remain without any manner of suspicion, or knowledge
to any, so long as it shall please your self.

O most excellent devise (quoth the Doctor) I have this matter already at my
fingers ends, and I warraunte you, you shall see me play the Porter so
cunningly, that how many so ever I meet, there shall none of them be able to
suspect me: Thus with a feined kiss that she again bestdwed of him, for that
time they departed.

Mistress Doritie, in like manner sent for the Lawier, whom she handled in like
sort, as she had done the Doctor, making him believe, that her housebandes
Jealousy was such, as she durst no more come in his company: But of her self
she loved him so entirely, that she would hazard any thing for his sake, and
because he should the better believe it, to morrow (quoth she) in the after
noone, my housebande will be forth of the doors, wherefore I pray you fail
not about three of the Clock to come and visit me, when we shall have
laisure to disporte our selves, to our better contentation: Many like enticyng
words she used, which so persuaded the Lawier, then dreadyng no bad measure
at all, he promised her not to fail, but he would keep his hour: and thus
departed very joyful, that he had again recovered his Mistress. And the
next day, even as it had stroke three of the Clock, he was knockyng at the
door of this Gentlewoman, who lookyng for his coming, was ready to receive
him, and up they go together to a Chamber, which she had appoincted for the
purpose: where for a time she dalied him of with devises: And suddenly her
maid (according as her Mistress had given her instructions) came hastily to
the Chamber door, calling her Mistress, saying: that her Master was come in,
and had asked for her: Mistress Doritie, who was not to learn to play her
part, seemed to be stricken into a wonderful fear, alas? quoth she to the
Lawier) for the love of GOD keep your self secret for a time, that I may go
down and rid him away, if it be possible, and thus going her way down, she
shuttes the door after her.

The Lawier who was ready to beraie him self for fear, crepte under the
Bed, where she let him alone, the space of an hour, and then coming up
into the Chamber, and could not see him, she began to muse what was become of
him: he hearing one was come in at the Chamber door, began to pry out under
the Beds feet, and perceiuyng by the skirte of her goune who it was, with a
faint voice he said: Alas my dear what news, is your housebande gone? Ah my
loving freende (quoth she) I was never so hardly beset since I was borne: my
housebande i^ come home with three or four of his friends, which he met
withal in the City, and be come out of the Country of (...), to make merry
with him, and here they be appoincted this night to Suppe, and hither be come
to their beds, so long as they remain in the City, and this Chamber is
appointed for two of them to lie in, that for my life I know not what shifte
to make, nor how to conueigh you hence.

Alas (quoth the Lawier) then am I utterly undone, for the love of GOD, devise
some means tonueigh me out of the house, for I would not remain all night in
this perplexity, no not for all the gold in the world. Mistress Doritie
making a little pause, suddenly as though she had an invention, but even then
come into her hedde, she said.

I have this only remedy left, here is in the house a Male full of stuff,
which should this night be sent to the Carriers: my devise is therefore to
take forth the stuff, and lay it aside till sometime the next week, when I
will make shift to send the stuff away very well, and you shall be presently
packed up in this Male, which my Maid shall do while I am below with my
housebande and his friends, and so causing a Porter to be sent for, he shall
carry you to your Chamber, or to any other place, where it shall please your
self, so that my housebande seeing this Male go forth of doors, will think
it is the stuff, which he knows this night should be sent.

No better devise in the world (quoth the Lawier) and let the Porter conueigh
this Male to my Chamber, you know where, and deliver it to my man, as sent
from his M^ister, and will him to give him forty pence for his labor.

The matter thus determined, Mistress Doritie sent up her Maid with this
empty Male, wherein she trussed up the Lawier, and there she left him liyng
from five of the Clock, until it was past eight, and in the Summer season the
weather being very hot, the Lawier had like to have been smothered where he
lay: at the length according to poinctmente, comes master Doctor disguised
like a right porter, with a long gaberdine down to the calfe of his legs,
and he enquires for a Male that should go to the Carriers, yea a Marie (quoth
the Maid) if you please to come in, it is ready for you, the Doctor being a
good sturdie lubber, took up the Male very easily for fear of brusing the
Gentlewomans tender ribs, whom he had thought he had upon his back, and thus
forth of doors he goes, taking the next way toward his lodgyng.

Mistress Doritie with her beloved Soldier (whom she had made privy to her
devise) stood where she might se Master Doctor in his Porters weed, going
with his carriage, whereat when they had awhile sported them selves, the
Soldier followed master Doctor an easy pace, but only to keep the sight of
him, and the Doctor he took his way through the streates with a maine pace,
till he had recovered the feeldes, where looking about him, to see what
company was stirryng saw no body nere him but the Soldier, whom he did not
know, and then crossyng the way from the common paths, he came to the side
of a Bancke, and being weary (as he was not to be blamed, considering the
knauishe burden that he had borne upon his back) he laiyng down the Male
tenderly upon the side of the Bancke) seeing no body but the Soldier, who
was but a little distaunce from him, said. Ah my sweet wenche, I can see no
creature stirryng in all the feeldes, but one man which is coming this way,
who so sone as he is paste, I will undo the Male.

The Lawier in the Male, when he felt the Porter lay him down, was in a good
hope, that he had been in his own chamber, but hearing by these speeches, that
he was in the feeldes, began to conjecture assuredly, that the Porter had
spoken those words to some woman that was in this company, with who^ he was
confederate, for the stealyng of such things as they should find in the
Male, and that when they should open the Male and find him there, they would
not stick to cut his throat for fear, least he should bewraie them, and for
the only spoil of such things as he had about him, that the Lawier was in
such a perplexity, that he wist not for his life what he might do: one while
he had thought to have cried out for help then he thought it would the sooner
bring him to his end, and as he continued thus in the midst of his muse, the
Soldier was come to the place, and speaking to the Doctor, he said: Porter it
seems thou haste been knauishlie laden, for I perceive thou art very hot, but
what have thou in the male, I pray thee, that thou art carriyng his way so
late in the Evening. Marie (quoth the doctor) I have ware there such as it is,
have thou ware knave (quoth the Soldier) is that a sufficient answer, what
ware is it, men's ware, or women's ware. Sir I know not (quoth the Porter) I
have but the cariyng of it to a gentleman's house that is here hard by, well
(quod the Soldier) undo your trusse, for I will se what wares you have there,
before you and I depart, why sir (quod the Porter) should I be so bold to
undo a gentleman's male, that is delivered me in trust to be carried, no sir you
shall pardon me, if you were my father, and herewithall he took the male upon
his back, and began to go his ways. But the Soldier knowing better what was
in the Male, then the Porter himself that carried it, and being provided for the
purpose with a good Cudgel, let drive half a dosen blows at the Male, as it
lay upon his back so surely, that the Lawier cries out, alas, alas, alas.
Why Porter (quoth the Soldier) have you quick wares in your Maleno marvel
you were so dainty in the showing of it.

Here withal the Doctor laid down his Male, and kneelyng down to the
Soldier, said. Ah sir for the love of God be content, and I will not let to
confess the whole truth unto you: I have a Gentlewoman in my Male, which I
have stolen from her housebande, and seeing you to be a gentleman but young in
years, and impossible but that you should love the company of a fair woman,
behold, I will deliver her unto you, to use at your pleasure, and when you
shall see time, to restore her unto me again, desiryng you sir of all
courtesy, to seek no other displeasure against us. You have said well (quod
the Soldier) but is she such a one as is to be liked, fair, fresh, and
young. Trust me sir (quod the Doctor) if she be not as fair, and well liking
as any Dame within the walls of this City, make me an example to all other,
how they shall dissemble with a Gentlemanne such as you are. Thou say well
(quod the Soldier) and now I think long till I have a sight of this Paragon,
which thou haste so praised unto me. You shall see her straight way (quod the
Doctor) and herewithall he began to vnlase the Male with great expedition,
which when he had unloosed at the one end, that he might come to the sight of
this Gentlewomans face (as he had thought) he said to the Soldier, see here
the sight which you so much desire, and pullyng the end of the Male open with
his hands, the Lawier thruste forth his hedde, and looked with such a
piteous countenance, as though he had been ready to be turned of the Ladder:
But the Doctor seeing a face to appear with a long Bearde, was in such a
maze, that he could not tell in the world what he might say. The Soldier who
had never more a do then to forbear laughter, to see how these two, the one
beheld the other: Said to the Doctor, and is this the fair Gentlewoman that
thou haste promised me, haste thou no body to mock but me, that with such
commendations thou give praise to a woman, whereby to set my teeth an edge,
and then in the end thus to delude me? But I will teach thee how to play the
knave again while thou live, and here withal he laid on with his Cudgel,
sparyng neither hedde, shoulders, arms, back, nor breast, and so be
bumbasted the Doctor, that for the space of a quarter of a year after, he was
not able to lift an Eurinall so hie as his hedde.

The Lawier who had nothing out of the Male but his hedde, seeing this fraie,
struggeled so much as he could, to have gotten forth, and to have run
away, while the Porter was a beatyng, but it would not be, his arms were so
surely laced down by his sides, that for his life he could not get them forth.

The Soldier, when he had thoroughly requited Master Doctors Knauerie, that
he had used against his beloved Mistress in his letter, left him, and began
to bend himself toward the Lawier: The Lawier seeing the Soldier coming,
had thought verily that he had been some good fellow that was walkyng there so
late, to have taken some prey, said: Oh sir, for the love of God spare my life,
and take my purse, to whom the Soldier answered: naie villain, my coming is
neither to take thy life nor thy purse, but to minister reuengemente for thy
large speeches, which like a discourteous wretch thou haste used against a
woman, and there with all laid upon him so long as he was able to fetch any
breath, and then calling the Porter unto him, he said: Let these words which
I mind to speak suffice for a warning to you both, if ever I may learn
that any of you hereafter this do use any misdemeanour toward any woman,
either by word or writing, assure your selves that although I have but dallied
with you at this time, I will devise some one mean or other to minister
revenge, that all such as you be, shall take an example by you. And thus I
leave you, going his way to his sweet heart, tellyng her the whole discourse
how he had spedde, by whom he was welcomed with a whole last of kisses, etc.

And now to return to those two that were left in the feeldes, as you have
heard: the Doctor taking good vewe of the Lawyer, knew him very well, but the
Doctor was so disguised in his Porters apparel, that the Lawyer did not know
him, but said unto him, a mischeef light of al such Porters, that when they
be put in trust with carriages into the City, will bring them into the
feeldes to such banquettes as these, Marie quod the Doctor a mischief take
all such burdens, that when a man has almost broken his back with bearing
them, and then shall receive such a recompense for his labor as I have done:
Villain (quod the Lawyer) why did thou not carry me to my chamber as thou
were willed when thou did receive me, I would I had carried thee to the
Gallows (quod the Doctor) so I had escaped this scouryng, but I perceive this
banquet was prepared for us both, and here withal with much ado he got of
the Porters coat, and making himself known to the Lawyer, each of them
conferred with the other, how cunningly they had been dealt withal, and did
think it not best for them any farther to deal in the matter, for fear of
farther mischief, but with much ado got them home, where the Lawyer kept his
bed very long after: But the Doctor took Sparmaceti, and such like things
that be good for a bruise, and recovered himself in a short space.

Now it fell out afterward that this Soldier, who lived in great credit
with Mistres Doritie (as he had well deserved) was employed in the Kings
wars against foreign fooes, with a great number of others, where he spent
his life in his Princes quarrel, and Mistres Doritie, sorrowyng a long time
the loss of so faithful a freende, seeing the diversity of men, that she had
made her choice amongst three, and had found but one honest, feared to fall
into any further infamy, contented herself to live orderly, and faithfully
with her housbande, all the rest of her life, and her housband who never
understood any of these actions, loved her dearly to his diyng day.

And now to say somethyng of the other brother and his wife, which as you have
heard was such a notable scold, that her housbande could never enjoy good
day, nor merry hour: She was such a devil of her tongue, and would so
crossebite him with such tauntes, and spightfull quippes, as if at any time he
had been merry in her company, she would tell him his mirthe proceeded rather
in the remembrance, of that she had brought him, then for any love that he had
to her self: if he were ^adde, it was for grief she was not dead, that he
might enjoy that she had. If he used to go abroad, then he had been spendyng
of that he never got himself. If he tarried at home, she would say it was
happy he had gotten such a wife, that was able to keep him so idely. If he
made any provision for good cheer, or to fare well in his house, she would bid
him spend that which he himself had brought. If he showed him self to be
sparyng, then she would not be pincht of that which was her own. Thus do
what he could, all that ever he did was taken in the worst part: And seeing
that by no manner of fair means he was able to reclaim her: in the end he
devised this way, himself with a trusty freende that he made of his
counsel, got and pinioned her arms so fast, that she was not able to undo
them, and then puttyng her into an old Peticoate, which he rent and tattered
in pieces of purpose, and shaking her heir loose about her eyes, tare her
Smock sleeves that her arms were all bare, and scratchyng them all over with a
Bramble that the blood followed, with a great chain about her leg, wherewith
he tied her in a dark house that was on his Backside, and then calling his
neighbors about her, he would seem with great sorrow to lament his wives
distress, tellyng them that she was suddenly become Lunatique, whereas by his
geasture he took so great grief, as though he would likewise have run madd
for company. But his wife (as he had attired her) seemed (in deed) not to be
well in her wits, but seeing her housbandes manners, showed her self in her
conditions to be a right Bedlem, she used no other words but Cursings and
Bannynges, criyng for the Plague and the Pestilence, and that the Devil would
tear her housbande in pieces: the company that were about her, they would
exhort her, good neighbor forget these idle speeches, which does so much
distemper you: and call upon God and he will surely help you. Call upon God for
help (quod the other) wherein should he help me, unless he would consume
this wretch with fire and brimstone, other help I have no need need of. Her
housbande, he desired his neighbors for Gods that they would help him to
pray for her, and thus altogether kneelyng in her presence, he began to say (
Miserere) which al they said after him, but this did so spite and vex her,
that she never gave over her railing, and ragyng against them all. But in the
end, her housband who by this shame had thought to have reclaimed her, made
her to become from evil to worse, and was glad himself in the end, clean to
leave, and to get him self from her into a strange Country, where he consumed
the rest of his life.

Thus to conclude, besides the matter that I mean to prove, Men may gather
example here, when they go a Wiuyng, not to choose for beauty without virtue:
nor for riches without good conditions. There be other examples if they be
well marked, worth the learning: both for men and women, which I leave to the
discretion of the reader.

FINIS.
Of Gonsales and his virtuous wife Agatha.
The Argument of the sixth History.
Gonsales, pretending to poison his verteous wife for the love of a Courtisane,
craved the help of Alonso a Scholar somethyng practiced in Physic, who in the
stead of poison gave him a powder, which did but bring her into a sound
sleep during certain hours, but Gonsales judging (in deed) that his wife
had been dead: caused her immediately to be buried: The Scholar again knowing
the operation of his Poulder, for the great love he bare to Agatha, went to
the Vault where she was entombed, about the hour that he know she should
awake. When after some speeches used between them, he carried her home to his
own house, where she remained for a space, in the mean time Gonsales being
married to his Courtisane, was by her accused to the Governor for the
poisonyng of his first wife, whereof being apprehended he confessed the fact,
and was therefore judged to dye, which being known to Agatha, she came to the
Judge, and clearyng her housbande of the crime, they lived together in perfect
peace and amity.

THere was sometime in the City of Civil in Spain, a Gentleman named
Gonsales, who though he were a man of years sufficient to be stayed, and to
give over the wa^ton pranckes of youthful folly. Yet was he by nature so
inclined to follow his lusts, and withal so variable and so unconstant, that
he suffered himself to be ruled wholly by his passions, and measured all his
doing rather by his delights and pleasures, the^ by sound discourse and rule
of reason. This Gentleman falling in love with a Gentlewoman of the same City,
whose name was Agatha, sought all the means he could to have her to wife. And
her friends although they were well enough informed of the disposition of
Gonsales, whereby they might have feared the entreatie of their kinswoman, for
that they knew him very rich, and her dowry not to be very great, they were
well content to bestow her upon him: and thought that they had in so doing
placed her very well. But before the first year after their Marriage was fully
expired, Gonsales followyng his wonted humor, and waxyng weary of love, grew
to desire change, giuyng thereby a notable example for women to learn how
little it is to their commodity or quiet, to match then^ise. (...) that be
rather rich then wise: and how much it were better for them to be married to
men, then to their goods.

For being come to soiourne in that Streate wherein he dwelt, a notable
Courtesane, who to the outward show was very fair, though inwardly she was
most foul, as she that under a goodly personage, did cover a wicked and
dangerous mind, corrupted with all vices (as for the most part al such women
done.) It was Gonsales chance to be one of the first that fell into those
snares, which she had set for such simple men's minds, as haunt after the
exterior appearance of those things, which their senses make them to delight
in, and not considering the danger whereunto they commit themselves, by
followyng of their disordinate appetites, do suffer them selves to be
entrapped by such leude Dames: Among which this (forsoothe) was one that was
of singular skill to captive men's minds, which by experience and by the
natural disposition of her mind, bent wholly to deceit and naughtiness: had
learned a thousand giles and arts, which way to allure men with the
pleasantness of her baits. Wherefore after he was once entangled with her
snares, he fell so far beyond all reason, and past al belief, to dote upon
this Strumpet that he could find no rest, nor no contentment, but so long as
he was with her. But she being as dissolute a Dame as any lived in the world,
and as greedy likewise of gain as ever any was of her profession, would not
content her self with Gonsales alone, but yielded unto as many as list to
enjoy her, if they came with their hands full, and spared for no cost to
reward her liberally. Which thing was unto him, that was so besotted on her,
so grievous and so intolerable, that nothing could be more.

There was at that same time, a Scholar in the City that studied in Physic:
with whom Gonsales had familiar acquaintance, and the Scholar thereby having
access and conversation in his house, began so fervently to be in love with
Agatha his wife, that he desired nothing so earnestly in the world as to
enjoy her, and to win her good will. Wherefore having (as I have said) free
access to her house, and to ^eclare his affection unto her without suspicion,
he ceased not (...) all the means he was able to devise, to solicit and to
procure her to yield unto his desire. With his endeavor and earnest suite,
although it were unto Agatha, noisome and displeasant, as she that was disposed
to keep her self honest: and that she could in that respect have been very
glad, that he would forbear to frequent her house. Yet knowing her housbande
to be a man of no very great substance, and but slenderly stuffed in the
hedpeece: and that he delighted greatly in the familiarity of the Scholar,
she forced her self to endure with patience, the importunate molestation,
which he still wearied her withal. Taking from him nevertheless all hope, to
obtain at any time any favor at her hands, and cuttyng him short from all
occasions, as much as she could, whereby he might have cause to molest her, or
to look for any thing to proceed from her, that were less then honest.

The Scholar perceiuyng that his own travail, to win her affection was but
labor lost, thought best to try if by the allurement or persuasion of any
other, he might happly move her to show her self more courteous, and favorable
unto him. Wherefore having found out an old Mother Elenour, a disciple of the
Spanishe Celestina, such a one as was most cunnyng and skillful in mollifiyng
of women's minds, to work them afterward to receive the impressions of their
lovers, he caused her to take acquaintance of Agatha, and by degrees (as
though she had been moved with pity and compassion of case) to declare unto
her the love which her housebande bare unto the Courtisan^: and to show her
how unworthy he was that she should be true unto him. And in the end passing
from one speech to an other, she said plainly unto her, that it was a great
folly, since her housband did take his pleasures abroad with other women, to
stand to his allowances, and to take the leauyng of his Strumpets, and
therewith to be content: and that, if she were in her case, and had a
housebande that would strike with the sword, she would undoubtedly requite him
and strike with the scabberde, so she counseled her to do likewise.

Agatha being a very discrete Gentlewoman, and loving her housbande as an
honest woman ought to do, said to her in answer of her talk, that she
would be right glad to see her housbande to be such a man as she wished him
to be, and as he ought to be. But that since she saw it would not be, and that
he could not frame him self thereto, she would not take from him or bar him
of that liberty, which either the custom of the corrupted world, or the
privilege that men had usurped unto themselves, had given unto them. And that
she would never for her part violate or break that faith which she had
given him, nor slack or neglect that care and regard of her honor, which all
women by kind and nature ought to have, as the thing that makes them to be
most commended throughout the world, let her housbande do what he list, and
like and love as many other women as pleased him. And that she thought her self
so much the rather bound so to do, because he did not in the rest misuse her
any way, or suffer her to want any thing that reasonably she could desire or
crave at his hands: and for that she had not brought him in effect any other
dowry worthy to be accounted of then her honesty. Wherefore she was fully
resolved never to vary from that constant resolution. And finally showing her
self somewhat moved and stirred with Choler, she told her that she maruailed
at her not a little (that being a woman of those years) that she should rather
reprehend and chide young folk, if she should see them so bent, then encourage
them to evil, and mused much she could find in her heart to give her such
counsel: which she assured her was so displeasant and so ungrateful, as if
from hence forth she durst presume to speak thereof any more, she would make
her understand perchance to her smarte, how ill she could away with such
pandarly practices.

This old Hag having had her head washed thus without soap, departed from
Agatha, and came unto the Scholar and told him in brief how ill she had
sped, and in what sort the honest Gentlewoman had closed her mouth, whereof
the scholar was very sorry: yet for all this, he thought he would not give over
his (...) imagining that there is no heart so hard or fiintie, but by long love,
by perseverance, prayer, and tears, may in the end be mollified and wrought
to be tender.

In this mean season, Gonsales still continuyng his old familiarity with the
Scholar, and having made him privy of the love he bare unto the Courtisane,
and what a grief it was unto him to see her enjoyed by any other then by
himself: one day among other talk between them of that matter, he said bnto
the Sholler, that it never grieved him so much to have a wife as it did then,
for that if he had bin unmarried he would have taken Aselgia (for so was the
Courtisane named) to be his wife, without whom he could find no rest nor
quiet in mind, and so long as every man has a share with him in her, he
accounted himself as il as if he had had no part in her at all. And thereto
said further, that assuredly if it were not for fear of the Law, he would
ease himself of that burden by riddyng of Agatha out of the world. Thereunto
replied the Scholar, saying that in deed it was a grievous thing for a
Gentleman to be combred with a wife, who^ he could not find in his heart to
love, and that in such a case, he that did seek the best way he could to
deliver himself of that yoke, was not altogether inexcusable, though the rigor
of Justice had appoincted severe punishementes, for such as violently should
attempt, or execute any such thing. But that men that were wise, could well
enough find out the means, which way to work their intentes, without
incurryng any danger of the Law for the matter. Which language in deed he
used unto him, but to feed his humor, and to see whereunto that talk in fine
would tend: And according to his desire before it was long. Gonsales having
used the like speeches, two or three times, and still findyng him to soothe
his saying, took one day a good heart unto him, and brake his mind unto the
Scholar at large, and in plain terms, to this effect.

Alonso (for that was the Scholars name) I do assure my self, and make full
accoumpt, that thou art my fast friend, as I am thine, and I doubt not but
that the freendship, which is between us, does make thee no less sorry then
my self, to see me grieve with this continual trouble of mind, wherein I
live, because I can not compass to take this woman, whom I love so dearly to
be my wife, and by that means come to have the full possession of her unto my
self, which is the thing I do desire above all other things in the world.
And for as much as I do persuade my self, that by thy means, and with the
help of thy profession, I may happ to find some remedy for my greef. I have
thought good to tell thee a conceit, which I have thought on oftentimes:
wherein I mean to use thee and thy assistaunce, for the better accomplishing
of my purpose in that behalf. Assuring my self that thou will not refuse, or
deny me any furtheraunce, that thy skill may aforde me, or shrink and draw
back, from the performyng of any friendly offer, whereby I may come by to
find some ease of mind, and be delivered of that intolerable tormente of
spirit, wherewith I am oppressed, for the love of this Aselgia, in whom I have
fixed and set all my joys and delights. Thou shalt therefore understand,
that I am determined as soon as I can possible, to rid my hands of Agatha my
wife and by one mean or other to cause her to dye: And I have been a good
while about the execution of this my intent, but because I could never yet
devise the best way to perform it, so that her death might not be laid
unto my charge. I have delaied it hitherto, and perforce, content to bear the
heavy burden of my grieved mind till now, which hence forward I am resolved
to bear no longer, if thou will according to my trust in thee, and as the
freendship which is between us does require, grant me thy furtheraunce and
helping hand. Wherefore, knowing that through thy long study in Physic thou
haste attained so great knowledge, that thou canste devise a number of
secrets, whereof any one might be sufficient to bring my purpose to effect. I
do require thee to fulfill my desire in that behalf, and to give me thy
help, to bring this my desire to pass: Which if thou do, I will
acknowledge my self so long as I shall live, to be so much bound unto thee,
that thou shall command me, and all that I have, in any occasion of thine, as
freely and as boldly, as thou may now any thing that is thine own.

The Scholar when he had heard Gonsales and his demand, stood still awhile,
as musing upon the request, and in the mean while discoursed with himself, how
by the occasion of his intent, and resolution of Gonsales, he might perhaps
find out a way, to come by the possession of Agatha, and to have her in his
hands, and at his devotion. But keepyng secret his thoughts and meaning, he
made him answer: That true it was, that he wanted not secret composissions,
to make folk die with poison, so as it could never be discerned by any
Physician, or other, whether the cause were violent, or no, but that for two
respects he thought it not good to yield unto his request. The one, for that
Physic and Physicians, were appointed in the world, not to bereue men of
their lives, but to preserve them, and to cure them of such diseases, as were
dangerous and perilous unto them: The other, because he did foresee, in what
ieoperdie he should put his own* life, whenever he should dispose himself to
work any such practice, considering how severely the laws have prescribed
punishments for such offenses. And that it might fall out, how warelie so
ever the thing were wrought, that by some seldom or unlooked for accident, the
matter might be discovered (as for the most part it seems, that God will
have it) in which case he were like to incur no less danger then Gonsales,
and both (assured) without remission to lose their lives. And that therefore,
he would not for the first respect, take upon him to do that, which was
contrary to his profession^ nor for the second, hazard his life to so
certain a danger, for so hateful a thing, as those practizes are to all the
world.

Gonsales very sorry to hear his denial, told him that the Laws and duties
of freendship, does dispense well enough with a man, though for his freende
he strain sometime his conscience. And therefore, he hoped that he would not
forsake him, in a cause that concern him so waightily as that did. And that
neither of those two respects (if they were well considered) ought to be able
to remove him from pleasuryng of his friend. For that now adays, as well were
they accounted and esteemed Physicians, that killed their Pacientes, as they
that did cure them: and because the thing being kept secret between them
two alone, he needs not to doubt, or fear any danger of his life by the
Law. For if it should by any mischaunce happen, that he should be imputed, or
burdened with poisoning of his wife, he assured him that he would never
whilst he had breathe, confess of whom he had the poison, but would rather
suffer his tongue to be pulled out of his hedde, or endure any torment that
might be devised.

The Scholar at the last seemyng to be won, by the earnestness of his
petition: Said, that upon that condition and promise, of not revealing him at
any time, he would be co^tente, rather to show himself friendly unto him,
then a true professor of his Science, or an exact regarder of his conscience:
and that he would do as he would have him.

And having left Gonsales very glad and joyful, for that his promise, he
went home, and made a certain composition of mixture of pouders, the virtue
whereof was such, that it would make them that took any quantity thereof, to
sleep so soundly, that they should for the space of certain hours seem unto
all men, to be stark dedde. And the next day he returned to Gonsales* and to
deliver it unto him, saying: Gonsales, you have caused me to do a thing, I
proteste I would not do it for my life: But since you may see thereby, that
I have regarded more your freendshippe, then my duty, or the consideration of
that, which is honest and lawful: I must require you eftsoon to remember
your promise, and that you will not declare to any creature living, that you
have had this poison of me.

Which thing Gonsales very constantly upon his oath, did promise him
again, and having taken the powder of him, asked him in what sort he was to
use it: And he told him, that if at Supper, he did cast it there upon her
meat, or into her brothe, she should die that night following, without either
pain or torment, or any grievous accidents, but go away even as though she
were sleep. That Euenyng at Supper time, Gonsales failed not to put the powder
into his wives potage, who having taken it, as soon as Supper was done, feelyng
her self very heavy and drousie, went to her Chamber, and gather to bed
(for she lay not with Gonsales, but when he list to call he, which had been
very seldom, since he did fall into love with the Strumpet) and within an
hour after, the operation of the powder took such force in her body, that
she lay as though she had been dead, and altogether senseless, Gonsales in
like sort when he saw his time went to his bed, and liyng all that night with
a troubled mind, thinkyng what would become of Agatha, and what success his
enterprise would take: the morning came upon him, before he could once close
his eyes, which being come he rose, not doubtyng but that he should assuredly
find his wife dedde, as Alonso had promised him. And as soon as he was up, he
went out of his house, and stayed but an hour abroad, and then he returned
home again, and asked his Maid, whether her Mistres were up or no. The Maiden
made him answer, that she was yet a sleep: And he making as though he had
meruailed at her long liyng in bed, demanded her how it happened that she
was so sluggishe that Morning, contrary to her custom, which was to rise
every Morning by break of the day, and had her go and wake her, for he would
have her to give him some thing, that lay under her Keys. The wenche
according to her Masters commandment, went to her Mistres bed side, and
having called her once or twice some what softelie, when she saw she waked
not, she laid her hand upon her, and giving her a shagge, she said withal,
Mistres awake, my Master calls for you. But she liyng still, and not awakyng
for all that the Maid took her by the arm, and began to shake her good and
hard: and she not understanding, neither aunswering, nor stirring hand or
foot. The Maid returned to her Master, and told him that for aught she
could do, she could not get her Mistres to awake. Gonsales hearing the Maid
to say so, was glad in his mind: But feinyng himself to be busied about
somewhat else, and that he regarded little her speech, he bid her go again,
and shake her till she did waken. The Maid did so, and rolled and tumbled her
in her bed, and all in vain: wherefore coming again unto her Master, she
said unto him, that undoubtedly she did believe, that her Mistres his wife
was dedde, for she had found her very cold, and rolled her up and down the
bed, and that yet she stirred not. What? dedde quod Gonsales, as if he had
been all agaste and amazed, and rising therewithal, he went to her beds
side, and called her, and shaked her, and wrong her by the fingers, and did all
that might be, as he thought, to se whither she were alive? But she not feeling
any thing that he did, lay still like a dedde body, or rather like a stone.

Wherefore, when he saw his purpose had taken so good effect, to dissemble the
matter, he began to cry out, and to lament, and to detest his cruel
Destiny, that had so soon bereued him of so kind, so honest, and so faithful
a wife: and having in the end discovered her body, and finding no spot or
mark, whereby any token or sign of poisonyng might be gathered, as one that
would not seem to omit any office of a loving husband, he sent for the
Physician to look upon her, who having used some such means, as he thought
meet to make her come to herself: finally, seeing her to remain immovable, and
without sense, concluded, that some sudden accident had taken her in the
night, whereof she had died, and for dedde he left her.

At which his resolution, though Gonsales were very glad yet to the outward
show, declaryng himself to be very sorry, and full of woe and heaviness, he
behaved him self in snche cunning sort, as he made all the world believe, that
he would not live long after her. And having called her friends, and lamented
with them her sudden death, and his misfortune: in fine, he caused her
Funeral to be very sumptuously and honorably prepared, and buried her in
a Vaute, which served for a Toumbe to all his ancestors, in a Church of a
Frierie, that stands without the City.

Alonso that was very well acquainted with the place, and had himself a house,
not very far from that Frierie, went his way that same Night unto his
said house, and when he saw the time to serve for his purpose, he gatte him
to the Vaute or Toumbe, wherein Agatha was laid, with one of these little
Lanterns, that they call blind Lanterns (because they turn them, and hide
their light when they list.) And because he was a young manne of very good
strength, and had brought with him instruments of Iron to open the Toumbe,
and lift up the stone that covered it, he gat it open, and having under propped
it surely: He went into the Vaute, and took the woman straight way in his
arms, mindyng to bring her out, and carry her away so a sleep as she was.
But the force and virtue of the powder, being finished and spent, as soon as he
moved her, she awaked out of her sleep, and seeing her self clad in that
sort, among rags and dedde bones, she began to tremble, and to cry: alas
where am I? Or who has brought me hither, wretch that I am? Marie that has
your cruel and unfaithful housebande, answered the Scholar: who having
poisoned you, to Marry a common Strumpet, has buried you here, whether I come
to try if by my skill I could revive you, and call back your soul by those
remedies, which I had devised unto your body again: Which if I could not
have done, as I intended, I was resolved to have died hereby you, and to have
laid my dedde body here by yours, to rest until the latter day, hopyng
that my Spirit should in the mean while have come and enjoyed yours, where
ever it had been. But since the Heavens have been so favorable unto me, as in
this extreme danger wherein you were, to grant such virtue unto the
remedies, which I have used toward you, as the which I have been able to
keep undissolved, your gentle Spirit with your fair body. I hope (my dear)
that you will henceforthe consider, what the affection of your wicked
housebande has been toward you, and how great good will, and by consideration
thereof, discern and resolve which of us two has best deserved to be
beloved of you.

Agatha findyng her self in that sort buried in deed, did easily believe the
truth which the Scholar told her, and to her self concluded, that her
housebande had showed himself in her behalf, a man of all other most cruel
and dis^^all. Wherefore tournyng her self toward the Scholar, she said unto him.

Alonso, I can not deny, but that my housebande has been to me, not only
unkind, but cruel also: nor I can not but confess, that you have declared
your self to be most loving and affectioned toward me: and of force I must
acknowledge my self beholding unto you, of no less then of my life, since
(alas) I se my self here among dedde bodies buried alive. But for as much,
although my housebande have broken his vow to me. I have not yet at any time
failed my faith to him. I do require you, that if you desire that I should
esteem this kind and loving office of yours, as it deserves to be esteemed, or
make account of this life, which you have given me, you will have due regard
and consideration of mine honesty, and that you will not by offering me any
villainy (which nevertheless I can not any way missedoubt, where I have
always found so much and so great courtesy) make this your courteous and
pitiful act to be less commendable, and praise worthy then it is. Which if
you do bridle your unlawful and sensual appetite and desire, will remain the
most virtuous and worthy of honor and fame, that ever courteous Gentleman
has do^n for a miserable woman, since the world began.

Alonso failed not with affectuall and manifest arguments to persuade her,
that her housebande had now no more right or title to her at all, and that
although he had, yet if she were wise, she should not commit her self unto his
courtesy again, since by this mortal token, he had given her a sufficient
testimony of his ranckor, and evil will toward her, whereby she might well
enough be assured not to escape, when soever she should resolve, to put her
self again into his hands: and that therefore she was not to make any
accoumpte of him, but to show her self thanckfull, for so great a benefit as
she had received, and to requite him so with her favor and courtesy, as he
might now in the end, attain to gather the fruit of his long and constaunt
good will, and of his travel sustained for the saffegarde of her life. And
with those words bendyng himself toward her, he would have taken a kiss of
her lips. But Agatha thrustyng him back, said unto him again. If my
housebande ( Alonso) have broken those bands, wherewith I was knitte unto him
by Matrimony, through his wicked and leude demeanor, yet have not I for my
part dissolved them, neither will I at any time, so long as I shall live. As
for committing my self unto his courtesy, or going any more into his hands,
therein I think it good to follow your advise: not that I would be unwilling
to live and dwell with him, if I might hope to find him better disposed: but
because I would be loathe to fall eftsoon into the like danger and grievous
peril. And as for requiting you, for this your commendable travail in my
behalf, I know not what better recompense I am able to give you, then to rest
bound unto you for ever, and to acknowledge my self beholding unto pour
courtesy for my life: which obligation if it may satisfy you, I will be as
glad and as content, as I may be in this miserable state wherein I am. But if
your meaning perchance be, that the loss of mine honesty, should be the
reward and hire for your pains, I do beseech you to depart hence out of this
tomb, and to leave me here enclosed, for I had rather die here thus buried
quick, through the ^rueltie of my housband, then through any such compassion
or pity to save my life, with the loss of mine honor and good name.

The Scholar by those words, perceived well enough the honest disposition of
Agarha, which he wondered at, considering that the terror of death it self was
not able once to move her from her faithfulness and constancy of mind. And
though it were grievous unto him to find her so steadfast, yet hopyng that by
time in the end he might overcome her chaste and honest purpose, answered:
that he could not but commend her for her disposition, though he deserved a
kinder recompense of his long and fervent love, and she a more loving and
faithful housband. But since she was so resolved, he would frame him self to
be content with what she would, and not crave of her any thing that she would
not willyngly grant him to have. And therewith helpyng her out of the
Sepulcher, he led her home unto his house, and left her there with an old
woman that kept his house, to whom he recomended her, and whose help he was
assured of, to dispose the good will of Agatha toward him, and the next
morning returned into the City.

Gonsales after a few days, seeming not to be able to live without a wife to
take care of his family, wedded that honest Dame Aselgia, and made her Mistres
of himself and all that he had. This his new Marriage so sone contrived, caused
the friends of Agatha to marvel not a little, and to misdoubt that the
sudden death of their kinsewoman, had not happened without some mystery.
Nevertheless, having no token nor evidence or proof, they held their peace.
But Gonsales having his desired purpose and living with his new wife, it
befell unto him (through Gods just Judgment with this his ioly Dame) as it
chanced to Agatha with him before. For Aselgia that was never wont to feed
with so spare a diet, as she that had never bin contented before without great
change, nor had not bin used to that kind of straigtnesse (which Gonsales
growing ielous of her, began to keep her in) but had always lived at
liberty, and with such licenciousnesse, as women of her profession are wont
to do, became in short space to show her self so precise unto him, and to
hate and abhor him in such extreme sort, that she could not abide to see,
or hear him spoken of. By occasion of which her demeanor toward him:
Gonsales to his grief began at last, to know and to discern what difference
there is between the honest and careful love of an honest wife, and the
dissemblyng of an arrant Strumpet. Wherefore one day among the rest,
complainyng of the little love which he perceived she bare him, and she
aunsweryng him thawartly. Gonsales falling into heat of Choler, said angerly
unto her: have I thou naughty pack poisoned Agatha for thy sake, that was the
kindest and the louingest wife that ever man had, and is this the reward I
have and the requital thou yeeldest me, to show thy self every day more
despightefull and crabbed then other? Aselgia having hard him and noted well
his words, took hold of them, and straight way thought that she had found
the way to rid her self of Gonsales: wherefore she reueiled his speeches unto
a Ribalde of hers, such a one as supplied her want of that which Gonsales alone
nor ten such as he were able to satisfy her withal, and induced him to
appeache him for that fact, assuryng her self that the Law would punish him
with no lnsse then death, and thereby she to remain at liberty to do what
she list again, as she had done before. This companion accused Gonsales upon
his own words unto the friends of Agatha, who having had half a suspicion
thereof before, went and accused him likewise before ye Judge, or head
Magistrate of the City. Whereupon Gonsales and his woman were both apprehended
and put to their examinations, to search out the truth: which Gonsales being
half convicted by the confession of the gentle peate his new wife, but chiefly
grieved with the worm of his own conscience, and to avoid the torment of
those terrors which he knew were prepared for him, confessed flatly,
affirmyng that he had poisoned her with a poison which he had kept of long
time before in his house, perfourmyng yet therein the promise which he had
made unto the Sholler. And upon his own confession, sentence was given against
him that he should loose his head.

Alonso, when he understood that Gonsaler was condemned to dye, was very glad
thereof, supposyng that he being once dead, Agatha (who all this while for any
thing that the old woman could say or allege unto her in the behalf of
Alonso, would never yield or consent to any one point wherein her honor might
have been touched or spotted) should remain at his discretion, and that she
would no longer refuse to grant him her good will when she should see her self
delivered of Gonsales. But the day being come wherein he was to be put to
execution, she having had inteligence of all that had passed, and knowing that
he was appointed to dye that day, determined with her self that she would in
that extremity deliver her disloyal housebande, and give him to understand
how little she had deserved to be so entreated by him as she had been.
Wherefore having gotten out of Alonso his house, she hied her unto the City as
fast as she could, and being before the Justice or Magistrate she said unto
him. Sir, Gonsales whom you have condemned and commanded to be put to death
this day, is wrongfully condemned: for it is not true that he has poisoned
his wife, but she is yet alive, and I am she. Therefore I beseech you give
order that execution may be stayed, since that your sentence is grounded upon
a false enformation and confession is unjust, and you may plainly discern by
me being here.

When the Governor heard Agatha speak in this sort, whom he had thought to
have been dead and buried, he was all amazed and half afraied to look upon
her, doubtyng that she was rather her spirit or Ghost, or some other in her
likeness then a lively woman in deed: for she was apparelled in a very plain
and black attire, and was very wanne and pale by reason of the affliction which
she had endured. First, for her own il fortune, and then for the mischaunce of
her housband.

In this mean while, the Sargantes and Officers had brought Gonsales before
the Justice or Magistrate, to the end that he (according to the custom of the
City) should give them commandment to lead him to the place of execution,
and there to fulfill his sentence upon him. But as soon as Agatha perceived
him, she ran unto him, and taking him about the neck and kissing him she
said. Alas my dear housebande, whereunto do I see you brought through your
own folly and disordinate appetite which blinded your judgment. Behold here
your Agatha alive and not dead: who even in that extremity is come to show
her self, that loving and faithful wife unto you, that she was ever.

The Justice or Governor seeing this strange accident, caused execution to be
stayed, and signified the whole case unto the Lord of the Country, who at
that time chanced to be at Sciuill: who wonderyng no less then the other at
the matter, caused both Gonsales and his wife to be brought before him, and
demanded of them how it had chanced that she having bin buried for dead was
now found alive. Gonsales, could say nothing but that for the love he bare
unto Aselgia he had poisoned his wife, and that he knew not how she was
revived again. But Agatha, declared how the Scholar with his skill had
delivered her from death, and restored her life unto her, but how or by what
means she could not tell.

The Lord having sent for Alonso, and demanded him of the truth, was
certified by him, how that in steed of poison he had given to Gonsales a
Powder to make her sleep: Affirmyng likewise that notwithstanding the long and
earnest pursuit, which he had made to obtain her love, and the cruelty and
injury which she saw her housebande had used toward her, to put her in that
danger and peril of her life, out of which he had delivered her, yet could
he never by any persuasion or entreatie win her to fulfill his desire, or
bring her to make breach of her faith and honesty. By which report the
Lord knew very well, that in an honest woman the regard and respect of her
honor and chastity, does far exceed any other passion, for any misery be
it never so great. And commendyng highly the love, and constancy of the woman
toward her housebande, and praisyng the policy of Alonso, he turned himself
unto Gonsales, and said unto him: Full evil have thou deserved to have so
good, and so verteous a Gentlewoman to thy wife, and in reason she ought now
rather to be Alonso his wife then thine: Neither were thou worthy of less
then that punishment, which the Law has condemned thee unto, though she be
yet alive, since thou, as much as in thee lay, have done, to bereue her of her
life. But I am content that her virtue and goodness, shall so much be
available unto thee, that thou shall have thy life spared unto thee for this
time: not for thy own sake, because thou deseruese it not, but for hers, and
not to give her that sorrow and grief, which I know she would feel, if
thou should dye in that sort. But I swear unto thee, that if ever I may
understand that thou do use her henceforth, otherwise then lovingly and
kindly, I will make thee to thy grievous pain prove how severely I can punish
such beastly and heinous factes, to the example of all others.

Gonsales imputyng his former offense, to want of wit and Judgment, made
promise unto the Lord, that he would always do as he had commanded him. And
accordyngly having forsaken clean that baggage Strumpet, that he had wedded:
He lived all the rest of his days in good love and peace with Agatha his wife,
whose chaste and constant mind, caused Alonso where before he loved her for her
excertor beauty, ever after to reverence her, and in manner to worshipp her as
a divine creature, for the excellency of her virtue. Resoluyng with himself
that a more constant faith and honest disposition could not be found in any
mortal woman.

FINIS.
Of Aramanthus. borne a Leper.
The Argument of the vij. History.
Armanthus son to Rodericke King of Tolosia, being borne a Leper, was sent by
his Father to the I Will of Candy for remedy, and by a Tempest at the Sea, the
Shipp was driven into Turkey, where she was cast away, and no man saved but
the child, which was taken up by a poor Fisherman, and fostered as his own
son, and afterward serving the Turk in his wars, showed himself so
politic, that the Turk by his only advise, incroched much upon the
Christians, and in fine, by his mean the City of Tolosia was taken, his
father put in prison, and how in the end he was known to be the son of
Rodericke.

I Shall not need by any long circumstaunce to describe, how many troubles,
tumultes, broils, Brabbles, Murders, Treasons, how kingdoms have been
disturbed? How many Countries laid waste? How many Cities have been sacked?
How many Tounes have been rased, and how many mischeefes have ever happened,
sithence the first creation of the world, until this present day, by that
monsterous vice Ambition. Considering that every History makes mention, every
Chronicle bears record, and every age, time, and season, have seen with
their eyes, and this our tale that follows shall some thing make more evident.

There was sometime remainyng in the famous City of Tolosia a worthy King,
whose name was Rodericke: who was likewise espoused to a most virtuous Queen
called Isabell, and truly a happy Court it might be called, which they
held, as well for the love that was between the King and Queen: as for the
virtue and clemency, wherewith both the one and the other were accompanied.

There was remainyng in the Court, the Duke of Ca^ia, who was the only brother
of Rodericke King of Tolosia: This Duke being a great deal more vicious then
his ^^ether was verteous, practiced no other thing, but how he might come by
the Kingdom of Tolosia: Knowing that there were no more between him and it
but the King, who loved him more dearly by a great deal then he deserved.
But it fell out the Queen Isabell was known to be with child, the Duke very
loathe that any other heirs should step in between him and home, devised to
poison the Queen, and so had thought to have done, by as many as the King
should have taken to wife (if at any time they proved to be with child) but by
the providence of God, this poison took no great effect in the Queen, saving
that when she was delivered of a son, the child was found to be in a notable
Leprosy, and the King having intelligence of an excellent Physician, (but
especially for the curyng of that desease) was remainyng in the I Will of Candy,
prepared a Shipp presently to send the child, which by the extreamitie of a
contrary wind, was driven into Turkey, and the Ship cast away upon the
maine, and all the men drouned exceptyng the child, which being in a Cradle
was carried to the Shore as it lay. Where a Fisherman found it, with such
sumptuous furnitures about it, with a very rich Jewel hangyng about the
neck. He took it up in his arms, and carriyng it home, with Bathes and
homely Oyntmentes of his own devising, within a very little space, the child
was restored to perfect health, whom he called Aramanthus, and brought him up
as his own Soonne, the child knowing no other in deed, but that the
Fisherman had been his father, and as Aramanthus grew in years, so he proved
of a very comely personage, but of a most excellent and perfect wit,
although he had no other trainyng up, but used to go to the Sea with his
father a fishyng.

Now it fell out that the Turk was leauiyng a mighty Army, to set upon the
Christians, the cause was t^is, he had two children, a son and a daughter,
the daughter her name was Florella, whose beauty was very excellent, and
mindyng to match his daughter with some noble Prince, he pretended that such
Countries, Cities, Towns, Castelles, Fortes, or what so ever he could by
conquest get from the Christians, to give them all for his daughters dowry.

Aramanthus hearing of this preparation to the Wars, would needs become a
Soldier, where at his father the Fisherman was greatly displeased, and
began to preach unto his son of the incommodities of war, and with how
many miseries Soldiers are besieged. Aramanthus whose baseness of his
bringyng up, could not conceal the nobility of his birth, would in no wise be
persuaded but go he would, and being pressed for an ordinary Soldier, when
he came to the place of service showed himself so valiant, and in very short
space became to be so expert, that that Captain under whose Ensign he served,
bare away the credit from all the rest: and in the end was himself preferred
to charge, which he governed with so great discretion, and still conducted
with such celeritie and slight, that who but Aramanthus and his company had
the only name throughout the Turks ca^pe, and where there was any attempt to
be given, where valiancie should be shown, Aramanthus he must give the
charge, and where any policy must be put in practice, Aramanthus he must lay
the platte: that to be short, he grew into such credit with the great
Turk himself, that Aramanthus only gave him counsel in all his affairs,
and there with all had so good success, that his practices still prevailed,
and came to happy end, that the Turk by his advise, had done wonderful
spoils upon the Christians, and had taken from them many Cities, Tounes, and
Provinces.

And thus leauyng them in the wars for a season, I will conuaie my tale
again to Isabell Queen and wife to Rodericke, who was now the second time
known to be with child, whereat the Duke of Caria being wonderfully wroth,
pretending to find a quick dispatche for all together, he secretly accused
the Queen of Adultery, to the King his brother, and with such allegations,
and false witnesses as he had provided, so informed the King that his tale was
credited: and the rather for that the king knowing his Queen to be with child
did think himself too far spent in years, to do such a deed. And yet the
King was replenished with so great pitee, that he could not endure to hear of
her death: He therefore by a messenger, commanded her presently to depart the
Court: and in pain of her life, never after to come in his presence. These
news did wonderfully amaze the Queen, who with many piteous intercessions,
desired to know her accusers, and that she might but speak for her self
before his Majesty, and then as he should find her, to use her according to
her deserts. But all in vain, for the Duke had so thoroughly incensed the
King, that he would neither abide to see, nor hear her. The duke understanding
how matters had passed, came to the Queen, and seemed much to lament her case,
persuading her to hold her self contented for a little season, not doubtyng but
in time, that he himself would so persuade with his brother, that she should
be heard to speak in her own defense, in the mean season, if it pleased her
to use his house in the Country he would provide for her all manner of
necessaries, what soever she should want, and for her better comfort, if she
had any assured friend, whose company she desired, that she might secretelie
send for them, to hold her fellowship, and to pass the time: and that he
himself would many times visit her, and daiely inform her, how matters did
pass in her behalf, with the King his brother.

The poor Queen, thinkyng all had to proceed of good will which this
Traitor had proffered, gave him more then a thousand thanks, reposing her
self, and the innocence of her cause, only in this Judas, who practiced
nothing else but her death, and the death of that she went withal.

The next day he provided a couple of Ruffians, such as he knew were for his
purpose, which should have secretelie conueighed her to the Dukes houses (as
she had thought) but as the Duke had willed them, as they rode over a Forest,
when they came to the side of a wood, they took her from her horse, spoiled
her of such things as were about her, and minded to have killed her, and
thrown her in some Bushe: But it fell out that there were certain banished
men in the Wood, which lived in that desarte in manner of Outlawes, and
hearing the piteous complainte of the Queen, they came to her rescue, but the
villains that would have slain her, perceiving them, fled, and left the
Queen, where these Outlawes came unto her: unto whom from poinct to poinct she
declared every thing, how it was happened unto her, the Outlawes having great
compassion, when they knew her to be the Queen for that they had ever heard
her to be Nobly reported on, brought her with them to their Cave, where they
ministered such releef to her distress, as men might do that were in their
estates. The Queen thinkyng that God had preserved her life, to some better
purpose, contented her self for a season, to remain amongst them: Where she
learned to play the Cook, and to dress their meat, such as they brought
in, or could provide for in the Forest. And thus leauyng the Queen with these
Outlawes, I will return again to speak of Aramanthus, who was now deuisyng
to frame a plotte, how he might betraie the City of Tolosia, whereof his
Father was King, as you have heard.

For the Turk having intelligence, of the pleasantness of this City, and of
the wonderful wealth and riches, wherewith it did abound, and therewithal
had learned, that it was of such force and inuinsible strength, that there
was no manner of hope, how it might be subdued, whereat the Turk was very
sorrowful and sad.

But my young Fisherman Aramanthus, whose cunnyng never failed, where courage
could net help, caused the Turk with his whole army by sea, to come before
this City, which is situate fast upon the sea side, and there to come to an
anchor, where Aramanthus himself; as a messenger appoincted from the Turk, came
to the king of Tolosia, to whom he told this tale: That the Turk his Master,
having been in dives parts of Christendom, where he had made wars a long
space, and upon diverse considerations, mindyng to depart with his Army, into
his own Country for a season, and being upon the Seas: one night as he was
liyng upon his bed, behold, a vision appeared unto him in a Dream, which
showed him how greeuouslie he had offended the God of the Christians, in the
persecutyng, spoilyng, and the murtheryng of them, as he had done in this
journey, and for that he should know, that the Christian God, was the most
high and Almighty God in deed, whom with his tyranny he had so displeased,
he should be creepled of al^ his limbs from that time forth, till his diyng
day, which should very shortly follow, with this he awaked, and giuyng a
piteous groan, such as was about him coming unto him, found him in a
wonderful maze, and so benumbed in all his parts, that he was not able to
stir hand nor foot: The next day calling his Counsailers and Captains
about him, not able of himself to come forth emongst them, but as he was
brought out of his Cabin on men's backs, he declared unto them the whole
circumstaunce of the premises, and being stricken with a wonderful remorse in
conscience, he determined to sail back again, not mindyng to depart from out
those parts of Christendom, till he had made satisfaction of all such
spoils and outrages, as he had committed against the Christians, and himself
with his whole army to become Christened, and there to be instructed in the
true and perfect faith, and as he continued this determination, behold, a
contrary wind has driven us on these parts, where hearing of the Fame of this
Noble City of Tolosia, he has sent me unto your grace, desiryng nothing but
your saffe conducte for himself, and certain of his cheef Lords and
Counsailors that be about him, that in this noble City they might be Baptized,
and receive the Christian faith, promising hereafter, not only to join in
league, and perfect amity with the Christians, but also to lincke with them in
Religion, himself, his Countries, Kingdoms, and Provinces.

This tale was not so smoothly told, but there was great doubt and suspicion
had in the matter, in the end thinkyng they could receive no prejudice, by
receiving of so small a number, gave safe condite for the Turk himself, and for
five hundred of his company, such as it pleased himself to appoincte.

The next day, the Turk was brought into the City on men's shulders, with
his appointed company, where he was worthily received by the king himself,
with the rest of his lords, and brought into a Palace of purpose, very
richely furnished, where being laid down upon a bed, as though he had been
able neither to stand nor sit, and giuyng the King, with the rest of his
company, great thanks for his entertainment he desired him with the Duke his
brother (according to the custom) to be his Godfathers when he should be
Christened, to which request they both willyngly agreed: the next day the
Turk himself was the first that received Christendom, and then all the rest
of his noble men that were with him, the which being finished, many godly
exhortations were preached unto them by learned menue. The Turk seemed in
very grateful manner to take this courtesy, wherewith the King had used him:
and thus taking his leave himself with all his company, departed again aborde
the ships: the Turk himself being carried upon men's backs, making show as
though he had been so feeble and weak, that he had not been able to have
moved, or stirred any one ioynte without help, fainyng that he would have
departed with his company into Turkey.

The King of Tolosia with all his people and Citezens, seeing with what devotion
the Turk with the rest of his company, had received Christendom, began to
think assuredly, that only by the Divine providence of God, the Turk was so
converted, and doubted nothing of the tale, which Aramanthus before had told
them, which turned in the end to their utter subversion. For the next day
Aramanthus coming again to the King, brought word of the death of the
Turk, and with a piteous discourse uttered, with a number of fained sighs,
said: that about twelve a clock of the night past, the Turk deceased, and
desired at the hour of his death that as in this worthy City, he had
received the true and Catholic faith, so likewise that he might be
entoumbed, and receive Christian burial in the Cathedral Church, to the
which he had given by his will forty thousand Frankes, more to the common
Treasure of the City, an hundred thousand Frankes, to the King himself as a
president of his good will, a rich Jewel, which himself did wear of great
estimation, to the Duke his brother, his own Armor and furniture. Item, to
the releef of the poor within the City, ten thousand Frankes. Many other
things (quod Aramanthus) he has bequeathed, that I have not spoken of, the
which God willing, shall be performed to the vttermoste.

The king seemed greatly to lament the death of the Turk and began to
conjecture assuredly, that it was the will of God but to preserve his life,
till he had received Christendom, but the time of his burial, was deferred
for certain days, til things might be provided, and more ready for the
pomp, and solemnising of his Funeral, and wonderful cost was bestowed by
Aramanthus, who had the only ordering of the matter, hoping in the end to
receive the whole commodity: and also to be rewarded with a large and
bountiful intrest. The day of burial being at hand, Aramanthus desired the
king, that for so much as the Turk had finished his days in the midst of
his army emongst his Soldiers, that he might likewise be buried like a noble
captain, and according to the manner of the feeld: he might be brought to his
grave with certain bands, trailing their weapons, as the custom of soldiers
is to bury their dedde. This request seemed to be very convenient, and
therefore was the readilier granted: but what should I stand with long
circumstance, to discipher all the Ceremonies that were used in this treason.
The day was come, that this practice must be put in ure, and an empty coffin
solempnly brought to the city, under show of great sorrow, when they were
al filled with great joy and gladness, to se what happy success was like
to follow, of that they had premeditated, and according as Aramanthus had
given order, 5000. of their chose men were appoincted to march, the one half
before, and the other half after the Coffin, trailyng their Ensigns and
weapons, and in this manner they entered the City, where the king with his
nobles and principalles of the City, were ready in mournyng weeds to
accompany the Corse. When Arama^nthus saw his time, the Alarm was given, and
he himself was the first that laid hands of the king his Father, the rest of
his nobles were so enclosed, that there could not one of the^ escape: Defense
there was none to be made, for the one side were in Arms, killyng and
murtheryng of as many as they could see stirryng in the streates: The other
side unprovided, glad to hide them selves, for the sauegard of their lives:
The rest of the fleet were likewise in a readiness, and coming a land,
entered the City, where there was no man to repulse them. And thus the famous
City of Tolosia was taken by the Turks, even in a moment, without any manner
of resistance: the churches and prisons were filled full of Christians, where
they were whipped, racked, and tormented to the death, unless they would
forsake their Faith. The king himself with his brother, and all the Lords,
were committed to prison, there to be fed with bread and water (and yet to
be scantled with such short allowaunce, as it was not able to suffice Nature)
and so to be dieted, unless they would forsake their Faith.

Now the Turk, who only by the means of Aramanthus, had conquered from the
Christians so many citees and tounes, for the love he bare unto him, and in
respect of his service, determined to make Aramanthus his son in law, and to
give him his daughter Florella for his wife: and for her dowry, all such
parts as he had taken from the Christians by conquest and understanding that
the father of Aramanthus was but a poor Fisherman, he pretended likewise to
make him a duke, and to give him living to maintain his estate. The Turk
therefore with allpossible speed, hasted messengers with shippyng, to bring his
daughter, with the old Fisherman, the supposed Father of Aramanthus, to this
City of Tolosia, where he minded to perform that he had determined.

Now it fell out, that the miserable Queen Isabell (whom you have heard was
left with child, remainyng with certain Outlawes) was delivered of a
Daughter, which she her self nursed in the Cave, where she had remained, and
hearing that the Turk had taken the City of Tolosia, would needs go see
what was become of the king her housebande: her daughter which was not yet
fully a year old, she committed to the Outlawes, to be fostered with such
homely Iunkettes, as their could provide, woe seeing her determination,
promised to dry Nurse the child, so well as they could, till she should make
return. Thus preparyng her self in a very simple attire, with a bondle of
Broomes on her hedde, she came to the City of Tolosia, where romyng up and
down the streates to sell her Broomes, she learned all that had happened to
the King, and how he was ready to perish, for want of food and sustenance
wherefore myndyng to give such succors, as her ability would serve: She
devised in the manner of a poor servant, to get into the service of the
Turk, who was the Iailer, and had the custody of the King, where every Night,
as opportunity would serve, she conueighed to him through a grate, such
fragmentes as she spared out of her own bealie, which were very short, and
there withal much more homely, but somthyng the better to amend his cheer.
She would lean her self cloase to the grate, and thrustyng in her Teate
between the Irons, the king learned again to suck, and thus she dieted him a
long season. Neither wiste the king what she was, that bestowed on him so
great grace and goodness: yet he blessed her more then a thousand times a
day. And although there were many of his company, that died for want of
sustenaunce, yet he again with these banquettes recovered himself, and began
to wax strong. Whereat the Turk began to suspecte some parcialitie in the
Iailer, and caused a privy watch to be kept: but Isabell suspectyng nothing,
according to her accustomed manner, at night when it was dark came to her
Nurseri^, where her order that she so long used, was espied, and being
apprehended by the watch, the next day she was presented to the Turk, and
in what manner they had found her, whereat the Turk wonderfully agreeued:
Swear by Mahounde him self, that she should presently be tortured, with the
greatest torments that might be devised. And in the midst of his fury,
word was brought him that his Daughter Florella, with the Fisherman that was
Father to Aramanthus were arrived, and ready to present them selves before
him, whereat the Turk wonderfully reioysed, and ca^lyng Aramanthus, caused
them to be brought in, Florella gave that reverence to the Turk, which both
appertained to the duty of a Child, and also as belonged to his estate.
Aramanthus likewise, although he were the greateste Counsailour, appertinent to
the Turk, yet used that dutiful reverence to the Fisherman his Father, as is
to be required in a Child. The Turk imbracyng his Daughter Florella, told
her the cause that he had sent for her, was to espouse her to Aramanthus, who
although the Destinies had denaied to make Noble by place of birthe, yet
through his Virtues, Valiaunce, and worthy exploites, he had gained the title
of true Nobility, in despite of Fortunes teeth. Florella having heard of the
Fame and worthiness of Aramanthus, was the best pleased woman in the world.

And the Turk turnyng him toward the Fisherman, said: And a thousand times
happy art thou old Father, that have lived to see thy self so highly exalted
in thy ofspryng: The poor Fisherman kneelyng down, said: Most mighty, and
magnificente Prince, not mindyng longer to conceal the thing, which might
redounde so greatly to the contentation of such worthy personages, seeing
then that Aramanthus, who only through his own valiancie, has aspired to so
great dignity and honor. How greatly were I then to be blamed, and how
worthily might I be condemned? If I should take upon me to be the sire of him,
who by all likelihood, is descended of Royal and Princely race, for better
testimony, behold this rich Mantell, and these other costly furnitures,
wherein I found Aramanthus wrapped, and by seemyng saved by his Cradell,
which brought him a Shoore, from some Ship that was wracked, where I found
him by the Sea side (as I say) wrapped in these sumptuous Furnitures, with
this rich and precious Jewel about his neck, being but an Infaunte* by
conjecture not above the age of a quarter of a year, where taking him up in my
arms, I brought him home to my house, called him by the name of Aramanthus,
and thus fostered him up as my own child, until the day that he came to serve
your Majesty in the Wars.

The Queen Isabell which stood by, and heard this discourse, and seeing the
furnitures and the Iewelles, wherewith she had decked her child, assuryng her
self that Aramanthus was her son, could no longer stay her speech, but
said: And do I then behold my son with my unhappy eyes, is he living here
in presence, whom I deemed to be dead? Oh most gracious Gods I yield you
humble thanks, and would to God my son thy coming had been but half so
happy, as thy presence is joyful to me thy wretched mother. What news be
these (quod the Turk) which I heard, I think the woman be out of her wits:
but what art thou that would challenge Aramanthus for thy son, whose
parents now I well perceive, are no beggars like thy self. Yes surely (quoth
the Queen) and much more miserable, then those that go from door to door:
and although his father sometime swaied the sword of government, and satt in
place and seat of Princely Throne. Dispatche then at once (quod the Turk) and
tell me who is his father, and what is the misery wherewith he is perplexed:
wherein if thou can persuade me with a truth, assure thee that only for
Aramanthus sake, I am the man that will minister release.

Behold then (quod the Queen) King Rodericke is his Father, whom thy self
keep here in prison, in this miserable manner, and I whom thou see here am
his mother, the wife of the King, and sometime the Queen of this wretched
City of Tolosia, who being delivered of a son, which by the pleasure of
GOD was visited in my womb, and borne in an extreme Leprosy: for help
whereof he was sent by his Father by Shippyng to the I Will of Candy, and till
this present day there was never tidings heard, either of the Ship, or of
any one man that was in her. And now behold I see with mine eyes the furnitures
wherein I wrapped my child, and the Jewel which I put about his neck, with my
own hands at his departure: the Fisherman verifying this tale to be true,
said in deed that he found him in an extreme Malady, which he cured
himself with medicines of his own providing.

Aramanthus having heard how matters were sorted out, began to tear himself,
saying: Ah most wicked and unnatural wretch, what Furies have saved thee,
that thou wart not drouned with the rest, but that thou must be preserved as
an Instrument to work thy Parents wrack: Come come you Hellishe Hagges, and
show your force on him that has worthily deserved it. But what has Tantalus
offended, that he should continually be sterued? Or how has Sisiphus that
rowles the restless Stone? Or what trespass has been committed by
Prometheus, Ixyon, Titias, or Danaus silly daughters, drawyng water at the
Well: that may be compared to that which I have done, is it possible the^
that I should escape unpunished? Or that the sacred Gods will be unrevenged of
my fact, no no, I have deserved to be plagued, and have merited more worthily
to be tormented then any of these before rehearsed. Florella over hearing these
desperate speeches, fell down in a sown for grief to see her Aramanthus so
disquieted. The Turk after his daughter was come again to her self, forrowed
to see the heaviness of Aramanthus, caused the King his father, with the Duke
of Caria presently to be sent for out of prison: And taking Isabell on the one
of his hands, and Aramanthus on the other, he said to the King: Receive here
noble Prince, a most loving and faithful wife, and a most valiant and
worthy son: And my self from an enemy, for ever after this, to become thy
most assured and trusty freende.

The King was wonderfully amazed to hear these speeches, did think himself to
be in some dream: till in the end he heard the whole discourse how every
thing had happened, and being ravished with gladness, he said.

O happy evil, which brings in the end so great a good, and welcome be
that sorrow, whereby is sprung a joy, much more surmountyng, then ever was
any heaviness: and with many like speeches, he still embraced his son
Aramanthus in his arms, and although he (...) it was the Queen his wife,
which so louin^ (...) him, when he was ready to have (...) want of meat: yet
he could not (...) any countenance, considerg^^ (...) her, by ye information
(...) which being (...) forgiveness: he (...) the beginning (...) sorry and
(...) so virtue (...) so (...) had.

Well (quoth her father) then see you ^ame your (...) like well of my likyng. I
have promised you to Phylotus in marriage, and Phylotus is he that shall be your
housband, and

(...) ^^^lotus and Emelia.
(...) viij. History.
(...) Citizen of Rome, falls in love (...) beautiful virgin (...) the
wonder^^^^ (...) his daugh^^^ (...) as pretely (...), who (...)

(...) seen their own error, and there withal have confessed their abuse,
yet their have not bin able to refrain them selves, from prosecuting their
folly to the end, and all be it, reason proffereth us sondrie sufficient
causes, why we ought to refrain the appetite of our own desires, yet fancy
then is he that strikes such a stroke, that reasons rules can naught at all
prevail, and like as those whom love has once entangled, the more they strive
the farther they be tied, so it is impossible that love should be constrained,
where affection breeds not likyng, nor fancy is not fed, but where these two
has once joined in election, all other affects be so dim and blinded, that
every vice seems to us a virtue, whereof springs this Proverb. In love
there is no lack, so that in deed to say the truth, if there be any piety
to be imputed to this ragyng love, it is in that it is not parciall, nor has
it any respect of persons, but be they friends, be they foes, be they rich,
be they poor, be they young, be they old, be they wise, be they foolish,
love is still indifferent, and respects all a like: but if any man will
think that in respect of beauty, we esteem not all the rest: I am able to
say it is not true, considering how many have forsaken the better likyng, and
have chosen the worse, so that for my part the more I consider of it, the more
I am (...), and therefore will beat (...), that I would go about to contrary
the credi^bbornly would refuse what soever you would think convenient for my
behoof, and although you shall find in me such duty as is meet for a
daughter, and al obedience that is fit for a child, yet sir consider the heart
which can not be compelled, neither by fear, neither by force, nor is not
otherwise to be lured, then only by fancies free consent, and as you have
bestowed on me this frail and transitory life, so my body shall be at your
disposition as it shall please you to appoint it, and will conclude with this
humble petition, desiryng you not to bestow me of any that is not agreeable to
my fancy and good likyng.

Well (quoth her father) then see you frame your liking to like well of my
likyng. I have promised you to Phylotus in marriage, and Phylotus is he that
shall be your housband, and look you go not about to contend against that I
have determined, if you do, never account me for father nor freende, and thus
he departed.

Emelia hearing this cruel conclusion of her father, was wonderfully abashed,
and being by her self in her Chamber, she began to consider of her fathers
words, and for fear to incur any farther displeasure, she deused how she
might frame her self to the likyng of her lover, and with a young woman's mind,
she first began to consider of his wealth, of his calling, of the reverence
wherewith he was used in the City, and that likewise in being his wife, she
should also be had in estimation, and be preferred before other women of
meaner credit, and to desire superiority, it is commonly every woman's
sickness, and therefore this could not choose but please her very well: then
she remembered how commodious it were to marry one so wealthy as Phylotus,
whereby she should not need to beat her brains about the practicing of
housewiferie, but should have servants at commaundment to supply that
turn, this likewise pleased her very well, but because she would well
persuade her self, she began to conjecture how she should spend the time to
her contentment, and therefore she began to think what a pleasure it was to
be well furnished with sondrie suits of apparel, that in the morning when she
should rise, she might call for what she list to put on, according as the time
and the fasshion did require, and her fancy served best, for thus Phylotus was
well able to keep his wife, and this pleased her likewise very well, and then
when she were up, she might break her fast with a cup of Malmsie, or
Muskadine next her heart. It was very good for ill Airs in a morning, and this
she thought was but an easy matter, and likewise pleased her very well: when
she had broken her fast, then she might stir about the house, and look to
this, and see to that, and where she found any thing amiss, not to touch it
with her own fingers, for marryng the beauty of her hand, but to call for
Cicelie, Ione, or Cate, and to chide them like Sluttes, that they could not
spy a fault but when they must be told: this likewise pleased her very well,
then to have provided for Dinner some iuncketts, that served best her appetite,
her houseba^de had good store of coin, and how could it be better spente,
then upon themselves: to make their fare the better, this likewise pleased her
very well, now when she had dined, then she might go seek out her examplers,
and to peruse which work would do best in a Ruff, which in a Gorget,
which in a Sleeue, which in a Quaife, which in a Caul, which in a
Handkercheef, what Lace would do best to edge it, what seame, what stitche,
what cut, what guard, and to sit her down, and take it forth by little and
little: and thus with her Nedle to pass the after nonne, with devising of
things for her own wearyng, this likewise pleased her passing well: Then to
provide for Supper some shift of diet, and sondrie sauces; the better to help
the stomach, Oranges, Lemo^s, Olives, Caphers, Salades of sondrie sorts, alas
a Croune will go a great way in such trifles. This likewise pleased her
very well, when she had supped, to use some exercise, according to the ceason:
if it were in Summer, to go walk with her neighbors to take the air, or in
her Guard in to take the verdure of sweet and pleasant flower, this likewise
pleased her very well, when she was come in, and ready to go to her Chamber,
a Cup of cold Sack to bedward, is very good for digestion, and no cost to
speak of, where such abondaunce does remain, and this likewise pleased her
very well.

But now although she had devised, to pass the day time with such
contentation, when she remembered at Night, she must go to bed to be lubber
leapt: and with what cold courtesy she should be entertained by her graie
hedded bedfelowe, what frosen embracementes he was able to bestow of her, all
was marde, and quite dashte out of remembrance, and all the commodities before
spoken of, that she should receive in the time of the day, would not serve to
counteruaile that one incommoditie, in the season of the Night: Like as we
say, one vice spilles a great number of virtues. Thus Emelia was now to
seek, and could in nowise frame her self to love Philotus: but when she had
flattered her self with a thousand delights, that she should receive in the
day time by his wealth, when she remembered bed time, she was as new to
begin as before. Wherefore she remained in great perplexity, thinkyng her
hap to be over hard, and the comfort very bare, where the best choice had
such assurance of doubtful end. For to Marry after her Fathers mind, she
knew would breed her lothed life: and to gainsaie what he had determined,
would likewise loose her fathers, likyng, that she wiste not for her life
whereon to resolve, and thus from day to day, as she continued in this doubt.
There happened to hit into her company a young Roman gentleman, whose name
was Flanius, who suddenly fell in Love with Emelia, and taking the time whilst
his opportunity served: he let Emelia to understand, of the great love he
bare her. Emelia, according to the custom of women, made the matter very coie
at the first, although in her heart she were right glad, co^sideryng her case
how it stood. Flanius was so much the more importunate upon her, and with
such nice terms as woers be accustomed: He so Courted, and followed Emelia,
that she perceiuyng his feruente affection, told him a very short
circumstaunce, how her father had disposed her, to one that she could not like
of, and therefore, if he would first promise to take her as his wife, and that
he could find such means, to conueigh her from her Fathers house in secret
sort (for otherwise she was sure her Father would be a let to hinder their
purpose) she was contented to harken to his speech, and yield to his demand.
Flanius the gladdest man in the world, to hear these joyful news, swear unto
her, that all should be accomplished, and that with as much speed as her
self would desire.

There was no more to conclude of the^, but how she might be conueighed from
out her fathers house. Flanius devised that late in an Euenyng, or in the Night
time when every one were quiet in their beds, if she could find the means
to get forth of doors, then he would be ready to receive her. But that
could not be, for both her Fathe and Mather never failed, to be at home in
the Evenings, and at Nights she was lodged in her Fathers Chambers, that it
was impossible for her to get forth. So that there was no remedy, but that
the feate must be wrought in some after Noone, when both her Father and
Mother used to be abroad, about their business: And then she knew not how
to come forth alone, because she had not been accustomed so to do, and to
follow a stranger, it would breed the greater suspicion.

But Flanius to avoid all these surmises, devised the next euenyng, to
conueigh her in at some back window of her fathers house, a suit of man's
apparel: wherein the next day in the after noone, her father and mother being
abroad, she should shift her self, and so come her ways unknown of any, to
such a place: where he himself would be ready awaiting for her, and so
conueigh her home to his own house. This devise Emelia liked passing will, and
according as it was appoincted. The next evening Flanius co^ueighed this suit
of apparel in at the window, where Emelia was ready to receive it, and laiyng
it up in safety, til the next day in the after noone, her father and her
mother being both forth of doors, she quickly shifted her self, into this
manes apparel, and thus forth of doors she goes to her appointed place, where
Flanius was staiyng, who according to promise, conueighed her home to his own
house.

This matter was not so closely handeled by Emelia, but she was espied by one
of her Fathers servants, who being on the backside through a Window, saw
her how she was stripping of her self, and marked how she put on the man's
apparel, whereat the young fellow had great marvel, and stood still
beholding to see what would fall out in the end, But when he saw her go
forth a doors, he hastened after into the streate: But Emelia was so suddenly
gone, that for his life hr wist not which ways to seek after her, wherefore
in a wonderful haste, he came to his Master, whom he found in the City, in
the company of Philotus, saying: Oh sir, I have very evil news to tell you,
what is the matter (quod his master) is any thing a miss at home? Yea sir
(quod the servant) your daughter Emelia is even now departed into the City,
in the habit of a man: But which ways she went, I could not for my life
devise, for after she gat once forth of the place where she shifter her, I
could never more set eye of her.

Is Emelia gone (quoth her lover Philotus) Oh God, what evil news be these
that I hear: And without any further stay, both the Father and the Lover,
gat them out at the doors together, and about the streates they run like a
couple of mad men.

Now it fell out, that Philerno the Son of Alberto, and Brother to Emella,
whom you have heard before, was left at Naples, being an Infant, and had
remained there till this time at School, and at this very instaunte was come
from Naples to Rome, to visit his Father and Mother, of whom he had no manner
of knowledge, otherwise then by their names. And it fortuned that Alberto and
Philotus, happened to meet with Philerno in the streates, who was so like his
sister Emelia, that both Alberto and Philotus, assured themselves, that it
could be no other but she. Wherefore Alberto coming to him, said: stay,
stay, most shameless and vngraci^us Girl, do thou think that by thy
disguising of thy self, in this manner, thou can escape unknown to me, who am
thy Father, Ah vile strumpet that thou art: what punishment is sufficient for
the filthiness of thy fact? And with this he seemed, as though he would have
fline upon her in the streate, to have beat her: but Phllotus thruste in
between them, and desired his neighbor to stay himself, and then imbracyng
Philerno in his arms, he said: Ah Emelia my sweet and loving wenche, how
canste thou so vnkindelie forsake thy Philotus, whose tender love toward thee
is such, that as I will not let to make thee sovereign of my self, so thou
shall be Dame and Mistress of all that ever I have, assuryng thee, that thou
shall never want for Gold, Gemmes, Iewelles, such as be fit and convenient
for thy degree.

Philerno seeing a couple of old dotyng fool, thus clusteryng about him, not
knowing what they were: had thought at the first, they had been out of their
wits, but in the end by their words, perceiuyng a farther circumstance in
the matter, he devised some thing for his own disporte, to feed them a little
with their own folly, said: Pardon me I beseech you this my grievous
offense, wherein I know I have too far straied, from the limits and bounds
of modesty, protestyng hereafter so to govern my self, that there shall be
no sufficient cause, whereby to accuse me of such vnmaiden like parts, and
will ever remain with such duty and obedience, as I trust shall not deserve
but to be liked during life.

Philotus having heard this pitiful reconciliation, made by his Emelia, very
gently entreated her father, in her behalf, well (quod her father) seeing you
will needs have me to forgive this her lewdness, at your request I am
contented to pardon her, and then speaking to Philerno, he said.

How say you houswife, is your stomach yet come down, are you contented to
take Philotus for your Housebande, yea my good Father (quod Philerno) and that
with all my heart, Oh happy news (quod) Philotus) and here withal he began
to set his cappe on the one side, and to turn up his muschatoes, and fell to
wipyng of his mouth, as though he would have fallen a kissyng of her by and by
in the streates, but reme^bryng him self where he was, he brought Alberto with
Philerno, into a friends house, that was of his familiare acquaintance, and
there the Marriage between them, was thoroughly concluced, and all parties
seemyng to give their full consentes. Philotus desired his father in Law, that
he might have the custody of Emelia, swearing by his old honesty, that he
would not otherwise use her, then his own Daughter Brisilla, until the day
of his Nuptials, and then to use her as his wife: to which request Alberto
seemed very willynglie to give consent: but then because Philotus would not
carry his beloved, through the streates in her man's apparel, he desired his
Father in Law to go home, and send some suit of her apparel, wherewith to
shift her, before he would carry her to his own house. Alberto seeing matters
so thoroughly concluded, took his leave of them both, and going his ways
home, he caused all his Daughters apparel to be looked together, and to be
sent to the place where Philotus was remaining with Philerno, who taking forth
such as should serve the turn for that present. Philerno so well as he could
arraied himself, in one of his sisters suits of apparel, and thus departed
with Philotus to his own house, where Philotus calling his daughter Brisilla,
he said unto her, behold here the party, whom I have chosen to be your
Mother, chargyng you of my blessyng, that you honor, reverence, and obeie her,
and with all diligence that you be attendaunt upon her, and ready at an ynche
to provide her of any thing, that she shall either want or call for. And you my
dear and loving Emelia, I do here ordain and appoincte you to be Mistress
of this house, and of all that is in it, desiryng you to accept of this my
Daughter, to do you service in the day time, and in the night to vouchsafe
her for your bedfellowe, until our day of Marriage be prefixed, and then my
self will supply the rome. Philerno seeing the excellent beauty of Brisilla,
was nothing sorry to have such a bedfellowe, but thought every hour a day,
till night was come, which being approached, to bed they went, where Philerno
did not think it his readiest way, to give any sudden attempt, but
therefore he brake into this discourse followyng.

My Brisilla, were it not but that we be found parciall in the causes of our
friends, but especially where the causes do touch our parents, our
judgments be so blinded by affection, that we can neither see, nor well
confess a manifest truth: but if matters might be considered on, without
respect of persons with indifference, and according to the truth and equity
of the cause: I durst then put my self in your arbitremente my Brisilla, and to
abide your sentence, whereto I doubt not, but you would confess the prejudice
I sustain, it is much intolerable, and almost impossible* for a young maid
to endure and the rather, if you would measure my condition, by your own
estate, who being as you see, a young maiden like your self, and should be thus
constrained by my friends, to the mariyng of your father, whom I do confess
to be worthy of a better wife then my self. But considering the inequality
of our years, I can not for my life, frame my self to love him, and yet I am
forced against my will to Marry him, and am appointed to be your mother: that
am more meet to be your companion and play fellow. But that affiaunce which
I have conceived in your good Nature, has made me thus boldly to speak unto
you, desiryng but to hear your opinion with indifferency, whether you think
I have good cause to co^plain or naie: and then peradventure I will say
farther unto you, in a matter that does concern your own behoof.

Brisilla hearing this pitiful complaint, very sorrowful in her behalf,
said: would to God I were as well able to minister releef unto your distress,
according to your own contentment, as I am heartily sorry to consider your
greef, and do well perceive the just occasion you have to complain.

Ah my Brisilla, said Philerno, I am as heartily sorry in your behalf, and
peradventure do understand somethyng, which your self do not yet know of,
which will grieve you very sore. But first Brisilla, let me ask you this
question, do you know my father, or naie.

No sure (quoth Brisilla) I have no manner of knowledge of him, neither did I
know, whether you had any father a live, or naie, but now by your own
report, and as strange it was to me, to hear the words, which my Father
used to me this day, when he brought you home, for that I never understood
before, that he went about a wife.

Philerno was very glad to hear these news, because it served so much the
better for his purpose: and therefore said as follows.

This tale that I mind to tell you (my Brisilla) will seem more strange then
all the rest, and yet assure your self, it is nothing so strange as true, and
therefore give ear to that I mind to say: Do you not think it very
strange in deed, that the one of us should be made both mother and daughter
to the other, and that our fathers, which be now so diescrepit and old,
should be so over haled, with the fury of their fond and unbridled
affections, that to serve their own appetites, they force not with what
clogges of care, they comber us that be their loving daughters, but have
concluded between them selves a cross Marriage, and so in deed it may well
be termed, that will fall out so ouerthwarte to our behoofes, who being now in
our young and tender years, and should both of us be made the dearlynges of
two old men, that seeks to prefer their own lust, before their childrens
love, and measure their fiery flames of youth, by the ded coals of age, as
though they were able with their cold and rare imbracementes, to delaie the
forces of the flesh, whose flames does excede in these our grene and tender
years, and as much possible for us to continue in likyng, as flowers are seen
to agree with Froste, but in plain terms (my Brisilla) and to discipher a
very trothe it is contracted between our aged parents, that your father (as
you see) should first take me to his wife, which weddyng being once performed,
then my Father in like manner, should challenge you, according as it is concluded
between them.

Alas (quod Brisilla) these news be strange in deed, and it should seem by
your words so fully resolved on, that there is no hope of redress to be had
in the matter.

None in the world (quod Philerno) but thus between our selves, the one of us
to comfort the other.

A cold comfort (quod Brisilla) we shall find in that, but oh pitilesse
parents, that will prefer your own pleasures with your childrens pain: your
own likyng, with your childrens loathyng: your own gain, with your childrens
grief: your own sport, with your childrens spoil: your own delight, with
your childrens despite. O how much more happy had it been, that we had never been borne.

Alas my Brisilla (quod Philerno) tormente not your self with such extreme
anguishe, for if that would have served for redress, the matter had been
remedied, and that long sithence: But I would to God my Brisilla, that I were a
man for your only sake, and having so good leisure, as thus being together by
our selves, we should so handle the matter, that our fathers should seek new
wives.

Alas (quod Brisilla) such wishes are but waste, and impossible it is, that
any such thing should happen.

Impossible (quoth Philerno) naie surely Brisilla, there is nothing impossible,
but I have known as great matters as these have been wrought: Do we not read
that the Goddess Venus, transformed an Iuorie Image, to a lively and perfect
woman, at the only request of Pygmalion. Diana likewise converted Acteon to a
Heart. Narcissus for his pride was turned to a flower. Archane to a Spider,
with a great number of others have bin transformed, some into Beasts, some
into Fowls, and some into Fishes, but amongst the rest of the miracles that
have bin wrought by the Goddess, this story falls out most me^te and
fittyng to our purpose.

There was sometime remainyng in the Country of Phestos a married couple, the
housbande called by the name of Lictus, the wife Telethusa, who being with
child, was willed by her housbande so sone as she should be delivered, if it
were not a lad, that the child should presently be slain, his wife being
delivered at her appointed time, brought forth a girl, and yet
notwithstanding her housbandes commandment, brought up the child, making her
housebande believe it was a boy, and called it by the name of Iphis, and thus
as it grew in years, was apparelled like a lad, and being after by his father
assured to a wife called by the name of Ianthe, a young Maiden, and the
daughter of one Telest dwelling in Dictis, Telethusa the mother of Iphis,
fearyng her deceit would be known, deferred of the Marriage day so long as
she could, sometimes fainyng tokens of ill success, sometimes faining
sickness, sometimes one thing, sometimes an other, but when all her shifts
were driven to an end, and the Marriage day at hand, Telethusa coming to the
Temple of the Goddess Isis, with her heir scattered about her ears, where
before the Altar of Isis, she made her humble supplications, and the gentle
Goddess having compassion, transformed Iphis to a man.

Lo here Brisilla, as great a matter brought to pass as any we have spoken
of yet, and the Goddess be of as great force and might in these days, as
ever they were in times past, we want but the same zeal and faith to demand
it, and sure in my opinion, if either of us made our request to the Gods, who
commonly be still assistant to help distressed wightes, they would never
refuse to grant our reasonable requests, and I will adventure on it my self,
and that without any farther circumstaunce.

And here with all he seemed with many piteous sighs, throwyng up his hands
to the heavens, to mumble forth many words in secret, as though he had been
in some great contemplation, and suddenly without any manner of stirryng either
of hand or foot, did lie still as it had been a thing immouable, whereat
Brisilla began for to muse, and in the end spoke to him, but Phylerno made no
manner of answer, but seemed as though he had bin in some trance, wherewith
Brisilla began to call and with her arm to shake him, and Phylerno giuyng a
piteous sigh, as though he had bin awaked suddenly out of some dream, said. O
blessed Goddess Venus, I yield thee humble thanks, that have not despised to
grant my request: and then speaking to Brisilla, he said: and now my Brisilla
be of good comfort, for the same Goddess which have not disdained to hear
my supplication, will likewise be assistaunt to further our farther pretenses,
as hereafter at our better leisure we shall consider of, in the mean time
receive thy loving freende, that to day was appoincted to be thy fathers
wife, but now consecrated by the Goddess to be thy loving housbande, and here
withal imbrasyng Brisilla in his arms. She perceived in deed, that Emelia
was perfectly metamorphosed, which contented her very well, thinkyng her self a
thrice happy woman to light of such a bedfellowe: thus both of them the one
pleased very well with the other, they passed the time, till Phylotus had
prepared and made all things ready for his Marriage day, and then calling his
friends and neighbors about him, to the Church they go together, where
Alberto gave Phylerno his son, in the steed of his daughter Emelia to
Phylotus for his wife: when all the rest of the Marriage rites that are to be
done in the Church were performed, they passed forth the day with feastyng
and great mirthe until it was night. When the company began to break up,
and every one to take his leave, and Phylotus with his bride were brought into
their Chamber, where Phylerno desiryng the company to avoid, and making fast
the door he said to Phylotus, there rests yet a matter to be decided
between you and me, and seeing we be here together by our selves, and that
time and place does fall out so fit, I hold it for the best that it be
presently determined.

What is the matter then (quod Phylotus) speak boldly my Emelia, and if there
be any thing that hanges in dispense between us, I trust it shall easily be
brought to a good agreement.

I pray God it may (quod Phylerno) and to reveal the matter in brief and
short circumstaunce, it is this. You are now my housebande, and I your lawful
wife, and for that I do know the difference in our years, your self being
so old and I very young, it must needs fall out there will be as great
deuersitie in our conditions: for age is commonly given to be froward,
testie, and overthwart: youth again to be frolique, pleasant, and merry, and
so likewise in all our other conditions we shall be found so contrary and
disagreyng, that it will be impossible for us to like the one of the others
doings, for when I shall seem to follow my own humor, then it will fall
out to your coffeehouse. And you again to follow that diet which your age
does constrain, will be most loathsome unto me, then you being my housbande
will think to command me, and I must be obedient to your will, but I being
your wife will think scorn to be controlde, and will dispose of my self
according to my own liking, and then what braules and brabbles will fall out,
it were to much to be rehearsed, and thus we shall live neither of us both in
quiet, nor neither of us both contented, and therefore for the auoidyng of
these inconveniences, I have devised this way, that being thus together by our
selves, we will try by the ears which of us shall be master and have
authority to command: if the victory happen on your side, I am contented for
ever after to frame my self to your ordinance and will as it shall please you
to appoinct: if otherwise the conquest happen on my side, I will triumph like a
Victor, and will look to bear such a swaie, that I will not be contraried in
any thing, what so ever it shall please me to command.

Phylotus knowing not what to make of these speeches, and thinkyng the time
very long, till he had taken his first fruits, said: Come, come my Emelia let
us go to bed, where I doubt not but we shall so well agree, that these matters
will easily be taken up, without any controversy, such as you have spoken of.

Never while I live (quod Phylerno) before I know whereon to resolve: and
whether you shall rest at my commandment, or I at yours.

Why (quod Phylotus) do you speak in earnest, or would you look to command
me that am your housbande, to whom you ought to use all duty and obedience.

Then were I in good case (quod Phylerno) that should be tied to use duty or
obedience, to a man of your years, that would not let to prescribe us rules of
your own dotage, to be observed in steed of domestical discipline.

Then I perceive (quod Phylotus) we shall have somethyng ado with you
hereafter, that will use me with these terms the very first night. But see
you make no more to do, but come on your ways to bed.

And I perceive (quoth Phylerno) the longer that I bear with you, the more
fool I shall find you, and with this up with his fiste and gave Phylotus a
sure wheritte on the ear. Phylotus in a great rage flies again to Phylerno:
there was between them souse for souse, and box for box, that it was hard
to Judge who should have the victory. In the end Phylerno gettes Phylotus
fast by the graie bearde, and by plain force pu^^es him down on the flower,
and so be pomels him about the face, that he was like to have been strangled
with his own blood, which gushed out of his nose and mouth. Wherefore holdyng
up his hands he cried, Oh Emelia, I yield my self vanquished and overcome, for
Gods sake hold thy hands, and I will never more contend with thee during
life.

Phylerno staiyng himself, said: Art thou contented then to yield me the
conquest, and hereafter this according as thou have said: neuermore to strive
with me, never to gainsaie any thing, what soever it shall please me to
command.

Never while I live (quod Phylotus) and therefore for Gods sake (...) me arise,
and challenge to yourself what superioriti^ you please, which form shall never
be denaied so long as I shall live.

Well (quod Phylerno) but before I will let you arise, I will have you promise
me to confirm these conditions, which follow in this manner. First, that at my
pleasure I may go abroad with my friends, to make merry so often as I
list, whither I list, and with whom I list. And neither at my going forth, to
be demanded whither I will, ne at my return to be asked where I have been. I
will farther have you condescende to this, that for as much as I have learned,
that it is not only very vntothsome, but likewise very unwholesome, for youth
and age, to lie sokyng together in one bed. I will therefore make no
bedfellowe of you, but at my own pleasure. And in manner as follows, that is
to say: this first year I shall be contented, to bestow one night in a month
to do you pleasure, if I (...) you worthy of it, or that you be able to
deserve it: but the first year being our expired, four times a year may
very well suffice, that is one night a quarter, as it shall please my self to
appoinct. There be many other matters which I will not now stand to repeat,
but these before rehearsed, be the principal things wherein I will not be
controlde, but mean to follow mine own liking: How say you Phylotus, can you
be contented to frame your self herein, to follow my direction.

Alas (quoth Phylotus) I see no other shift, I must perforce endeavor my self
patiently to abide what soever it shall please you to command, and do yield
my self as recreant, and overcome, and wholly do put my self to your favor and
mer^ie, ready to receive what soever it shall please you to awarde (...).

Phylerno, lettyng him n^w arise said: prepare your self then to go to your
bed, and anon at mine own leisure, I will come unto you: and depart again
at mine own pleasure, when I shall see time.

Phylotus, comforting himself with these sweet speeches, did think it yet, to
be some part of amends, that she had pro^^ed to come and visit him: went
quietly to his bed, there to abide the good hour till Emelia did come.

Phylerno, having prepared one of these Marcenarie women (whereof there are
great store in Rome to be had) conueighed her to the bed of Phylotus, giuyng
her enstructions how to use her self: and went himself to his best beloved
Brisilla, whom he had made privy to his whole devise, and in this manner it was
agreed between them, they had thought to have dieted Phylotus once a month
with some cast stuff, such as they could hire best cheap in the Town.

But it fell out that Flanius, whom you have heard before, had stolen away
Emelia, being at the Church the same day that Phylotus was married, and saw
Alberto give his daughter Emelia to Phylotus for his wife: had thought
assuredly that himself had been deceived by some Devil or spirit, that had
taken upon him the likeness of Emelia. And therefore hastyng himself home with
all possible speed, came to Emelia, and blessing himself he said: I charge
thee in the name of the living GOD, that thou tell me what thou art, and that
thou presently depart to the place from whence thou came. And I conjure thee
in the name of the holy Trinity, by our blessed Lady the Virgin Marie, by
Angels and Archaungels, Patriarchs and Prophets, by the Apostles, and four
Evangelists, Matthewe, Mark, Luke and Ihon, by all the holy Martyrs and
Confessors, and the rest of the rabble and blessed route of Heaven, that thou
quietly depart without any manner of prejudice, either to man, woman, or
child, either to any manner of Beast that is upon the face of the earth, the
Fowls of the air, or the Fishes of the Sea, and without any manner of Tempest,
Storm, Whirle wind, Thunder or Lightnyng, and that thou take no manner of
shape, that (...) seem either terrible or fearful unto me.

Emelia hearing these words, merueilyng much what they meant* with a ^^ilyng
countenance came toward Flanius, saying: Why how now Seignior Flanius* what
do you think me to be some Devil, or any Hagge of Hell, that you fall so to
Coniuryng, and blessyng of your self.

I charge thee come no nere (quoth Fla^ius) stand back, (...) these
inticementes can no longer abuse me, when I have seen with mine eyes, my
beloved Emelia, married in the Church, and given by Alberto her Father, to
Phylotus for his wife, what should I think of thee but to be some Fee^d, or
sent unto me by some Inchauntment* or Witchcraft, and therefore I will no
longer neither of thy company, neither of thy conference: And here withal
taking Emelia by the shoulders, he thrust her forth of doors, and shuttyng
the door after her: He gat him to his Chamber, where he fell to his prayers,
thinkyng assuredly that Emelia had been some spirit.

But Emelia, after she had a three or four days made what means she could to
Flanius, and saw it was in vain: was driven to go to her Father, before whom
falling upon her knees, she desired him most humbly to forgiuer her.

Alberto taking her up in his arms said: that he knew nothing wherein she
had offended him, but her suite might easily be granted.

Dear father (quoth Emelia) I know I have offended, and so far as my fact
deserves, rather to be punished then pitied: the remembrance whereof is so
loathsome unto me, that I fear to call you by the name of father, having showed
my self so unworthy a daughter. These words she pronounced with such sorrow,
that the tears streamed down her cheeks, wherewith Alberto moved with
natural affection, said: dear child, I know no such offense that ought to
be so grievously taken: but speak boldly what so ever it be, I freely forgive
it.

Emelia very well comforted with these speeches, began to discourse how she
first disguised her self in Pages appare^^, and what greef it was to her
conscience, that she should so far straie from the duty and obedience of a
child, and to become a fugitive in a man's apparel. But her father not
sufferyng her further to proceed in her tale, said: Alas dear daughter if
this be the matter, it is long ago sith I have both forgiven and forgotten
these causes: and therefore let these things never trouble you. But tell me
now how do you like of your bedfellows, how agree you with him, or he with
you, I would be glad to know.

Alas dear father (quoth Emelia) that is the matter that I come to you, he
has turned me away, and will no longer take me for his wife, and what is the
cause that has moved him unto it, I protest before God I know not for my life.

Has he turned thee away (quod Alberto) my self will quickly find a remedy
for that matter, and without any more to do (would not tarry so much as while
his goune was a brushing) but out of doors he goes toward Phylotus, who^ by
chance he met withal in the Streates, and in a great chafe begins to
challenge him for abusyng of his daughter, swearyng that he would make all Rome
to speak of his abuse, if he meant to proceed in that he had begun.

Phylotus wonderyng to see the man in such an agony, began to wish that he
had never seen him nor his daughter neither, and that if any body have cause
to complain it is I (quoth Phylotus) that have married such a wife, that is
more like to a Devil then a woman: and I perceive now is maintained in her
mischief by you that are her father, who ought rather to rebuke her then so to
take her part, and to encourage her in her lewdness.

What incouragment is this you speak of (quod Alberto) I know not what you
mean by these words, but assure your self of this, that as I will not
maintain my child in any thing that is evil, so I will not see her take a
manifest wrong.

Do you think this to be good then (quoth Phylotus) that your daughter should
bestow such hansell on her housband as she has already bestowed upon me,
and then pointyng to his face, he said: See here your daughters handie work,
how think you, is this requisite to be borne with all, that you stand so
much in your daughters defense?

Alberto seeing his face all swollen, and the skin scratched of, perceived
that Phylotus was at a fraie, and had good cause to complain: And wonderyng
that his daughter was so suddenly become a shrewe, said: If this be my
daughters handie work, I can neither bear withal, neither will I allow it
in her, so to use her housebande. And therefore I pray you, let me hear the
matter debated between you: and I doubt not, but to take such order, as
there shall no more any such rule happen between you.

I am contented you shall debate what you will (quod Philotus) so it may be
done with quietness, but I will never more contend with her for the maisterie
while I live, she has alredie won it, I am contented she shall wear it.

I pray you then (quoth Alberto) that you will go home to your own house, and
I will go fetch my daughter, and will come unto you straight way, and I
doubt not but to take such order between you, as shall fall out to both your
likinges.

I pray God you may (quod Philotus) and I will go home* and there will stay
your coming.

Alberto likewise went to his own house, and calling Emelia, said never a
word to her, but willed her to follow him: and coming to the house of
Philotus, whom he found within, tariyng his coming. And it fortuned at the
same (...), Philerno and Brisilla, both were gone into the Town to buy
certain things, that they had need of. And Alberto beginning first to rebuke
his Daughter, that would seem in such manner to abuse her housebande, and with
a long discourse he preached unto her, with what duty and obedience, women
ought to use their housebandes withal, and not to take upon them like
Masters, to correct and chastise them. Emelia denaied not only the fact,
but also she denaied Philotus to be her housebande.

What have we here to do (quoth the Father) how can thou (shameless
queen) denaie that, which within these four days was performed, in the face
of the whole world?

Emelia standing stiff to her tackelyng: would in nowise confess that ever
she was Married.

Then her Father began to charge her with her own words, which he had
used to her before, how she had disguised her self in man's apparel, and so
stolen away forth of doors, the which Emelia never denaied. Why then (quoth
her father) did not I meet thee in the streates, and at the request of thy
housebande here present, did forgive thee thy fault, to whom I then delivered
thee, and with whom thou haste ever sithence remained.

Emelia made flat denial of any of all these sayings to be true. Alberto in
a great fury, would have taken witness of Philotus in the matter, but
Philotus fearyng an other banquet at night, when he should go to bed, durst
not in any wise seem to contrary Emelia: In the end after great fendyng and
prouyng had in the matter, Emelia from poinct to poincte discoursed to her
Father, how she first fell into the likyng of Flanius, and by his practice, so
conueighed her self away in his Pages apparel, and had with him remained all
this while, till now he had turned her away.

Her father would in nowise allow this tale to be true, but Flanius being
well known to be a courteous Gentleman, Alberto devised to send for him, who
presently at his gentle entreaty, came to the house of Philotus, where he
spared not to confess a truth, that only for the love that he bare to Emelia,
he devised to steal her away: and there came one unto him in the likeness of
Emelia, and in the same apparel that he had provided for her, whom he very
charely kept, until such time as he saw with his own eyes, that Emelia was
Married in the Church to Philotus, and then assuryng him self, that he had
been deceived by some Spirit, that had taken upon the similitude and
likeness of Emelia, he presently came home, and turned her away, and what
was become of her, he could never learn.

Alberto much amazed to hear this tale, said: Seignior Flanius do you know
your Emelia again, if you see her, and then poinctyng to his daughter, he
said: Is not this the same Emelia that you speak of, which you have turned
away.

I know not (quod Flanius) the one from the other, but sure I saw with mine
eyes two Emelias so like, that the one of the^ of force must needs be the
Devil.

There is no question (quod Philotus) but that is my wife, if there be ever a
Devil of them both, I know it is she: Out alas that ever I was borne, what
shall I now do, I know I have Married the Devil.

And by fortune as Alberto chanced to look forth of the window, he espied
Philerno and Brisilla in the Streate coming homewardes: Peace (quod Alberto)
here comes the other Emelia, we shall now try, which of them is the Devil
(I think) before we depart.

By this Philerno was come in, and hearing how matters had been debated, and
were fallen out: again, knowing Alberto to be his Father, and what prejudice
his sister Emelia was like to sustain, if she should be forsaken by her
freende and lover Flanius, confessed the whole matter, humbly desiryng his
Father to forgive him.

When he had a while wondered at the circumstaunce, and the truth of every
thing laid open, and come to light, all parties were well pleased and
contented, saving Philotus, for when he remembered, first the loss of his love
Emelia, then how Philerno had heaten him, what a bedfellowe he had provided
him, while he him self went and lay with his Daughter: these things put all
together, made him in such a chafe, that he was like to run out of his
wits: But when he had regarded a good while, and saw how little help it did
prevail him, he was contented in the end, that his Daughter Brisilla, should
Marry with Philerno, and Flanius very joyfully received again his Emelia
(when he knew she was no Devil) and both the Marriages consummate in one
day. And so I pray God give them joy, and every old dotarde so good success
as had Philotus.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
GEntle Reader, now thou have perused these Histories to the end, I doubt not
but thou will deem of the^, as they worthily deserve, and think such
vanities more fitter to be presented on a stage (as some of them have been)
then to be published in Printe (as till now they have never been) but to
excuse my self of the folly that here might be imputed unto me, that my self
being the first that have put them to the print, should likewise be the first
that should condemn them as vain: for mine own excuse herein, I answer:
that in the writing of them, I have used the same manner, that many of our young
Gentlemenne uses now adays, in the wearyng of their apparel, which is
rather to follow a fashion that is new (be it never so foolish) then to be
tied to a more decent custom, that is clean out of use: Sometime wearyng
their hair freeseled so long, that makes them look like a water Spaniell:
Sometimes so short like a new shorn Sheep: Their Beardes sometimes cut
round like a Philippes Daler: Sometimes square like the Kings hedde in
Fishestreate: Sometimes so nere the skin, that a man might judge by his face,
the Gentleman had had very pilde luck, their Cappes and Hattes sometimes so
big, as will hold more wit, then three of them have in their heddes:
Sometimes so little, that it will hold no wit at all. Their Ruffes sometimes
so huge, as as shall hang abou their necks like a Carte wheel: Some^^^^s a
little falling band, that makes them look like one (...) Queens Silkewomen.
Their Cloakes sometimes so (...) trippe on their heels: Sometimes so short,
(...) over they elbowes: Their Ierkinnes sometimes with hie collers, buttoned
cloase under their Ch^^^ sometimes with no collers at all about their necks,
lik^ wench in a red wastcoate, that were washing of a Buck^ Sometimes with
long sausie sleeves, that will be in every dishe before his master, somtymes
without sleeves, like Scogins manne, that used to run of sleeue less
errandes: The Dublettes sometime Faggot wasted about the Nauil, sometimes
Cowbealied below the flanckes, that the Gentleman must undo a button when he
goes to piss.

In their Hoose so many fashions as I can not describe, sometimes
Garragascoynes, breeched like a Bear, sometimes cloase to the docke, like the
Devil in a play (wanting but a tail) sometimes round like to Saint Thomas
Onions: Sometimes petite Ruffes of two inches long, with a cloase stocking
clean above the nocke of his tail: Sometimes disguising them selves after the
use of Spain: Sometimes after the Italian manner, and many times they imitate
the French fashion so near, that all their hair is ready to fall of their
heddes.

Now I am sure, if any of the^ were asked, why he used such variety in his
apparel, he would answer, because he would follow the fashion. Let this
then suffice likewise for mine excuse, that my self seeing trifles of no
account, to be now best in season, and such vanities more desired, then
matters of better purpose, and the greatest part of our writers, still busied
with the like. So I have put forth this book, because I would follow the
fashion.

And now friendly Reader, because I have entered thus far to speak of
fashions: I will conclude with a tale, that makes somethyng for my purpose. I
have read it so long ago, that I can not tell you where, nor the matter is
not great though I do not tell you when, but in England (as I think) and as
it should seem, nere about London. There was sometimes dwelling a Gentleman,
though not of very (...) wealth, yet of a very honest life, and of good
report (...) his neighbors, whose name was master Persinu^^^ (...) had a
Daughter, whose name was (...) (...) of eighteen years, of a singular
beauty, very well trai^^ up by her own Mother, who was likewise living, and
^ith whom she now remained. It fortuned that a Devil of Hell called Balthaser,
no inferior Devil, but a Master Devil, a principal Officer, and commander
in Hell, and trust (...), if there were ever a Devil that was an honest man,
Balthaser was he, saving that being now an aunciente Devil, and well spent in
years, he began to wax wanton, and to dote in the Love of Mistres Mildred: but
yet not like our greatest part of lovers now a days, that still practice
their loves unlawfully, more for lust, then for loialtie: but Balthaser
co^trarywise, bare his love honestly, lawfully, yea, and in the way of
Marriage, the which to bring to pass, he took such continual care, and
travail in his mind, that he now confessed the fire of Hell to be but a
trifle, in respect of the scorchyng flames of Love. Sometimes coniecturyng in
his mind, what bashfulnesse is found to be in young Damselles in these days,
but especially when a man comes to proffer them love, they are so shamefaste,
that with a good will, they would never hear of Marriage, till they were
thirty years old at the least, and many of them if it were not for men; I
think could be well contented to lead Apes in Hell: other whiles he remembered
the greedy desire, that is generally in Parents, who never consent to the
Marriyng of their fair daughters, without some great ioynter: Now the Devil
had no lands, and therefore to find the best remedy he could: they say the
Devil is able to put upon him all manner of shapes, so he took upon him the
presence and personage of so gallant a your ge^tleman, and fitted so well the
fancy of Mistres Mildred, that without any long circumstaunce, she was
contented to accept him for her housebande, the which being perceived by her
Father and Mother, not mindyng to contrary their Daughters likyng, gave their
free consentes, that there was no more (...), but to appoincte for their
Mariyng day, the which (...) expired, the Devil sittyng by his best
beloved, (...), ^ordes, or such like as follows.

(...), my dear and loving wife, I must confess my self not a little
beholding unto you, that neither (...) my Petigree from whence I came, neither
(...), neither yet how I am able to keep you, would notwithstanding vouchsafe
to take me for your housebande, I must think your courtesy proceaded of Love,
and do (...) my self so much the more beholding unto you, and (...) give you
some trial, that you have not made your choice(...) Rascal, or Knave of no
reputation, I am contented to (...) you one demand, what soever you think
best to require (...) me, and therefore my dear, ask what you list, your
desire shall be satisfied: always provided, that hereafter you never trouble
me, with any farther requests.

The young wife wonderfully well contented with these loving speeches, of her
courteous housebande, desired of him a little pause and respite: And now
coming to her Mother, to whom she unfolded the whole contents of the
premises, fittyng them down together, to consider of the matter, after a
great number of consultations, and as many imaginations had between them, in
the end they concluded, that her (...) should be for a suit of apparel of a
gallaunt fashion, but even then newly come up, and coming to her housebande
with this demand, they had their wish presently accomplished, and this suit
of apparel laid by them, so well made and fitted, as possibly could be
desired. Thus all parts were well pleased, they continued in good liking for
the space of one month, at which time an other new fashion was then come up,
as well in the attiryng of their heddes, as also in the making of their Gounes,
Kirtelles, and Stomachers. Mistress Mildred, being now quite out of conceit,
for that she had never a Goune to put on her back, but of a stale cut, and the
fashion at the least of a monethe old, who would blame the Gentlewoman, though
she took it very greeuouslie: alas her mind was so far out of quiet, that
her meat almost did her no manner of good. Which sudden alteration being
perceived by her houseband, he began to entreat her, to show him the cause of
her conceived greef, the which when she had reueiled, the good honest devil
her housband said: well my dear wife, although (...) I satisfied your last
demand, my conditions were (...) you should never trouble me, with any
further requests, (...) once again to recomforte you, ask of me what you
will, (...) grant your desire, but to cut you of all hope that here^^ (...)
his, I will never be troubled again with new fashion^, (...) your self that
this is the last request, that ever I (...) to grant you.

Mistres Mildred giuyng him twenty kisses for his kind^esse, went again to her
mother with these joyful news, and ^oncludyng as before, they brought the
Devil, an Inventory (...) new fashions, beginning with Cappes, Caules,
Quaiues Ruffes, Partlettes, Sleeves, Gounes, ^irtelles, Peticotes, and there
was no Stitche, no Cut, no Lace, no Guard, nor no fashion that was then in
use, but in this Inventory it was to be found, and as before, this bill was
no sooner presented, but all things were in readiness, so well fitted and
fashioned as if the most cunningest woorkemen in England had been at the
making. But what should I say? Before an other month was expired, there was a
new invention, for then came up new fashions in their Caps, in their Hats, in
their Caules new fashioned Shadows, then came up Periwigges, Frezelyng, and
Curlyng, then came up Dublettes, Bombasting, and Bolstering: new fashions in
their Gounes, ^irtells, and Peticotes, then they began to wear Crimsm,
Carnation, Green and Yeallowe Stockynges: To be short, there was such
alteration in women's apparel, from the topp to the toe in a month, that
Mistres Mildred though her self now again to be clean out of fashion, the
remembrance whereof brought her likewise to be quite out of countenance, but
when she remembered how she was prohibited, from making any further demaundes,
it did so gaul her at the heart, that now she began to froune, lump, and
lowre at her housebande, which when he perceived, he said unto her: why how
now my good Mildred, I fear me thy hedde is troubled again with new
fashions, from whence comes these sudden fittes, what is the matter that
^eedeth such alteration in thy manners, tell me I pray thee, what is it that
does offend thee?

The poor Gentlewoman not able to speak one word for weepyng, at the last
burstyng out into these terms, if (quoth she) I had made my choice of a
housbande worthy of my self* I should never have given him cause thus to
wonder at me* nor my self have had occasion to complain for such a trifle,
for that I might have done, as other women do, and have followed every
fashion, and every new devise, without (...) grudgyng, or restraint of my
desire, I should not their ha^^ bin enioyued to such a kind of silence, but I
might have made my housbande privy to my wantes, I should not then have bin
kept like Ione of the Country, in attire of the old fashion devised a month
ago.

While Mistres Mildred was proceeding in these speeches or such other like,
the Devil her housbande was stroke in such a dumpe, that not able any longer
to endure her talk, he not only avoided himself from her presence, but also
devised with speed to fly the Country, and coming to Dover, thinkyng to
cross the Seas, findyng no shippyng ready, he altered his course and gat him
into Scotland, never staiyng till he came to Edenbrough, where the King kept
his Court, and now forgettyng all humanity which he had learned before in
England, he began again a fresh to play the Devil, and so possessed the
King of Scots himself, with such strange and unacquainted passions, that by the
conjecture of Physicians, and other learned men that were then assembled
together, to judge the Kings diseases, they all concluded that it must needs
be some Feende of Hell, that so disturbde their Prince: Whereupon
Proclimations were presently sent forth, that who soever could give releef,
should have a thousand crounes by the year, so long as he did live. The desire
of these crounes, caused many to attempt the matter, but the fury of the
Devil was such, that no man could prevail.

Now it fortuned that Persinus, the father of Mistres Mildred, at this present
to be at Edenbrough, who by constraint of some extremity, was now compelled
to practice Physic, wherein he had some pretty sight, but there with all so
good success, that who but Persinus the English Physician, had all the name
through the whole Realm of Scotland. The fame of this Physician came to the
hearing of the King, who sendyng for Persinus, began to debate with him of the
straung^esse of his fittes, profferyng large sommes of money if he could find
a remedy. To whom Persinus answered, that it (...) far his skill: the King
notwithstanding, would not (...) over, but entreated Persinus to take in hand
the cure, (...) when he still denaied, did think it rather proceeded of
stubbornness, then for want of experience: wherefore he began to threaten him,
swearyng that if he would not accomplish his request, it should cost him his
life.

Persinus seeing himself so hardly besteade, was contented to cry some part of
his cunnyng: and the next day when the King was in his fit, he was brought in
to see the manner how it held him. Whom the Devil perceiving to come in at the
door, speaking to Persinus, he said in this manner.

My father Persinus, I am glad I see you here, but what wind has driven you
hither to this place.

Why what art thou (quoth Persinus) that call me thy father.

Marie (quoth the Devil) I am Balthaser, that was once married to your
Daughter, in deed a Devil of Hell, though you never knew it before, whom
your Daughter weried so much with her new fashions, as I had rather be in
Hell, then married to such a wife.

And art thou then Balthaser, (quoth Persinus) why then I pray thee good son
depart the King of Scots, for he has threatened me for thy cause, to take
away my life.

Marie (quoth Balthaser) even so I would have it, it were some part of
aquitaunce, for your Daughters kindness toward me.

Persinus seeing the disposition of the Devil, thought it not good to deal
any farther with him at that present, but afterward when the King was come to
himself, he requested of him but respete for one Month, and against the day
that he should then take him in hand again, he devised with the King that all
the Ordnaunce in the Town might be shot of, all the (...)

FINIS*

