A brief declaracion of the Lords Supper, written by the syngular learned man,
and most constaunt Martyr of Jesus Christ, Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London
prisoner in Oxforde, a litel before he suffered death for the true testimony
of Christ.

Roma. 8. For thy sake are we killed all day long, and are compted as sheep
appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we overcome through
him, that loved us.

Anno. 1555.

To the Reader.
Understand (good reader) that this great clearke and blessed Martyr, bishop
Nicholas Ridley sought not (by setting furthe this notable godly piece of
learned work) the vain glory of the world, nor temporal friendship of men for
his present advancement, much less he hunted hereby for Bishoprikes and
benefices, as all his adversaries (the enemies of Christ's truth and
ordinance) the Papists commonly do: but having consideracion of the great
charge of soul committed unto him, and of thaccompte thereof which the justice
of God would require at his hands, intending therwithall to be found blameles
in the great day of the Lord, seeing he was put aparte to defend the Gospel.
he not only forsook lands, goods, world, friends, and him self withal, and
testified the truth specified in this book by his learned mouth in the open
presence of the world: but also (to leave a sure monument and love token unto
his flock) he has regestred it by his own pen in this form ensuyng, and
sealed it up with his blood. Forasmuch than as he has approved him self no
vain disputour, no wethercocke, nor hipocrite, seeing he has willingly given
his life for the truth: and inasmuche also as his love and most constaunt
christian conscience speaks freely unto thee, gentill reader: I beseech thee
for Christ's sake and thine own, lend him thine indifferent heart, and
pacient hearing.

MAny things confound a weak memory: a few places well weighed and
perceived, lyghten the understanding. Truth is there to be searched, where it is
certain to be hade. Though God does speak the truth by man, yet in man's
word (which God has not revealed to be his) a man may doubt, without mystrust
in god. Christ is the truth of God revealed unto man from heaven by God him
self, and therefore in his word the truth is to be found, which is to be
embraced of all that be his. Christ bids us ask, and we shall have: search,
and we shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto us. Therefore our
heavenly father, the author and fountain of all truth, the botomles sea of al
understanding, send down (we beseech the) thy holy spirit in to our hearts,
and lyghten our understanding with the beams of thy heavenly grace. We ask
thee this (O merciful father) not in respect of our desartes, The. blessed
martirs prayer
but for thy dear son our saueour Jesus Christ's sake. Thou know (O
heavenly father) that the controversy about the Sacrament of the blessed body
and blood of thy dear son, our saueour Jesus Christ, has troubled not of
late only, ye church of England, France, Germanye, and Italy, but also many
years agoo. The fault is ours (no doubt) therefore, for we have deserved thy
plague. But (O Lord) be merciful, and releue our myserie with some light of
grace. Thou know (o Lord) how this wicked world rolleth up and down, and
releth to and fro: and cares not what thy will is, so it may abide in
wealth. If truth have wealth, Note.
who are so stowte to defend the truth, as they? But if Christ's cross be
laid on truths back, than they vanyshe away straight, as wax before ye
fire. But these are not they (O heavenly father) for whom I make my most moan,
but for those sely ones (O Lord) which have a zeal unto thee: those I mean,
which would and wish to know thy will, and yet are let, holden back, and
blinded by the subtilties of Satan and his Ministers, the wickedness of this
wretched word, and the synful lusts and affectiones of the flesh. Alas
Lord, thou know that we be of our selves but flesh, wherein there dwells
nothing that is good. How than is it possible for man without the (O Lord) to
understand thy truth in deed? Can the natural man perceive the will of God? O
Lord, to whom thou gave a zeal of thee, give them also (we beseech thee) ye
knowlage of thy blessed will. Suffer not the^ (O Lord) blyndlye to be led,
for to strive against thee as thou did those (Alas) which crucified thine
own son: forgive them (O Lord) for thy dear sons sake, for they know
not what they do. They do think (Alas, O Lord) for lack of knowlage, that
they do unto the good service, even when against thee they do most extremely
rage. Remember, O Lord (we beseech the) for whom thy martyr Stephan did pray,
and whom thine holy Aopstle Paul did so truly and earnestly love: that for
their salvation, he wished him self accursed for them. Remember (O heavenly
father) the prayer of thy dear son, our saueour Christ, upon the cross,
when he said unto thee: O father forgive them: they know not what they do.
With this forgiveness, O good Lord, give me (I beseech the) thy grace, so
here briefly to set furthe the sayenges of thy son our saueour Jesus Christ,
of his Eua^gelistes, and of his apostles, that in this aforesaid controversy,
the light of the truth, by ye lantern of thy word may shine unto al them
that love the.

Of the Lords last supper do speak expressly the eua^gelistes, Matthewe,
Mark, and Luke: but non more plainly nor more fully declares ye same, than
does S. Paul, partly in the 10. Chaptre, but especially in ye 11. Chap. of
his furst epistle to ye Corinthianes. As Matthewe and Mark do agree much in
words, so do likewise Luke and S. Paul. But al. iiij. no doubt, as they were
all taught in one schole, and inspired with one spirit, so taught they all one
truth. God grant us to understand it well. Amen.

Matthewe sets furthe Christ's supper thus.

When eue^ was come, he sat down with the.xij. etc. Math. 2^
As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to
the disciples, and said. Take, eat, This is my body. And he took the cup,
gave thanks, gave it to them saying: Drink ye al of this: for this is my
blood of the new testament, that is shed for many, for the Remission of
sins. I say unto you, I will not drink hencefurthe of this fruit of the
vine tree, until that day, when I shall drink that new in my fathers
kingdom. And wha^ they hade said grace, they went out, etc.

Now Mark speaks it thus. And as they eat, Jesus took bread, blessed, Mar.
14.
and brake, and gave to them, and said: Take, eat, This is my body. And he
took the cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, and they all drank of it.
And he said unto them: This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed
for many. Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day, that I drink that new, in the kingdom of God.

Here Matthewe and Mark do agree not only in ye matter, but also almost fully
in the form of words. In Matthewe gave thanks. Mark has one word,
Blessed: which signifies in this place all one. And where Matthewe says:
Drink ye all of this: Mark says: they al drank of it. And where Matthewe
says: of this fruit of ye vine: Mark leaves out ye word (this) and says,
of ye fruit of the vine.

Now let us see likewise, what agreement (in form of words) is between S. Luke
and S. Paul. Luke writes thus: Luce. 22.
He took bread, gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to them, saye^g: This is my
body which is given for you This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also
when they hade supped, he took the cupp, saying: This cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Saint Paul sets furthe ye Lords supper thus. ^. Cor. 11.
The Lord Jesus, the same night, in the which he was betrayed, took bread, and
gave thanks, and brake, and said: Take, eat: this is my body, which is
broken for you. This do in remembrance of me. After the same manner he took
the cup, when supper was done, saying This cup is the new testament in my
blood. This do, as often as ye shall drink it, in the remembrance of me. For
as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show ye
Lords death, until he come

Here where Luke says, which is given: Paul says, which is broken. And as
Luke adds to the words of Paul spoken of the cup (which is shed for
you) so likewise Paul adds to the words thereof, This do, as often as you
shall drink it in the remembrance of me. The rest that follows in S. Paul
both there and in ye 10. chap. perteyneth unto the right use and doctrine of
the Lords supper,

Thus the Evangelists and S. Paul have rehearced the words and work of
Christ, whereby he did institute and ordain this holy sacrament of his body and
blood, to be a perpetual remembrance unto his coming again of him self (I
say) yt is of his body given for us, and of his blood shed for ye remission
of sins. But this remembrance which is thus ordained, as ye author thereof is
Christ (both God and man) so by the almighty power of God, it far passes
all kinds of remembraunces, that any other man is able to make either of him
self or of any other thing. For who so ever receaueth this holy Sacrament thus
ordained in remembrance of Christ, he receaueth there with either death or
life. In this (I trust) we do all agree. For S. Paul says of ye godly
receauours in ye 10. chap. of his furst epistle unto the Corinthia^s: The cup
of blessing, which we bless, is it not the partaking or feloweship of Christ's
blood? And also he says. The bread which we break (and means at the Lords
table) is it not the partaking or feloweship of Christ's body? Now the
partaki^g of Christ's body and of his blood unto the faithful and godly, is
the partaking or feloweship of life and immortality. And again of the badde
and ungodly receauours, S. Paul as plainly says thus: He that eats of this
bread, eand drynketh of this cup unworthily: is guilty of the body and blood
of ye Lord. O how necessary tha^ it is, Note.
if we love life, and would eschew death, to try and examine our selves,
before we eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: for else assuredly, he
that eats and drynketh thereof unworthily, eats and drynketh his own
damnacion, because he estemeth not the Lords body: yt is, he reuerenceth not
the Lords body with ye honor that is due unto him.

And that which was said, that with the recept of the holy Sacrament of the
blessed body and blood of Christ is received of every one, good and badde,
either life or death, it is not me^t, that they which are dead before God,
may hereby receive life: or the living before God can hereby receive death.
For as non is mete to receive natural fode, whereby ye natural life is
nourished, except he be borne and live before: so no man ca^ feed (by the
recept of this holy sacrament) of the fode of eternal life, except he be
regenerated and borne of God before. And on the other side, no man here
receaueth damnacion which is not dead before.

Thus hitherto without all doubt, God is my witness, I say so far as I do
know, there is no controversy among them that be learned, in the church of
England (concerning the matter of this sacrament) but all do agree, whether
they be new or old: and to speak plain, and as some of them do odiously
call either other: whether they be protestauntes, papists, Pharisees, or
gospellers. And as al do agree hitherto, in ye aforesayed doctrine, so al do
deteste, abhor and co^de^ne ye wicked heresy of ye Messalonianes, which
other wise be called Euticheres, which said, yt ye holy Sacrament ca^ another do
good nor harm. Al do al so co^de^ne those wicked Anabaptists, which put no
difference between the Lords table and the lords meat, and their own. And
because charity would, that we should, (if it be possible, and so far as we
may with the sauegarde of good conscience, and mayntenaunce of the truth)
agree with all men: therefore me thinks, it is not charitably done to burden
any man (either new or old, as they call them) further, than such do declare
them selves, to dissent from that we are persuaded to be truth, or pretend
thereto to be controversies, where as non such are in deed: and so to multiplye
the debate, the which the more it does encreace, the further it does depart
from the unity, that the true christian should desire.

And again, this is true, that truth another needs nor will be maynteyned with
lies. It is also a true proverb, that it is even sin, to lie upon the devil:
what it is to lie.
for though by thy lie thou do sin never so much to speak against the
devil, yet in yt thou lie, in deed thou workest the deuilles work: thou
do him service, The slau^derous lies of the papists.
and take the deuilles part. Now whether than they do godly and charitably,
which either by their pen in writing, or by their words in preaching, do
bear the simple people in hand, that those which thus do teach and believe,
do goo about to make the holy Sacrament (ordained by Christ him self) a thing
no better than a piece of common bread: or that do say, that such do make
the holy Sacrament of the blesed body and blood of Christ nothing else, but a
bare sign or a figure, to represent Christ non otherwise, than the Iuye bushe
does represent the wine in a tavern, or as a vile person gorgiouslye
apparailed* may represent a king or a prince in a play. Alas let men leave
lyeng, and speak the truth every one, not only to his neighbor, but also of
his neighbor: for we are members one of an other, says saint Paul. The
controversy (no doubt) which at this day troubles the church (wherein any
mean learned man, either old or new, does stand in) is not, whether the
holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, is no better than a piece of
common bread or no: or whether the Lords table is no more to be regarded, tha^
the table of any earthy man or no: or whether it is but a bare sign or figure
of Christ and nothing else or no. For all do grant, that S. Paul's words
do require, that the bread which we break, is the partaking of the body of
Christ, and also do grant him that eats of that bread, or drinks of ye
cup unworthily, to be guilty of the Lords death, and to eat and drink his
own damnacion, because he estemeth not the Lords body. All do grant, that
these words of S. Paul (when he says: If we eat, it auantageth us nothing:
or if we eat not we want nothing thereby) are not spoken of the Lords table,
but of other common meats.

wherein the controversy consists.
Thus tha^ hitherto yet, we al agree. But now let us see, wherein the dissensio^
does stand. The understanding of it, wherein it chiefli stands, is a step
to the true searching furthe of the truth. For who can seek well a remedy, if
he know not before, ye disease? It is another to be denied nor dissembled, that
in the matter of this Sacrament there be diverse points, wherein men (counted to
be learned) can not agree. As whether there be any Transubstanciation of the
bread, or no any corporal and carnal presence of Christ's substance, or no:
Whether adoracion (due only unto God) is to be done unto the Sacrament or no:
and whether Christ's body be there offered in deed unto ye heavenly father, by
ye priest or no: and whether ye evil man receaueth the natural body of Christ
or no. Yet nevertheless as in a man diseased in diverse parts, commonly the
original cause of such diverse diseases, which is spredde abroad in the
body, do come from one chief membre, as from the stomach, or from the head:
even so all five aforesayed do chiefly heng upon this one question: which is,
what is the matter of the Sacrament: whether is it the natural substance of
bread, or the natural substance of Christ's own body? The truth of this
question truly tried out and agreed upon, no doubt shall cease the controversy
in all ye rest. For if it be Christ's own natural body, borne of the virgin:
than assuredly (seeing that all learned men in England so far as I know,
both new and old, grant there to be but one substance) than I say, they
must needs grant Transubstanciacion: that is, a change of ye substance of
bread, into the substance of Christ's body. Tha^ also they must needs grant
the carnal and corporal presence of Christ's body. Than must the Sacrament be
adored with ye honor due to Christ him self, for the unity of the two
natures in one person. Than if ye priest do offer the Sacrament, he does
offer in deed Christ him self. And finally the murtherour, the aduouterour, or
wicked man receiving the Sacrament, must needs than receive also the natural
substance of Christ's own blessed body, both flesh and blood.

Now on ye other side, if after the truth shall be truly tried out, it shall be
found, that the substance of bread is the natural substance of the
Sacrament, although for the change of the use, office and dignity of ye
bread, the bread in deed sacramentally is changed into the body of Christ, as
the water in Baptism is sacrame^tally changed into the fountain of
regeneration, and yet the natural substance thereof remains all one, as was
before: if (I say) the true solucion of that former question (whereupon al these
controversies do heng) be, that the natural substance of bread, is the
material substance in the Sacrament of Christ's blessed body: than must it
needs follow, of the former proposicion (confessed of all that be named to be
learned, so far as I do know, in England) which is, that there is but one
material substance in the Sacrament of the body, and one only likewise in the
Sacrament of the blood: that there is no such thing in deed and in truth, as
they call Transubstanciacion: for the substance of bread remains still in the
Sacrament of the body: than also the natural substance of Christ's humane
nature, which he took of the virgin Mary is in heaven, where it reigns now
in glory, and not here enclosed under the form of bread: than that godly
honor, which is only due unto God ye creator, may not be done unto the
creature without idolatry and sacrilege, is not to be done unto the holy
Sacrament.

Than also the wicked, I mean the impenite^t murtherour, aduouterour, or such
like, do not receive the natural substance of ye blessed body and blood of
Christ. Finally tha^ does it follow, ye Christ's blessed body and blood, which
was once only offered and shed upon the cross, being available for the
sins of all the hole world, is offered up no more, in'the natural substance
thereof, another by ye priest nor any other thing But here before we go any
further to search in this matter, and to wade (as it were) to search and try
out (as we may) ye truth hereof in the scripture, it shall do well by the way,
to know, whether they that thus make answer and solucion unto the former
principal question, do take away symplie and absolutely the presence of
Christ's body and blood, from the Sacrament ordained by Christ, and duly
ministered according to his holy ordinance and institucio^ of the same.
Undoubtedly they do deny that utterly, either so to say, or so to mean.
Hereof if any man do or will doubt, the books which are written already in
this matter of them, that thus do answer, will make the matter plain.

Now than will you say, what kind of presence do they grant, and what do they
deny? Bryefly they deny the presence of Christ's body in the natural
substance of his humane and assumpt nature, and grant the presence of the
same by grace: that is, they affirm and say, that the substance of the
natural body and blood of Christ is only remaynyng in heaven, and so shall be
unto the later day, when he shall come again in glory (accompanied with the
Au^gelles of heaven) to judge both the quick and the dead. And that the same
natural substance of the very body and blood of Christ, because it is united
unto the divine nature in Christ ye second person of the Trinity. Therefore it
has not only life in it self, but is also hable to give and does give life
unto so many as be or shall be partakers thereof: that is, yt to all yt do believe
on his name, which are not borne of blood (as S. Io. says) or of ye will of ye
flesh, or of ye will of man, but are borne of God: though the self same
substance abide still in heaven, and they for the time of their pilgrimage
dwell here upon earth: By grace (I say) that is, by the gift of this life
(mentioned in John) and the propreties of the same, mete for our pilgrimage
here upon earth, the same body of Christ is here present with us. Even as for
example, we say, ye same Sun which (in substance) never remoueth his place
out of the heavens, is yet present here by his beams, light, and natural
influence, where it shyneth upon the earth. For Gods word and his
Sacraments be (as it were) the beams of Christ, which is Sol iusticiae, the
Su^ne of ryghteousnes.

Thus haste thou heard, of what sort or sect so ever thou be, wherein does
stand the principal state and chief point of all the controversies, which do
proprely perteyne unto the nature of this Sacrament. As for the use thereof, I
grant there be many other things, whereof here I have spoken nothing at all.
And now least thou justly might complain, and say, that I have in opening
of this matter done nothing else, but dug a pit, and have not shut it up
again: or broken a gap, and have not made it up again: or opened ye book, and
have not closed it again: or else to call me what thou lustest, as neutrall,
dissembler, or what so ever else thy lust and learning shall serve to thee to
name me worse. Therefore here now I will (by Gods grace) not only shortly but
so clearly* plainly as I ca^, make ye to know, whether or ye aforesaid two
answers to ye former principal state and chief poi^t does like me best: yea
and also I will hold al those accursed, which in this matter (yt now so
troubles ye church of Christ) have of God received the keye of knowlage, and
yet goo about to shut up ye doors so, yt they the^ selves will not enter in,
nor suffer other that would. And as for mine own part, I co^sydre, both of
late what charge and cure of soul has been committed unto me, whereof God
knows, how sone I shall be called to give acco^pte: and also now in this
world, what perile and danger of ye laws (concerning my life) I am now in at
this p^se^t time. What folly where it tha^ for me, now to disse^ble with God, of
who^ assuredly I look and hope by Christ to have everlasting life? Seeing yt
such charge and danger (both before God and man) do compass me in round
about on every side: therefore (God willing) I will frankely and freely vttre my
mind, and though my body be captyue, yet my tongue and my pen (as long as I
may) shall freely set furthe, that which undoubtedly I am persuaded to be ye
truth of Gods word. And yet I will do it under this protestacion, call me
protestau^t who iusteth. I pass not thereof. My protestacion shall be thus: that
my mind is and ever shall be (God willing) to set furthe syncerely the true
sense and meaning (to the best of my understanding) of Gods most holy word,
and not to decline from the same, either for fear of worldly danger, or else
for hope of gain

I do proteste also due obedience and submission of my judgment in this my
writing, and in all other mine affairs unto those of Christ's church, which be
truly learned in Gods holy word, gathered in Christ's name, and guided by
his spirit. After this protestacion, Answer to the chief question
I do plainly affirm and say, yt the second answer made unto the chief
question and principal point, I am persuaded to be the very true meaning and
sense of Gods holy word: that is, that the natural substance of bread and
wine is the true material substance of the holy sacrament of the blessed body
and blood of our saueour Christ: and the places of scripture, whereupon this my
faith is grounded, be these, both concerning ye sacrament of ye body, and
also of ye blood.

Furst let us repete the beginning of the institucio^ of the Lords supper,
wherein al ye three eua^gelistes, and S. Paul almost in words do agree,
saying that Jesus took bread, gave thanks, brake, and gave it to the
disciples, saying. Take, eat, this is my body. Here it appears plainly, that
Christ calls very bread, his body. For that which he took, was very bread. In
this all me^ do agree. And that which he took, after he hade given thanks, he
brake: and that which he took and brake, he gave to his disciples: and that
which he took, brake, and gave to his disciples, he said him self of it: This
is my body. So it appears playnlie, that Christ called very bread his body.
But very bread cannot be his body in very substance thereof: Argument
therefore it must needs have an other meani^g. Which meaning appears plainly
what it is, by the next sentence that follows imediatlye, both in Luke and in
Paul. And yt is this: Do this in remembrance of me. Whereupon it seems unto
me to evident, that Christ did take bread, and called it his body, for that he
would thereby institute a perpetual remembrance of his body: specially of ye
singular benefit of our redemption, which he would than procure and purchase
unto us, by his body upon the cross. But bread reteynyng still his own very
natural substance, may be thus by grace, (and in a sacrame^tal significacio^)
his body: whereas else the very bread which he took, brake, and gave them,
could not be in any wise his natural body. For that were confusion of
substaunces, and therefore the very words of Christ joined with the next
sentence following, both enforces us to confess the very bread, to remain
still, and also opens unto us, how that bread may be and is thus by his
divine power his body, which was given for us. But here I remember, I have red
in some writours of the contrary opinion, which do deny that, yt which
Christ did take, he brake. For (say they) after his taking, he blessed it, as
Mark does speak. And by his blessing, he changed the natural substance of
the bread in to the natural substance of his body: and so although he took
the bread, and blessed it, yet because in blessing he changed the substance
of it, he brake not the bread, which than was not there, but only the form
thereof.

Unto this objection I have two plain answers, both grounded upon Gods
word. The one I will here rehearse: the other answer I will differ, until I
speak of the Sacrament of the blood. Mine answer here is taken out of ye
plain words of S. Paul, which does manifestlye confound this fantastical
inuencion, furst inverted (I wene) of Pope Innocentius, and after confirmed by
the subtle sophister Duns, and lately renewed now in our days, with an
eloquent style and much finesse of wit. Man* Antho. constable. Gardener.
But what can craftye inuencion, subtlety in sophismes, eloquence or fynesse
of wit prevail against the infallible word of God? What need we to strive
and contend what thing we break, for Paul says, speaking undoubtedly of the
Lords table: The bread (says he) which we break, is it not the partaking or
feloweship of the Lords body? Whereupon it follows, that after the thanks
geuyng it is bread which we break. And how often in the Acts of ye apostles,
is the Lords supper signified by breaking of bread? They did persevere (says
S. Luke) in the Apostles doctrine, Act. 2.20.
communion, and breaki^g of bread. And they brake bread in every house. And
again i^ an other place, wha^ they were come together to break bread etc. s.
Paul which sets forth most fully in his writing both the doctrine and ye
right use of ye Lords supper, and ye sacrame^tal eating and dri^king of
Christ's body and blood, calls it five times bread, bread, bread, bread,
bread.

The sacramental bread is the mystical body, The. 2. reason.
and so it is called in scripture* 1. Cor. 10. as it is called the natural body
of Christ. But Christ's mystical body is the congregation of christianes. Now
noma^ was ever so fond, as to say, that that sacrame^tal bread is
transubstanciated and changed in to the substance of the congregation.
Wherefore no man should likewise think, or say, yt ye bread is
tra^substa^ciated and changed in to ye natural substance of Christ's humayne
nature.

But my mind is not here to wryt what may be gathered out of scriptures for
this purpose, but only to note here briefly, those which seem unto me, to be
the most plain places. Therefore contented to have spoken thus much of the
sacrame^tal bread, I will now speak a litel of ye Lords cup.

And this shall be my third argument grounded upon Christ's own words. The. 3.
Argument.
The natural substance of the sacramental wine remains still, and is ye
material substance of the sacrament of ye blood of Christ: Therefore it is like
wise so in ye Sacramental bread.

I know that he that is of a contrary opinion, will deny the former part of
mine Argument. But I will prove it thus, by the plain words of Christ him
self, both in Mathewe and in Mark. Christ's words are these: after the
words said upon the cup. I say unto you (says Christ) I will not dri^ke
he^cefurthe of this fruit of the vine tree, until I shall drink that new in
my fathers kingdom. Here note how Christ calls playnlie his cup the fruit
of the vine tree. But the fruit of the vine tree is very natural wine. Wherefore
the natural substance of the wine does remain still in the Sacrament of
Christ's blood. And here in speaking of ye Lords cup, it comes unto my
remembrance ye vanity of Innocentius his sa^tastical inuencion, which by
Paul's words I did confute before, and here did promise somewhat more to
speak, and that is this. If the transubstanciacion be made by this word
(Blessed) in Mark said upon the bread, as Innocentius that pope did say:
Than surely seeing that word is not said of Christ, another in any of the
evangelists nor in S. Paul upon the cup: There is no transubstanciacion of
the wine at al. For where the cause does fail, there can not follow the
effect. But the sacramental bread and the sacramental wine do both remain
in their natural substance alike, and if the one be not changed, as of the
sacramental wine it appears evidently: than there is no such
transubstanciacion in another of them both,

All that put and affirm this change of ye substance of bread and wine in to
the substance of Christ's body and blood (called Transubstanciacion) do also
say this change to be made by a certain form of prescripte words and non
other. The papists affirm they wotte not what
But what they be that make the change, either of the one or of the other,
Gardener to the 48. objection.
undoubtedly eue^ they that do write most fynely in these our days, almost
confess plainly, that they can not tell. For although they grant, to certain
of the old autors, as Crysostome and Ambrose: that these words (This is my
body) are the words of consecracion of the sacrament of the body: yet say
they, these words may well be so called, because they do assure us of the
consecracion thereof, whether it be done before these words be spoken or no.

But as for this their doubt (concerning the sacrament of the body) I let it
pass. Let us now considre the words which perteyne to the cup. This is
furst evident, yt as Matthewe much agrees with Mark, and likewise Luke with
Paul, much agrees herin in form of words: so in the same, the form of
words in Matthewe and Mark is diverse from that which is in Luke and Paul:
ye old autors do most rehearse ye form of words in Matthewe and Mark:
because I wene they seemed to the^ most clear. But here I would know, whether
it is credible or no, that Luke and Paul, when they celebrated the Lords
supper with their congregaciones, that they did not use the same form of words
(at the Lords table) which they wrote, Luke in his gospel, and Paul in his
epistle. Of Luke, because he was a physician, whether some will grant, that he
might be a priest or no, and was hable to receive ye order of priesthood,
which (they say) is given by virtue of these words said by the bishop: Take
thou authority to sacrifice for the quycke and the dead. I can not tell, but if
they should be so strayt upon Luke, either for his craft, or else for lack
of such power given him by virtue of thaforesaid words: than I wene, both
Petre and Paul are in daungier to be deposed of their priesthood, for the
craft either of fyshing, which was Petres: Petre and Paul had no such
priesthode as the papists have
or making of te^tes which was Paul's, were more vile, than the the science of
phisike. And as for those sacramental words of the order of Priesthood to
have authority to sacrifice both for ye quyck and the dead, I wene Petre and
Paul (if they were both alive) were not hable to prove, that ever Christ gave
them such authority, or ever said any such words unto them. But I will let
Luke goo, and because Paul speaks more for him self, I will rehearse his
words: That (says Paul) which I received of the Lord I gave unto you. For
the Lord Jesus. etc. And so he sets forth the hole institucio^ and right
use of the Lords supper. Now seeing that Paul here says, that which he
received of the Lord, he hade given them, and that which he has received and
given them before by word of mouth, now he rehearses and writes the same in
his epistle: is it credible that Paul would never use this form of words,
upon the Lords cup, which (as he says) he received of the Lord, that he
hade given them before, and now rehearses in his Epistle? I trust no man is so
far from all reason, but he will grant me, that this is not likely so to be.
Now than if you grant me, that Paul did use the form of words, which he
writes: Let us than rehearse and considre Paul's words, which he says,
Christ spoke thus upon ye cup. This cup is the new testament in my blood: this
do as often as ye shall drink it, in the remembrance of me.

Here I would know, whether that Christ's words spoken upon the cup, were
not as mighty in work, and as effectual in significacion to all intentes,
constructiones and purposes (as our Parliament men do speak) as they were
spoken upon the bread. If this be granted, which thing I think no man can
deny: than further I reason thus. But the word (is) in the words spoken upon
the Lords bread does mightily signify (say they) the change of the
substance of that which goes before it, in to ye substance of yt which
follows after, yt is, of the substance of bread in to the substance of
Christ's body, when Christ says: This is my body. Now than if Christ's
words which are spoken upon the cup, which Paul here rehearses be of the
same might and power, both in working and signifieng: Than must this word
(is) when Christ says: This cup is the new testament etc. turn the
substance of the cup in to the substance of the new testament. And if thou
wilt say, that this word (is) another makes nor signifies any such change
of the cup, although it be said of Christ, that this cup is the new
testament, yet Christ meant no such change, as that. Mary Sir, even so say I,
wha^ Christ said of the bread, which he took, and after thanks given brake
and gave them, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, he meant no more any such
change of the substance of bread in to the substance of his natural body,
than he meant of the change and Transubstanciacion of the cup in to the
substance of the new testament. And if thou wilt say, that the word (cup)
here in Christ's words does not signify the cup it self, but the wine, or
thing contained in the cup, by a figure called Metonimia, for ye Christ's
words meant, and so must needs be taken: thou say very well. But I pray the
by the way, here note two things, Furst that this word (is) has no such
streynght or significacion in the Lords words, Note well the Papists error
confuted.
to make or to signify any transubstantiacion. Secondly, that the Lords
words whereby he instituted the sacrament of his blood, he uses a figuratyne
speech. Now vain than is it, that some so earnestly do say, as if were an
infallible rule, that in doctrine and in the institucion of the sacraments,
Christ used no figures, but all his words are to be strayned to their propre
significacio^s: wha^ as here what so ever thou say was in ye cup, another
yt nor the cup it self (taking every word in his propre significacio^) was ye
new testament, but in understanding that which was in the cup, by the cup
yt is a figurative speech: yea and also thou cannest not verify or truly say
of that, whether thou say it was wine or Christ's blood, to be the new
testament without a figure also. Thus in one sentence spoken of Christ, in the
institucion of the sacrament of his blood, the figure must help us twyse. So
untrue is it, that some do write, that Christ uses no figure in the doctrine
of faith, nor in the institucion of his Sacraments. But some say, if we shall
thus admit figures in doctrine, than shall all the articles of our faith, by
figures and allegories shortly be transformed and unloosed. I say it is like
fault (and eue^ the same) to deny ye figure, where ye place so requires to be
understood, as vaynely to make it a figurative speech, which is to be
understood in his propre significacion.

The rules whereby ye speech is known, when it is figurative, Aug. De Doc.
christiana, li. 3. ca. 16.
and whereby it is none, S. Augustine in his book De doctrina christiana, gives
diverse learned lessons, very necessary to be known of ye students in Gods
word. Of the which, one I will rehearse which is this. If (says he) the
scripture does seem to commau^de a thing, which is wicked or ungodly: or to
forbid a thing that charity does require, than know thou (says he) that
the speech is figurative. And for example he brings the saying of Christ, in
ye.6. chap. of S. Io. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye can not have life in you: it seems to command a wicked or an
ungodly thing. Wherefore it is a figurative speech, co^mau^ding to have
communion and fellowship with Christ's passion, and devoutly and holsomlye to lay
up in memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

And here I can not but marvel at some men, Gardener in his answers to the 161.
and. 22^ objection. Note.
surely of much excellent fynesse of wit, and of great eloquence, that are not
ashamed to write and say, yt this aforesaid saying of Christ is after S. Austin
a figurative speech in deed: howbeit not unto the learned, but to the
unlearned. Here let any man that but indifferently understands the latin
tongue, read the place in S. Austen: and if he perceive not clearly S
Augustines words and mind to be contrary, let me abide thereof the rebuke.

This lesson of S. Augustine I have therefore the rather set furthe, because it
teaches us to understand that place in John^ figuratyuely. Even so surely the
same lesson with the example of S. Augustines exposiciones thereof, teaches us
not only by the same, to understand Christ's words in the institucion of the
Sacrament both of his body and of his blood figuratyuely, but also the very
true meaning and understanding of the same. For if to command to eat the
flesh of the son of man, and to drink his blood seems to command an
inconuenie^ce and an ungodliness, and is even so in deed, if it be
vnderstande^ as the words do stand in their propre significacion: and
therefore must be understood figuratyuely and spiritually, as S. Augustine
does godly and learnedly interpret them: Than surely Christ commanding in
his last supper to eat his body, and to drink his blood, seemed to command
in sound of words, as great and even the same inconvenience and ungodliness,
as did his words in the.6. chap. of S. John^: and therefore must even by the
same reason, be likewise understood and expounded figuratyuely and
spiritually, as S. Augustine did the other: Whereunto that exposicion of S.
Augustine may seem to be the more mere, for that Christ in his supper, to the
commandment of eating and drinking of his body and blood adds, Do this in
the remembrance of me. Which words surely were the keye, that opened and
revealed the spiritual and godly exposicion unto S. Augustine.

But I have tarried longer in setting furthe ye form of Christ's words upon
the Lords cup, written by Paul and Luke, than I did inte^de to do. And yet
in speaking of the form of Christ's words, spoken upon his cup, The Lords
cup, as the priests say.
comes now to my remebrau^ce the form of words used in the latin Mass,
upon the Lords cup. Whereof I do not a litell marvel, what should be the
cause seeing the latin Mass agrees with the evangelists and Paul, in the
form of words said upon the bread: why in the words said upon the Lords
cup, it diffreth from them all, yea and adds to the words of Christ spoken
upon the cup, these words, Misterium fidei, that is, the mystery of faith,
which are not read to be attributed unto the sacrament of Christ's blood,
another in the evangelists nor in Paul, nor so far as I know, in any other
place of holy scripture? yea and if it may have some good exposicion, yet why
it should not be as well added unto the words of Christ upon his bread, as
upon his cup, surely I do not see ye mystery. And because I see in the use
of the latin mass the sacrament of ye blood abused, when it is denied unto
the lay people, clean contrary unto Gods most certain word: for why, I do
beseech the, should the sacrament of Christ's blood be denied unto the lay
christian, more tha^ to ye priest? Did not Christ sheade his blood as well for
ye lay godly man, as for ye godly priest? If thou wilt say, yeas that he did
so. But yet ye sacrament of the blood is not to be received without the offering
up and sacrificeing thereof unto God the father, both for the quick and for
the dead: and no man may make oblacion of Christ's blood unto God, but a
priest, and therefore the priest alone (and that but in his Mass only) may
receive the sacrament of the blood. And call you this (Masters) Misterium
fidei? Alas alas, I fear me this is before God Misterium iniquitatis, the
mystery of iniquity, such as S. Paul speaks of, in his epistle to the
Thessalonians. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Prayer. Psalm. 67.
The Lord be merciful unto us, and bless us, lighten his countenance upon
us, and be merciful unto us. That we may know thy way upon earth, and among
all people thy salvation.

This kind of oblacion stands vponTransubstanciacion his cousyn germayne,
and they do grow both upon one ground. The mass sacrifice injurious to
Christ's passion
The lord wede it out of his vineyard shortly (if it be his blessed will and
pleasure) ye bitter root. To speak of this oblacio^, how much is it
injurious unto Christ's passion? How it can not, but with high blasphemye and
heinous arrogauncie, and intolerable pride, be claimed of any man, other than
of Christ him self? how much and how plainly it repugneth unto the manifest
words, the true sense and meaning of holy scripture in many places, Hebr. 9.10.
especially in the epistle to the Hebrews: the matter is so long, and other have
written in it at large, that my mind is now, not to entreat thereof any
further. For only in this my scribbling, I intend to search out and set forth
by the scriptures (according to Gods gracious gift of my poor knowlage)
whether the true sense and meani^g of Christ's words in ye institucio^ of his
holy supper, do require any Tra^substa^ciacio^, as they call it: or that the
very substance of bread and wine do remain still in the Lords supper and be
the material substance of the holy Sacrament of Christ our saueours blessed
body and blood. Gardener in the answer to the. 15. objection.
Yet there remains one vain Quidditie of Duns in this matter, yt which because
some that write now do seem to like it so well, that they have strypped him
out of Dunces dustye and dark terms, and pricked him and painted him in
fresh colors of an eloquent style: and may therefore deceive the more, except
the error be warely eschued.

Duns says in these words of Christ, This is my body, this pronowne
demonstratyue, meaning the word (this) if ye will know, what it does show
or demonstrate, whether ye bread that Christ took or no: he answers no, but
only one thing in substance it poynteth, whereof the nature or name it does
not tell, but leaves that to be determined and told by that which follows ye
word (is) that is by Praedicatum, as the logician does speak: and therefore
he calls this pronowne demonstratiue (This) Indiuiduum Vagum, that is, a
wa^dring propre name, whereby we may point out and show any one thing in
substance, what thing so ever it be. That this ymaginacion is vain and
untruly applied unto these words of Christ, This is my body: it may appear
plainly in ye words of Luke and Paul, said upon the cup, co^ferred with ye
form of words spoken upon ye cup in Mathewe and Mark. For as upon the
bread it is said of al, This is my body: so of Matthewe and Mark it is said
of the cup, This is my blood. Than if in the words, This is my body, the
word (this) be (as Duns calls it) a wa^dring name, to appoint and show
furthe any one thing, whereof the name and nature it does not tell: so must it
be likewise in those words of Matthewe and Mark upon the Lords cup, This
is my blood. But in the words of Matthewe and Mark, it signifies and
poynteth out ye same, that it does in the Lords words upon the cup in Luke
and Paul, where it is said This cup is the new testament in my blood. etc.
Therefore in Matthewe and Mark the pronowne demonstratyue (this) does not
wandre to point only one thing in substance, not showing what it is, but
tells it plainly what it is, no less in Mathewe and Mark unto the eye,
than is done in Luke and Paul, by putti^g to this word (cup) both unto the
eye, and unto the ear. For taking the cup and demo^strating or showing it
unto his disciples, by this pronowne demonstratiue (this) and saying unto them,
Drink ye all of this: it was than al one to say. This is my blood, as to say:
This cup is my blood, meaning by the cup as the nature of the speech does
require, the thing contained in the cup. So likewise without all doubt, when
Christ hade taken bread, given thanks, and broken it, and giving it to his
disciples said, Take: and so demonstrating and showing that bread which he
hade in his hands, to say than, This is my body: and to have said, This
bread is my body. As it were all one, if a man lacking a knyfe, and goi^g to
his oisters, would say unto an other, who^ he saw to have two knives, Sir, I
pray you lend me the one of your knyues. Were it not now all one to answer
him, Sir, hold I will lend you this to eat your meat, but not to open
oysters withal: and hold, I will lend you this knyfe to eat your meat, but
not to open oysters. This similitude serves but for this purpose, to declare
ye nature of speech withal, where as the thing that is demonstrated and showed,
is evidently perceived, and openly known to the eye. But O good Loord, what a
wonderful thing is it to see, how some me^ do labor to teach, what is
demonstrated and showed by the pronowne demonstratyue, this, in Christ's words
when he says: This is my body: This is my blood: how they labor (I say) to
teach, what that (this) was than in deed, wha^ Christ spoke in the beginning
of the sentence the word (this) before he hade pronounced the rest of the
words, Guard. to the. 13. objection.
that followed in the same sentence: so that their doctrine may agree with
their Transubstanciacion: which in deed is the very fou^dacion, wherein al their
erroneous doctrine does stand. God makers agree not among them selves
And here the Transubstanciatours do not agree among them selves, no more than
they do in the words which wrought the Transubstanciacion, when Christ did
furst institute his Sacrament: Wherein Innocentius a bishop of Rome of the later
days, and Duns (as was noted before) do attribute the work unto the word
(Benedixit) Blessed: but the rest for the most part, to Hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body. etc. Duns therefore with his sect, because he puts the
change before, must needs say, yt (this) when Christ spoke it in the
beginning of the sentence, was in deed Christ's body. For in the change, the
substance of bread did depart, and the change was now done in Benedixit
(says he) that went before: and therefore after him and his, that (this) was
than in deed Christ's body, though ye word did not importe so much, but only
one thing in substance: which substance after Duns (the bread being gone)
must needs be the substance of Christ's body. But they that put their
Tra^substanciacion to be wrought by these words of Christ, This is my body:
and do say, that when the hole sentence was finished, than this change was
perfected, and not before: they cannot say, but yet Christ's (this) in the
beginning of the sentence before the other words were fully pronounced, was
bread in deed. But as yet ye change was not done, and so long the bread must
needs remain, and so long with the universal consent of al transubstau^ciatours,
the natural substance of Christ's body can not come: and therefore must their
(this) of necessite demo^strate and show the substance, which was as yet in
the pronou^ceing of the furst word (this) byChrist, but bread. But how can
they make and verify Christ's words to be true, demonstrating the substance
which in the demonstracion is but bread, and say thereof, This is my body: yt
is (as they say) the natural substance of Christ's body: except they would
say, that ye verb (is) signifies is made, or is changed in to. And so tha^
if the same verb (is) be of ye same effect in Christ's words spoken upon the
cup, and rehearsed by Luke and Paul: the cup or the wine in the cup must
be made or turned in to the new testament, as was declared before.

Gardener a Neutral or Jack of both Sides.
There be some among the Transubstanciatours, which walk so wylylie and so warely
between these two aforesaid opiniones, allowing them both, and holding plainly
another of them both, that me thynkes, they may be called Neutralles,
Ambodexters, or rather such as can shifte on both sides. They play on both
parts. For with the later, they do allow the doctrine of the last syllable,
which is that transubstanciacion is done by miracle in an instaunt, at ye
sound of the last syllable (um) in this sentence, Hoc est corpus meum. And
they do allow also Duns his fantastical imaginacio^ of Indiuiduum vagum, that
demo^strateth as he teaches, in Christ's words, one thing in substance, than
being (after his mind) the substance of the body of Christ.

A maruailous thing, how any man can agree with both these two, they being so
contrary the one to the other. For the one says, the word (this)
demonstrateth the substance of bread: and the other says, no not so, the
bread is gone, and it demonstrateth a substance which is Christ's body.

Tushe says this third man, ye understand nothing at al. Guard. to the. 84
objection
They agree well enough in the chief point, which is the ground of al: that is,
both do agree and bear witness, that there is transubstanciacion. They do
agree in deed in that conclusion: I grant. But their process and doctrine
thereof do eue^ as well agree together, Godmakers agree against the truth. Note
as did ye false witness before Annas and Caiphas against Christ: or the two
wicked judges against Susa^na. For against Christ the false witnesses did agree
no doubt, to speak all against him. And the wicked judges were both agreed to
condemn poor Susanna: but in examinacion of their witnesses, they dissented
so far, that all was found false, yt they went about, both yt where in they
agreed, and also those things, which they brought for their proves.

The consent of the old autors,
Thus much have I spoken, in searching out a solucion for this principal
question, which was, what is the material substance of the holy Sacrament, in
the Lords supper. Now least I should seem to set by mine own conceate, more
than is mete: or less to regard the doctrine of the old ecclesiastical
wrytours, than is convenient for a man of my poor learning and simple wit
for to do. And because also I am in deed persuaded, yt the old
ecclesiastical wrytours understood the true meaning of Christ in this matter:
and have both so truly and so plainly set it furthe in certain places of their
wrytinges, that no man which will vouchesafe to read them, and without
prejudice of a corrupt judgment will indifferently weighe the^, and construe
their minds non other wise, than they declare them selves to have meant: I am
persuaded (I say) that in reading of them thus, no man can be ignorant in
this matter, but he that will shut up his own eyes, and blyndfelde him self.
When I speak of ecclesiastical wrytours, I mean of such, as were before the
wicked vsurpacio^ of the sea of Rome was growe^ so vnmeasurably great, that not
only with tyrannical power, but also with corrupt doctrine, it began to
subuerte Christ's gospel, and to turn the state, that Christ and his apostles
set in ye church, vpside down.

For the causes aforesaid, I will rehearse certain of their sayenges: and yet
because I take them but for witnesses and expou^ders of this doctrine, and not
as the autors of the same: and also for that now I will not be tedious, I will
rehearse but few, yt is three old writours of the Greek church, and other
three of the Latin church, which do seem unto me, to be in this matter most
plain.

The Greek autors are Origene, Chrysostom, and Theodoret. The Latyne are,
Tertulliane, S. Augustine and Gelasius. I know there can be nothing spoken so
plainly, but ye craftye wit furnished with eloquence, can darken it, and
wraste it quite from ye true meaning to a contrary sense. And I know also, ye
eloquence, craft, and fynesse of wit has gone about to bleare men's eyes,
and to stop their ears in thaforenamed writours, that men should another
hear nor see, what those autors both write and teach so plainly, that except
men should be made both stark blind and deaf, they can not but of
necessity, if they will read, and weye them indifferently, both hear and
see, what they do mean, when eloquence, craft, and fynesse of wit have
done all that they can. Now let us hear the old wrytours of the Greek
church.

Origene.
Origene, which lived about.1250. years agoo: a man for the excellency of his
learning so hyghly esteemed in Christ's church, Eccl. Hist. Li. 6. ca. 3
that he was co^pted* and judged ye singular teacher in his time of Christ's
religion, the co^fou^der of heresies, the scholemaister of many godly matters,
and an opener of the high mysteries in scripture. He writing up on the.15.
chap. of S. Matthewes gospel, says thus: But if any thing enter into the
mouth, it goes away into the belly, and is avoided into the draught. Yea and
that meat which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, concerning the
matter thereof, it goes away into the belie, and is avoided into the draught.
But for ye prayer which is added unto it, for ye proporcion of the faith, it
is made profitable, making the mind hable to perceive and see that which is
profitable. For it is not the material substance of bread, but the word which
is spoken upon it, that is profitable to ye man that eats it not unworthily.
And this I mean of the typical and symbolical (that is, sacramental) body.
Thus far go the words of Origene, where it is plain, furst that Origene
speaking here of the sacrament of the Lords supper, as the last words do
plainly signify, does mean and teach, that the material substance thereof
is received, digested, and avoided, as the material substance of other bread
and meats is, which could not be, if there were no material substance of bread
at all, as the fantastical opinion of tra^substa^ciacio^ does put. It is a
world to see ye answer of ye papists to this place of Origene. The papists
objection against Origene.
In ye disputacio^s which were in this matter in the Parliament house, and in
both the universities of Cambridge and Oxforde, they that defended
transubsta^ciacio^ said, that this part of Origene was but set forth of late
by Erasmus, and therefore is to be suspected. But how vain this their answer
is, it appears plainly. For so may all the good old autors, which lay in
old libraries, and are set furthe of late, be by this reason rejected, as
Cleme^s Alexandrinus, Theodoretus, Justinius, Ecclesiastica historia Nicephori,
and other such. An other answer they hade, An other objection.
saying that Origin is noted to have erred in some points, and therefore faith
is not to be given in this matter unto him. But this answer well weighed does
ministre good matter to ye clear confutacion of it self. For in deed we grant,
that in some points Origene did err. But those errors are gathered out and
noted both of S. Jerome, and Epiphanius, so that his works (those errors
excepted) are now so much the more of authority, ye such great learned men
took pains to draw out of him, what so ever they thought in him to be written
amysse. But as concerning this matter of the Lords supper, another they nor yet
ever any other ancient author did ever say, that Origene did err.

Guard. to the. 166*
Now because these two answers have been of late so confuted and confounded,
that it is well perceived, that they will take no place: therefore some which
have written sense that time, have forged two other answerres, even of the
same molde. The former whereof is, that Origene in this place spoke not of the
sacrament of bread or wine of the Lords table, but of an other mystical meat:
of the which S. Augustine makes mention to be given unto them, that were
taught the faith, before they were baptized. But Origenes own words in.ij.
sentences before rehearsed, being put together, prove this answer untrue. For
he says, that he means of that figurative and mystical body, which
profits them, that do receive it worthily, alluding so plainly unto S.
Paul's words spoken of the Lords supper: that it is a shame for any learned
man ones to open his mouth to the contrary. And that bread which S. Augustine
speaks of, he ca^ not prove that any such thing was used in Origenes time.
Yea and though that could be proved, yet was there never bread in any time
called a sacramental body, saving the sacramental bread of the Lords table,
which is called of Origene the typical and symbolical body of Christ.

Guard. in the same place.
The second of the two new found answers, is yet most monstrous of al other,
which is this. But let us grant (say they) that Origin spoke of ye Lords
supper, and by the matter thereof was understood the material substance of
bread and wine: what tha^, say they? For though ye material substance was once
gone, and departed by reason of Transubstanciacion, whiles the forms of the
bread and the wine did remain, yet now it is no inconuenie^ce to say, that as
the material substance did depart at the entering in of Christ's body under
thaforesayd forms: so when the said forms be destroyed and do not remain,
than comes again the substance of bread and wine. And this say they, is very
mete in this mystery, that that which began with the miracle, shall end in a
miracle. If I hade not read this fantasy, I would scarcely have believed, that
any learned man ever would have set forth such a foolish fantasy: which not
only lacks all ground, either of Gods word, reason, or of any ancient
wrytour, but is also clean contrary to the common rules of schole divinity:
which is, that no miracle is to be affirmed and put without necessity. And
although for their former miracle, which is their Transubstanciacio^, they
have some color, though it be but vain, saying, it is done by the power and
virtue of these words of Christ, This is my body: yet to make this second
miracle of returnyng the material substance again, they have no color at
all. Or else I pray them show me, by what words of Christ is ye second
miracle wrought. Thus ye may see, that the sleightes and shifts which craft
and wit can inuente to wraste the true sense of Origene, can not take place.
But now let us hear one other place of Origene, and so we will let him go.

Origene in the.11. Homily Super Leuiticum, says, that there is also even in
the four Gospelles, and not only in the old Testament, a lettre (meaning a
literal sense) which kylleth. For if thou follow (says he) ye lettre in that
saying: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood.
etc. This lettre does kill. If in that place the lettre does kill, wherein is
commanded the eating of Christ's flesh: than surely in those words of
Christ, wherein Christ commands us to eat his body, the literal sense
thereof likewise does kill. For it is no less crime but even the same and all
one in the literal sense, to eat Christ's body, and to eat Christ's flesh.
Wherefore if the one do kill, except it be understood figuratively and
spiritually: than the other surely does kill likewise. But that to eat
Christ's flesh does kill so understood, Origene affirms plainly in his
words above rehearsed: Wherefore it can not be justly denied, but to eat
Christ's body literally understood, must needs (after him) kill likewise.

The answer that is made to this place of Origin of the papists, is so
folishe, that it bewrays it self, without any further confutacion. It is the
same, that they make to a place of S. Augustine, in his book De doctrina
Christiana: Li. 3. ca. ^6.
Where as Saint Augustine speaks in effect ye same thing that Origene does
here. The papists answer is this: To ye carnal man ye literal sense is
hurtful, but not so to the spiritual. As though to understand that in his
propre sense, which ought to be taken figuratively, were to the carnal man a
dangerous perile: but to the spiritual man non at all.

Now to Chrysostom, Chrisosto.
whom I bring for the second wrytour in the greek church. He speaking against
ye unholy using of man's body, which after S. Paul ought to be kept pure and
holy, as the very temple of the holy ghost, says thus: In opere imperfecto
ho. 11. in Matthew.
If it be a fault (says he) to translate the holyed vessels, in the which
is contained not the true body of Christ, but the mystery of the body, to
private uses: how much more offense is it to abuse and defile the vessels of
our body?

These be the words of Chrysostom. But I trow that here many foul shifts
are devised, to defeat this place. The author (says one) is suspected. I
answer. But in this place never fault was found with him, unto these our
days. And whether this author was John^ Chrysostom him self the Archbishop of
Constantinopole, or no: that is not the matter. For of all it is granted, that
he was a writour of that age, and a man of great learning: so that it is
manifest, that this which he writes, was the received opinion of learned men
in his days.

Or else undoubtedly in such a matter, his saying should have be^ impugned of
some yt wrote in his time, Gardi. to the ^98. objection.
or nere unto the same. Nay (says an other) if this solucio^ will not serve,
we may say, that Chrysostom did not speak of the vessels of the Lords
cup, or such as were than used at the Lords table, but of the vessels used
in the temple in the old law. This answer will serve no more than the other.
For here Chrysostom speaks of such vessels, wherein was ye which was
called the body of Christ, although it was not ye true body (says he) of
Christ, but the mystery of Christ's body. Now of the vessels of the old law,
the wrytours do use no such manner of phrase: for their sacrifices were not
called Christ's body. For than Christ was not but in shadows and figures, and
not by the Sacrament of his body revealed. Erasmus which was a man that could
understand the words and sense of the wrytour, although he would not be seen
to speak against this error of transubstanciacion, because he durst not: yet
in his time declares plainly that this saying of this wrytour is non
otherwise to be understood.

Yet can I (says the third papist) find out a fine and subtle solucion for
this place, Guard. in the same place
and grant all that yet is said, both allowing here the wrytour, and also
that he meant of the vessels of the Lords table. For (says he) the body of
Christ is not contained in them, at the Lords table, as in a place, but as in
a mystery. Is not this a pretty shifte, and a mystical solucion? But by the
same solucion than, Christ's body is not in the Lords table, nor in the
priests hands, nor in the pixe, and so is he here no where. For they will not
say, that he is either here or there, as in a place. This answer pleases so
well the maker, that he him self (after he had played with it a litel while,
and showed the fynesse of his wit and eloquence therein) is content to give it
over and say: but it is not to be thought, that Chrysostom would speak after
this fynesse or subtlety: and therefore he returns again unto the second
answer for his shoore Ancor, which is sufficiently confuted before. An other
short place of Chrysostom I will rehearse, which (if any indiffere^cy may be
heard) in plain terms sets forth the truth of this matter. Before ye bread
(says Chrysostom Ad Cesariu^ Monachu^) be hallowed, we call it bread, but ye
grace of God sanctifieng it by the means of the priest, it is delivered now
from the name of bread, and estemeth worthy to be called Christ's body,
although the nature of bread tarry in it still. These be Chrisostomes words:
wherein I pray you, what can be said or thought more plain against this
error of transubstanciacio^, Guard. to the 201. objection.
than to declare, that the bread abides so still? And yet to this so plain a
place, some are not ashamed thus shamefully to elude it, saying: we grant, ye
nature of bread remains still thus, for that it may be seen, felt, and
tasted: and yet the corporal substance of ye bread therefore is gone, least two
bodies should be confused together, and Christ should be thought impanate.

What contrariety and falshead is in this answer, the simple man may easily
perceive. Is not this a plain contrariety, to grant that the nature of bread
remains so still, yt it may be seen, felt, and tasted: and yet to say, the
corporal substance is gone, to avoid absurdity of Christ's impanacion? And
what manifest falshead is this, to say or mean, that if the bread should
remain still, than must follow the inconvenience of impanacio^? As though the
very bread could not be a sacrament of Christ's body (as water is of baptism)
except Christ should unity the nature of bread to his nature, in unity of
person, and make of the bread, God.

Now let us hear Theodoretus, which is the last of the three Greek autors.
Theodores
He writes in his dialoge Contra Eutichen thus. He that calls his natural
body, corn, and bread: and also named him self a vine tree: even he the same
has honored the Symboles (that is the sacramental signs) with the names of
his body and blood, Dial, ^
not chaungeing in deed the nature it self, but adding grace unto the nature.

what can be more plainly said, than this, that this old wrytour says? that
although the Sacraments bear the name of the body and blood of Christ, yet is
not their nature changed, but abides still. And where is tha^ the papists
transubstantiacion?

The same wrytour in ye second dialoge of ye same work against thaforesaid
heretic Eutiches, writes yet more plainly against this error of
transubstanciacion, if any thing can be said to be more plain. For he makes
the heretic to speak thus against him that defends the true doctrine, whom
he calls Orthodoxus.

As the sacraments of the body and blood of our Lord are one thing before the
inuocacion, and after the inuocacio^ they be changed, and are made an other: so
likewise the Lords body (says the heretic) is after the assu^pcion or
ascension in to heaven, turned in to the substance of God: the heretic meaning
thereby, that Christ after his assension, remains no more a man. To this
Orthodoxus answers thus, and says to ye heretic: Thou art taken (says
he) in thine own snare. For those mystical symboles or sacraments after the
sanctificacion do not goo out of their own nature, but they tarry and abide
still in their substance, figure and shape, yea and are sensibly seen and
groped to be ye same they were before. etc.

At these words the papists do startle: and to say the truth, these words
be so plain, so full, and so clear that they can not tell, what to say, but
yet they will not cease to goo about to play the cuttles, and to cast their
colors over them, that the truth, which is so plainly told, should not have
place. This author wrote (say they) before the determinacion of the church. As
who would say, what so ever that wicked man Innocentius the Pope of Rome
determined in his congregacions with his monks and friars, that must be (for
so Duns says) holden for an article and of the substance of our faith. Some
do charge this author that he was suspected to be a Nestorian, which thing in
Calcedon counsel was tried and proved to be false. But the fowlest shifte of
all, D. More man in the conuocacion house.
and yet the best that they can find in this matter, when none other will
serve: is to say, that Theodorete understands by the word (substance)
accide^tes and not substance in deed. This gloss is like a gloss of a lawer
upon a decree, ye text whereof begins thus: Statuimus, that is, We decree.
The gloss of the lawer there (after many other pretty shifts there set furthe)
which he thinks will not well serve to his purpose, and therefore at the last
to clear the matter, he says thus after ye mind of one lawer. Vel Dic
(says he) Statuimus, Distinc. ca 4. Statuimus.
id est, abrogamus, yt is: or expou^de we do decree, that is, we abrogate or
disanull. Is not this a goodly and worthy gloss? who will not say, but he is
worthy in the law, to be retained of counsel, that can gloss so well, and
find in a matter of difficulty, such fine shifts? And yet this is the law,
or at least the gloss of the law. And therefore who can tell, what perile a man
may incur to speak against it, except he were a lawer in deed, which can
keep him self out of the briers, what wind so ever blow?

Hitherto ye have heard three wrytours of the Greek church, not all what they
do say: for that were a labor to great for to gather, and to tedious for ye
reader: But one or two places of every one, the which how plain, how full, and
how clear they be against the error of transubstanciacion, I refer it to
the judgment of the indifferent reader. And now I will likewise rehearse the
sayenges of other three old ancient wytours of the latin church, and so make
an end.

And furst I will begin with Tertullian, Tertullian*
whom Cipriane the holy martyr so highly esteemed, that when so ever he would
have his book, he was wont to say: Give us now the Master. This old wrytour
in his.4. book against Marcion the heretic, says thus: Jesus made ye bread,
which he took, and distributed to his disciples his body, saying: This is my
body. That is to say (says Tertullian) afigure of my body. In this place it
is plain, that after Tertullianes expolicion, Christ meant not by calling the
bread his body, and the wine his blood, that either the bread was the natural
body, or the wine his natural blood, but he called the^ his body and blood,
because he would institute the^ to be unto us sacraments: that is, holy tokens
and signs of his body and of his blood: that by them remembering and firmly
believing the benefits procured to us by his body which was torn and crucified
for us, and of his blood which was shed for us upon the cross: and so with
thanks receiving these holy sacraments, according to Christ's institucion,
might by the same be spiritually nouryshed and fed to the increase of all
godliness in us here in our pilgrimage and iournaye, wherein we walk, unto
everlasting life. This was undoubtedly Christ our saueours mi^de, and this is
Tertullianes exposicion. The wranglyng that the Papists do make to elude this
saying of Tertullian, Guard. to the.16. objection.
is so far out of frame, that it even wearieth me to think on it. Tertullian
writes here (say they) as none has done hitherto before him. This saying is
toto manifest false: for Origene, Hilarie, Ambrose, Basil, Gregory Nazianzene,
saint Augustine, and other old autors, likewise do call the sacrament, a
figure of Christ's body. And where they say, that Tertullian wrote this, when
he was in a heat of disputacion, with an heretic, couetyng by all means to
overthrow his adversary. As who say, he would not take heed, what he did
say, and specially what he would write in so high a matter, so that he might
have the better hand of his adversary. Is this credible to be true in any
godly wise man? How much less tha^ is it worthy to be thought or credited in
a man of so great a wit, learning and excellencye, as Tertullian is worthilye
esteemed ever for to have been?

Likewise this author in his furst book against the same heretic Marcion,
writes thus: God did not reject bread, which is his creature: for by it he
has made a representacio^ of his body. Now I pray you, what is this to say,
that Christ has made a representacion (by bread) of his body, but that Christ
hade instituted and ordained bread to be a sacrament, for to represent unto us
his body? Now whether the representacion of one thing by an other, requires
the corporal presence of the thing which is so represented or no, every man
that has understanding, is hable in this point (the matter is so clear of it
self) to be a sufficient judge.

The second doctor and wrytour of the latin church (whose sayenges I
promised to set furthe) is S. Augustine: Augustine
of whose learning and estimacion I need not to speak. For all the church of
Christ both has and ever has hade him for a man of most singular learning,
wit, and diligence, both in setting furthe the true doctrine of Christ's
religion, and also in the defense of the same against heretics. This author as
he has written most pleynteously in other matters of our faith, so likewise
in this argument he has written at large in many of his works, so plainly
against this error of transustanciacion, yt the papists love least to hear
of him, of al other wrytours: partly for his authority, and partly because he
opens the matter more fully, than any other does. Therefore I will rehearse mo
places of him, tha^ hertofore I have done of the other. And furst, what can be
more plain, than that which he writes upon the 89. psalm, speaki^g of the
sacrament of the Lords body and blood: and rehearsing (as it were) Christ's
words to his disciples, after this manner. It is not this body, which ye do
see, that ye shall eat, another shall ye drink this blood, which the
souldyours, yt crucify me, shall spill or sheade. I do commend unto you a
mystery, or a sacrament, which spiritually understood shall give you life.

Now if Christ hade no moo natural and corporal bodies, but that one which they
tha^ presently both heard and saw, nor other natural blood, but that which
was in the same body, and the which the soldiers did afterward cruelly shede
upon the cross: and another this body nor this blood was (by this declaracion
of S. Augustine) either to be eaten or dronken, but the mystery thereof
spiritually to be understood: than I conclude (if this saying and exposicion
of S. Augustine be true) that ye mystery which the disciples should eat, was
not the natural body of Christ, but a mystery of the same spiritually to be
understood. For as S. Augustine says in his 20. book Contra Faustum. ca.
21. Christ's flesh and blood was in the old testament promised by similitudes
and signs of their sacrifices, and was exhibited in deed and in truth upon ye
cross, but the same is celebrated by a sacrament of remembrance upon ye
aultare. And in his book De fide ad Petrum, ca. 19. he says, that in these
sacrifices, meaning of the old law, it is figuratively signified, what was
than to be given: but in this sacrifice it is evidently signified, what is
already given (understanding in the sacrifice upon the aultare) the
remembrance and thanks giving for the flesh, which he offered for us: and for
the blood which he shed for us upon the cross: as in the same place and
evidently there it may appear.

An other evident and clear place, wherein it appears, that by the
sacramental bread, which Christ called his body, he meant a figure of his body.
As upon the.3. Psalm, where S. Augustine speaks this in plain terms. Christ
did admytte Judas unto the feast, in the which he commended unto his disciples
the figure of his body. This was Christ's last supper before his passion,
wherein he did ordain the sacrament of his body, as all learned men do agree.

S. Augustine also in his, 23. epistle to Bonifacius teaches, how sacraments
do bear the names of ye things whereof they be sacraments, both in
Baptism, and in the Lords table, even as we call every good frydaye, the day
of Christ's passion: and every Easter day, the day of Christ's resurrection:
when in very deed there was but one day wherein he suffered, and but one day
wherein he rose. And why do we than call them so, which are not so in deed, but
because they are in like time and course of the year, as those days were,
wherein those things were done? Was Christ says (S. Augusti^) offered any more
but once? And he offered him self. And yet in a sacrament or represe^tacio^ not
only every solemn feast of Easter, but also every day, to ye people he is
offered: so yt he does not lie, yt says: He is every day offered. For if
Sacraments hade not so^ similitudes or likeness of those things, whereof they
be Sacraments, they could in no wise be sacraments: and for their similitudes
and likeness commonly they have the names of the things, whereof they be
sacraments. Therefore as after a certain manner of speech, ye sacrament of
Christ's body is Christ's body, the sacrament of Christ's blood is Christ's
blood, so likewise the Sacrament of faith is faith.

After this manner of speech (as S. Augustine teaches in his questiones Super
Leuiticum, Question* 57.
and Co^tra Adamantinu^) it is said in scripture, that.vii ears of corn be
seven years: seven kyen be vii. years, and ye rock was Christ: and blood is
ye soul: the which last saying (says S. Augustine in his book Contra
Adimantinum) is understood to be spoken in a sign or figure. Cap. 13.
For the Lord himself did not stick to say, This is my body, when he gave the
sign of his body. For we must not considre in sacraments (says S. Augustine
in an other place) What they be, Contra Maximinum. li. ca. 2^.
but what they do signify: for they be signs of things, being one thing in
them selves, and yet signifieng an other thing. For the heavenly bread (says
he, speaking of the sacramental bread) by some manner of speech is called
Christ's body, when in very deed it is the Sacrament of his body. etc.

What can be more plain, or more clearly spoken, than are these places of S.
Augustine before rehearsed, if men were not obstinately bent to mayntene an
untruth, and to receive nothing what so ever does set it furthe? Yet one
place more of S. Augustine will I allege, which is very clear to this purpose,
that Christ's natural body is in heaven, and not here corporally in the
Sacrament, and so let him depart. In his.50. treatise, which he writes upon
John^, he teaches plainly and clearly, how Christ being both God and man, is
both here after a certain manner, and yet in heaven and not here in his natural
body and substance, which he took of the blessed virgin Mary: speaking thus of
Christ and saying. By his divine Majesty, by his providence, and by his
unspeakable and invisible grace, yt is fulfilled which he spoke: Behold I am
with you unto the end of the world. But as concerning his flesh which he
took in his incarnacion, as touching that which was borne of the virgin, as
concerning that which was apprehended by the Jews and crucified upon a tree,
and taken down from the cross, lapped in lynen clothes, and buried, and rose
again, and appeared after his resurrection, as concerning that flesh, he
said: ye shall not ever have me with you. Why so? For as concerning his
flesh, he was conuersau^t with his disciples.xl. Days, and they accompanyeng,
seeing, and not folowi^g him, he went up in to heaven, and is not here. By ye
presence of his divine majesty he did not depart: as concerning ye presence
of his divine majesty, wc have Christ ever with us: but as concerning ye
presence of his flesh, he said truly to his disciples: Ye shall not ever have
me with you. For as concerning the presence of his flesh, the church hade him
but a few days: now it holds him by faith, though it see him not.

Thus much S. Augustine speaks repeting one thing so often: and al to
declare and teach, how we should understand the manner of Christ's being here
with us: which is by his grace, by his providence, and by his divine nature:
and how he is absent by his natural body which was borne of the virgin Mary,
died, and roose for us, and is ascended in to heaven, and there sits (as is
in the articles of our faith) on the right hand of God, and thence (and from
non other place says S. Augustine) he shall com on the later day, to judge
ye quycke and the dead. At ye which day the righteous shall than lift up
their heads, and the light of Gods truth shall so shine, that falshead and
errors shall be put in to perpetual confusion: righteousness shall have the
vpperhande, and truth that day shall bear away ye victory, al thenemies
thereof quyte overthrown, to be trodden under foot for evermore. O Lord,
Lord, I beseech the hasten this day, than shall thou be glorified with the
glory due unto thy holy name, and unto thy divine majesty: and we shall sing
unto thee, in all joy, and felicity, laud and praise for ever more. Amen.

Here now would I make an end. For me thinks, S. Augustine is in this matter so
full and plain, and of that authority, that it should not need after this his
declaracion, being so firmly grounded upon Gods word, and so well agreing
with the other ancient autors, to bring in for the co^firmacion of this matter
any moo: and yet I said, I would allege three of the latin church, to
testify the truth in this cause. Now therefore ye last of all shall be Gelasius,
which was a bishop of Rome, but one that was bishop of that sea, before ye
wicked usurpation and tyranny thereof spredde and burst out abroad in to all
the world. For this man was before Bonifacius, yea and Gregory the furst: in
whose days both corruption of doctrine and tirannical usurpation did chiefly
grow, and hade the vpperhande.

Gelasius in an epistle of the two natures of Christ, Contra Eutichen, writes
thus: The sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, which we receive are
godly things, Gelasius
whereby and by the same we are made partakers of the divine nature, and yet
nevertheless the substance or nature of the bread and wine does not depart
nor go away.

Note these words I beseech you, and considre, whether any thing can be more
plainly spoken, than these words be against the error of tra^substanciacion,
which is the ground and bitter root, whereupon spring all the horrible errors
before rehearsed.

Wherefore seeing that ye falshead does appear so manifestly, and by so many
ways so plainly, so clearlye and so fully, that no man needs to be deceived,
but he that will not see, or will not understand: Let us all that do love the
truth, embrace it, and forsake the falsehead. For he that loves the truth,
is of God: and the lack of the love thereof is the cause why God suffers men
to fall in to errors, and to perish therein: yea and as S. Paul says, why
he se^deth unto them illusiones, yt they believe lies, unto their own
condemnacion: because (says he) they loved not the truth. This truth no
doubt is Gods word. For Christ him self says unto his father: Thy word
is truth. Io. 17.
The love and light where of almighty God our heavenly father give us, and
lyghten it in our hearts by his holy spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Vincit Veritas.

