Gesta romanorum




Sometime there dwelled in Rome a puyssaunte Emperor wh^che had a daughter a
fair creature and was named Atlenta whom diverse and many knights and other
great lords desired her to their wife. This Atlenta was won derswyfte of foot
/ wherefore such a law was ordained that no man should have her to wife but
such as might over run her and take her by strength of foot. And so it
befell that many came and ran with her / but she was so swyfte that no man
might overtake her by course of rennynge. At the last there came a knight named
Pomeys unto her fader and said to him thus / my lord if it might please you to
give me your daughter to wife I will gladly run with her. Than said her fader
there is such a law ordained and set that who so will have her to wife must
first renew which her / and if he fail in his course that he overtake her not
he shall lose his head / and if it fortune him to overtake her than shall I
wedde her unto him / and when the king had told him all the peril that might
fall in the winning of her / the knight wylfully granted to abide that
Ieopardy. Than the knight let ordeyne him three balls of gold against the
rennynge. And when they had begone to run a little space the young lady over
ran him / than the knight threw forth before her ye first balle of gold.
And when the damoysell saw ye ball she stouped and took it up / and that while
the knight waune before her but that auayled little / for when she had that
perceived she ran so fast that in short space she gate before him again.
And than he threw forth the second balle of gold / and she stouped as she
did before to take it up / and in that while ye knight wanne before her again
/ which this young damsel seeing constreyned her self and ran so fast
till at the last she had him at a vauntage again and was before him and by that
time they were nyghe the mark where they should abide / wherefore the knight
threw the third balle forth before her / and like as she had done before
stouped down to take up the balle / and the while she was in taking up the
third balle the knight gate before her and was first at the standing / and
thus was she won. By this Emperor is understand the fader of heaven / and
this maiden is understand the soul of man with whom many deuylles desyren to
run / and to dysceyue her thorugh their temptacyons / but she with stands
them myghtly and ouercometh him / and when he has done his power / and may
not speed than marketh the three balls of gold / and casts them before her
in the three ages of man / that is to say / in youth / in manhood / and in old
age In youth he casts the balle of lechery before her. That is to say the
desire of flesh / nevertheless for all this balle often times man ouercometh
the devil by confession contrycyon penance and satysfaccyon. The second
balle is the balle of pride the which the devil casts to man in his manhood
/ that is to say in his myddell age / but this balle man oftentimes ouercometh
as he did the first. But late him beware of ye third balle which is the
balle of coueryse that the devil casts unto man in his old age that is full
dredefull. For but if a man may overcome this balle with this other two than he
shall lose his honor that is to say yt kyngedome of heaven. For when man
brenneth in couetyse he thinks not on goostly richesse for ever his heart is
set in worldly goods and recketh not of prayers ne of alms deeds / and thus
leseth he his heritage to the which god has bought him with his precious
blood unto yt which Ihesus bring you and me and all mankind Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named Ancelme
which bare in his arms a shield of silver with five reed cosys. This Emperor
had three sons whom he loved much / he had also contynuall war with the
king of Egypt / in the which war he lost all his temporal goods except a
virtuous tree. It fortuned after on a day yt he gave battle unto ye said king
of Egypt wherein he was grievously wounded Nevertheless he opteyned the vyctory
notwithstanding he had his dedely wound / wherefore while he lay in point of
death he called unto him his eldest sone and said / my most dear and well-beloved
sone all my temporal richesse I have exspended and almoost nothing is left
me except a virtuous tree ye which stands in the mids of mine Empire I
give to the all yt is under the earth and above the earth of ye same tree. O my
reverent fader quod he I thank you much. Tha^ said themperoure call to me my
second sone. Anon his eldest sone gretely gladded of his faders gift called
in his brother / and when he came than said the emperor / my dear sone quod he I
may not make my testament for so much that I have spent al my goods except a
tree which stands in my Empire of the which tree I give and byquethe to ye
all yt is great and small. Than answered he and said. My reverent fader I
thank you much. Than said themperoure call to me my third sone / and so it
was done. And when he was come the Emperor said. My dear sone I must dye of
this sickness and I have but only a virtuous tree of the which I have
byquethed thy bretherin their porcyon and to the I byquethe thy procyon / for I
will y^ you have of the said tree all yt is were and dry Than said his sone.
Fader god thank you Soon after that the Emperor had made his byquest he
deyed. And the eldest sone anon took season of the tree when the second
brother this herd he said brother mine by what law or tytell occupied you this
tree. Dear brother quod he I occupied by this tytell / my fader gave me all ye
is vnde earth and above of the said tree and therefore by reason this tree is
mine. Unknowing to the quod the second brother he gave me all that is in bread
length and depnes of yt said tree / and therefore I have as great right in the
tree as thou This herynge the third sone came unto them and said. O ye my
best beloved brethern it behooves you not to strive for this tree / for as
much right have I in this tree as ye / for well ye wot by the law that the
last will and testament ought to stand / for sothely he gave me of the said
tree all yt is wete and dry and therefore by right the tree is mine / but for as
much as your tales ben great and mine also / my cou^ceyll is that we be
Iustyfyed by reason / for it is not good ne commendable that any strife or
dyssencyon should be among us. Here beside dwells a king of reason / for it
is not good to strive go we there unto him / and eueryche of us lay his right
before him / and like as he will Judge stand we unto his Judgment Than said his
bretherin / this counceyl is good / wherefore they went all three unto ye king
of Reason and euerychone of them syngulerly showed forth his right unto him
like as it is said before. When the king had herd their tytles / he rehearsed
them all again syngulerly first saying unto the eldest sone thus. Thousayest
for the quod the king thy fader gave the all that is under the earth and above
the earth of the said tree. And to the second brother he byquethed all that is
in bread length and depnes of that tree. And to the third brother he gave all that is wete and dry. And with that he laid the law for them and and said /
that ye last will ought for to stand. Now my dear sons breuely I shall
satysfye all your reasons. And wha^ he had thus said he turned him unto the
eldest brother saying thus. My dear sone if the list to abide ye Judgment of
right the behooves to be letten blood of the ryghtarme. My lord quod he your
will shall be done. Than called the king forth a dyscrete physycyon
co^maundynge to let hy^blode. When the eldest sone was thus letten blood ye
king said to them all three / my dear sons quod he where is your fader buried.
Than answered they and said. Forsothe my lord in such a place. Anon the
king commanded to delue up the body and to draw out a bone of his breast and
to bury his body again / and so it was done. And when ye bone was drawn out
the king commanded ye it should be laid in the blood of the elder brother and
yt it should lie till it had received kyndely the blood and than to be laid in
ye son and dried / and after that it should be wasshen with clear water / his
servants fulfilled all that he badde. And when they began to wasshe ye blood
vanysshed clean away when the king saw this he said to the second sone / it
behooves that you he laten bold as thy brother is. Than said he. My lord thy
will shall be fulfilled / and anon he was served like as his brother was in all
thing And when they began to wasshe the bone the blood vanysshed away. Than
said y^ king to the third sone. My dear child it behooves the also to be
laten blood. He answer and said. My lord it pleases me well so to be. When
the youngest brother was laten blood and served in all thing like as his two
brethern were served before when the kings servant began to wasshe the bone
they might neither for washing ne for brekynge do away the blood of y^ bone
but ever it appeared blody when yt king saw this he said / it apered openly yt
this blood without doubt is of the nature of this bone / thou art his true sone
and these other.ii. ben bastardes I give to the that tree for ever more. Dear
friends this Emperor is our lord Thesu christ which bare a shield of silver
with five reed rosys / that is to say his body yt was so fair so clear and
more radyent than any silver accordy^ge with ye psalms saying thus. Speciosus
formo p^ filus hou^n. That is to say he was more specyous and fayrer of shape
than all the chylderin of men By this.v. rosys we understand his.v. wou^des
which he suffered for mankind. And by the king of Egypt we understand ye
devil against whom he faught all the time of of his life / and at last was
slain for mankind. Nevertheless before his death he made his testament to his
three sons. By the first to whom he gave of the tree al yt was under earth and
above / we shall understand the mighty men and states of this world to whom
he has given power in earth in water and in air so yt be obedyent at their
will all thing under heaven. By the second sone to whom he gave the tree in
length bread and depnes we may understand the wytty men of this world as
Iustycis vocates and men of law these men have power in length and bread and
depnes upon gentlymen of myddell degree and upon poor men them to deem and to
Judge as they list. By the.iii. sone to whom he gave all yt was were and dry
of ye tree we shall understood good christian men which have and suffer both
wete and drought / that is to say now pouerte now trouble now solace now care
now cold now hete / and all this they receive of god / thank fully this
noble tree yt was thus byquethed to. This tree is the tree of paradyse / yt is
to say euerlasty^ge Joy of heaven which is given to us al if we will take it
tha^kfully nevertheless it is heaven in diverse wise and nor egally for some has
more and some has less after their merytes this notwtsto^dy^ge every man
opteyneth not / therefore it behooves them to go unto ye king of reason / yt is
to say unto yt fader of heaven which knows all thing or they be made. The
first sone was let blood and in his blood the bone was wrapped. By this blood
we shall understand our merytory deeds / and be yt white and heavy alms deed
which iks full heavy to them that gives alms / nevertheless it makes ye
soul white / wherefore when these mighty men have alms or to do a merytory
deed though it be made dry and stablysshed with the sone and by the wind of
dyuyne predicacyon nevertheless when the water of pride envy wrath and of such
other all the merytory deed done before is brought to naught and the blood /
that is to say alms deed by the which they should come to everlasting life
begins to vanysshe away. For why as the appostle says / he that offends
in one sin is gylty in all This blood later which let them blood is a
dyscrete confessoure / though the mighty men of this world do good and
fulfill their penance / nevertheless when ye water of couetyse that is to say
when the purse is full of pence anon they give true Judgment / against whom it
is wryte^ thus. The wisdom of this world is no thing else but folly before god
/ and against the mighty men of this world speaks holy scripture and says
where ben tho mighty men which were praised among the birds of heaven ete and
drink and often dessended unto hell. The third sone of this Emperor is a
good christian man which all the time of his life did good deeds and lived
without pride envy or lecherfy from the bone of such a man the blood may not
be wasshen away / yt is say his merytory deed may not be put away from
penance such a may is the true child of god of whom our lord speaks thus
/ the which have forken all thing for me etc. yt is to say ye yt have
forsaken will of sin shall receive an hundred times more / yt is to say ye
shall not only receive the tree of paradyse but also y^ heritage of heaven /
these two other sons ben bastardes for why that they behote in their baptesme
they wrought all yt contrary through their wicked living and therefore he yt
desired to opteyne ye Joy of heaven hy^ behooves to abide steadfastly in
werkynge of good deeds and than by reason may he opteyne the tree of paradyse /
unto the which yt lord bring us which lives and regneth eternal without
end Amen

IN Rome dwelled a noble Emperor named Dyoclesyan which above all worldly
goods loved y^ virtue of charity wherefore he desired greatly to know what
foul loved her birds best to this entente yt he might thereby grow to more
parfyte charity. It fortuned after upon a day yt this Emperor walked to the
forest to take his dysporte where as he found the nest of a great bird yt is
called in latin Strucio with her bird / y^ which bird the emperor took with him
and closed him in a vessel of glass. The mother of this little bird follows
after to themperours place and entered in to the halle where her bird was
closed. But wha^ she saw her bird and might not by no menes come to her ne
get her out she turned again to the forest and there she abode three days /
and at y^ last she turned again to y^ pallays berynge in her mouth a worm yt
is called Thumare. Wha^ she came where her bird was she let the worm fall
upon the glass through virtue of whose blood the glass brake and the bird
escaped and flewe forth with his mother. When yt Emperor saw this he praised
much y^ mother of this bird which so dylygently labored for the delyuerau^ce
of her bird. My friends this Emperor is the fader of heaven which wonderly
loved them yt ben perfyte in love and charity This little bird closed in the
glass and taken fro y^ forest was Adam our forefader which was exylled fro
Paradyse and put in the glass / yt is to say in hell. This herynge the mother
of the bird / yt is to were the sone of god descended fro heaven and came to
the forest of the world and lived here.iii. days and more berynge with him a
worm / yt is to say manhood according with the psalm saying thus. Ego su^
xmis et no^ homo. That is to say I am a worm and no man. This man hode is
suffered to be slain among yt Jews / of whose blood the vessel eternal was
broken and the bird went out that is to say Adam went sorthe with his mother
the sone of almighty god and flewe unto heaven.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a worthy Emperor and a wise which had a fair
daughter and full gracyous in the sight of every man. This Emperor bethought
hy^ upon a day to whom he might give his daughter in marriage saying thus if I
give my daughter to a rich man and he be a fool tha^ is she lost / and if I
give her to a poor man and a wytty than may he get his living for hy^ and
her by his wisdom. There was yt time dwelly^ge in ye cite of Rome a
philosopher named Socrates poor and wise which came unto themperoure and said
My lord dysplese you not though I put forth my petycyon before your
highness. The Emperor said what soever it pleases ye tell forth. Tha^ answered
Socrates and said. My lord ye have a daughter whom I desire above all thing.
The Emperor answered and said. My friend I shall give the my daughter to wife
upon this condycion yt if she dye in thy felaushyp after yt she be wedded unto
ye you shalt withouten doubt lose thy life. Tha^ said Socrates. Upon this
co^dycion I will gladly take her for to be my wife the Emperor herynge this
let call for the all the lords and states of his Empire and made a great
feast at their wedding. And then after the feast Socrates led home his wife
to his own house where as they lived in pease and health long time / but at
last this Emperors daughter sekened to death wha^ Socrates this perceived he
said to him self Alas and woe to me what shall I do and whether shall I flee if
themperours daughter yt is my wife should deye and for sorrow this Socrates
went to a forest there beside and wept bytterly. The while he wept thus and
mourned there came an aged man berynge a staff in his hand and asked the
cause of Socrates why he mourned. Socrates answered and said I wedded
themperours daughter upon this condycyon y^ if she deyed in my felawshyp I
should lose my life / and now she is sekened unto the death and I can find no
remedy of help and therefore I mourn more than any creature can think. Than
said the old man be ye conforted for I shall be your helper if ye will do after
my counceyll. In this forest be three herbs if ye make a drink of the first to
your wife and of y^ other.ii. a plaster and if she use this medycyne drink
and plaster in due time without doubt she shall recover to perfyte heith.
Socrates fulfilled all as the old man had taught him. And when his wise had
used a while that medycynall drink and plaster within short time she was
perfytly hole of all her sekenes. And wha^ the emperor herd yt Socrates wrought
so wisely / and how dylygently he labored for to hele his wife he promoted him
unto great dygnyte and worship.

Dear friends this Emperor is our lord Ihesu christ / his daughter so fair
and so gentylle is the soul made at ye symylytude of god which is full
gracyous and glorious in the sight of him and of his angels while that she is
not de fouled and abides in her own propre clennesse. This soul god would
not give it unto a rich man but to a poor man that is to say a man that is
made of the slyme of ye earth This Socrates is a poor man / for why every man
comes poor and naked in to this world from his moders belly / and every man
takes his soul in wedlock upon such condycyon that if she dye in his
felaushyp by deedly sin / without doubt he shall lose eternal life. Therefore
o thou man if thy wife seken so through a deedly sin / do than as Socrates did
goo unto the forest that is holy church and thou shall find there an old man
with a staff / that is a dyscrete confessoure which shall tell the of these
three herbs / for he has power to bind and to unbind. The first herb is
contrycyon of whom you sholdest make thy drink of teeres Ambrose says that
teeres wassheth sin where shame is to knowledge and these two other herbs ben
confession and satysfaccyon / if these herbs be used in plaster the sin
without doubt shall receive his health and his soul shall be delivered fro
sin / and by all right he shall have everlasting life. Unto the which
bring us our lord Ihesus.

Sometime there reigned in ye cite of Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named
Frederyk which had only but one sone whom he loved much. This Emperor
when he lay in the point of death he called unto hy^ his sone and said dread
sone I have a balle of gold which I give the upon my blessing that you anon
after my death shall give it to the most fool yt you may find. Than said his
sone. My lord without doubt thy will shall be fulfilled. Anon this young
lord after the death of his fader went and sought in many realms and found
many foles rycheles / by cause he would satysfye his faders will labored
ferther till he came in to a realm where the law was such yt every year a
new king should be chose there / and this king has only the gydynge of that
realm but a year / and at the years end he shall be deposed and put in exyle
in an ylende where as he should wretchedly fynysshe his life / wha^ themperours
sone came unto this realm the new king was chosen with great honor / and
al manner of mynstralsye went before him and brought him with great reverence
and worship unto his regal sete. And when the Emperors sone saw that he came
unto him and salued him reverently and said. My lord lo I give to ye this
balle of gold on my faders behalf. Than said he I pray the tell me the cause
why thou gyuest me this balle. Than answered this young lord and said thus. My
fader quod he charged me in his deed bed under pain of his blessynde that I
should give this balle to the most fool that I could find / wherefore I have
sought many realms and have found / wherefore I have sought many realms and
have found many foles nevertheless a more fool than thou art found I never
and therefore this is the reason. It is not unknown to the that thou shall
reygne but a year and at the years end thou shalt be exyled in to such a
place where as thou shall dye a myscheuous death / wherefore I hold ye for the
most fool yt ever I found that for yt lordshyp of a year thou would so
wylfully lose thy self / and therefore before all other I have given to the
this balle of gold. Than said ye king with out doubt thou says me sothe /
and therefore when I am in full power of this Realm I shall send before me
great tresoure and richesse wherewith I may live and save my self from
myscheuous death when that I shall be exyled and put down and so is was done /
wherefore at the years end he was exyled and lived there in ^pease upon such
goods as he had sent before / and he deyed afterward a good death.

Dear friends this Emperor is the fader of heaven the which byquethed the
balle / that is for to say worldely richesse to foles and ydeotes which
sauereth no thing but that erthely is This Emperors sone / that is for to
say a prechour and a dyscrete confessoure serched about many realms and
lands to show to mysbeleuynge men and foles they peril. The realm wherein no
king might regne but a year is this world. For who so had lived an hundred
year when he comes to the death him shall seem that he has lived but the
space of an hour therefore do as the king did while yt ye be in power of life
/ send before you your tresour yt is to say alms deeds and other good
merytory works / and certainly when ye be put in exyle out of this world ye
shall live in pease and shall find yt mercy of god plentefull whereby ye shall
opteyne everlasting life. Unto y^ which bring us he / that for us deyed on
her rode tree.

Amen.
OYoclesyan reigned in y^ cite of Rome / in whose Empire dwelled a noble
philosopher the which set up by his craft an image in the mids of ye cite
of Rome the which image or figure straight out his arm and his formest finger
where upon stood this poyse written in laty^. Percute hic. Smite here. This
image after yt death of this philosopher stood still a long time. And many
great clerks came thither for to read the superscrypcyon yt was on y^ finger /
but none of them understood what it mente / wherefore there was great wonder
among the people. And at y^ last a long time after there came a strange
clerk out of far countrees / and when he saw this image he read ye
scripture. Smite here. And than upon a day when he saw the shadow of the
hand he took a mattocke and brake up the ground under the hand where y^
shadow was according too the understanding of the superscrypcyno. And anon
he found an house all of marble underneath the ground where in he did
dyscende / and entered in to an halle were he found so much richesse so many
Iewelles and so great meruaylles that he never herd ne saw such neither so
many before that time. At the last he saw a board covered and all manner of
necessary things according thereto laid thereupon. He h^helde ferder and
saw a carbuncle in a wall that lyghtened all the house. And before against this
Carbuncle on that other side stood a man holding in his hand a bow with an
arowe r^dy for to shote. The clerk maruaylled much when he saw al these
things and thought in him self / if that I tell this forth there will no man
believe me / and therefore I will have somewhat of these goods in tok^n of prove.
And with that he saw knyfe of gold upon the board which he took and would
have put it in his bosom. But anon the archer smote yt Carbuncle and brake it
wherewith all the hole house was shadowed and made derke. And when the clerk
perceived it he wept more byttterly than any man might think / for he wist
not by what way that he might go out. For so much that the house was made
derke thorughe the brekynge of yt carbuncle. And that same derkenesse abode
stylle for ever / more after / and so fynysshed y^ clerk his life there in
that derkenesse. Dear friends this image so standing is yt devil / which
says evermore. Smite here. That is for to say. Take heed unto erthely
richesse / and not to heavenly tresoure. This clerk which smote with the
mattocke betokens the wise men of this world as pleders of law / vocates /
and other worldly men which smyteth ever what by right what by unright that
they may get the vanytees of this world / and in their smiting they find
great wondres and maruayllesse / that is to say they find therein the delyces
of the world wherein many men reioyseth. The carbuncle that gives light is
the youth of man which gives hardynes to take their pleasure in worldly
richesse. The archer with his arowe is death which lays watch against man to
sle him. The clerk which took up the knyfe is a worldly man that weneth ever
to have all thing at his will. The death smyeteth the carbuncle / that is to
say the youth strength and power of man / and than lies he wrapped in
derkenesse of sin in the which derkenesse oftymes he dies. Therefore study
we to fle the world and his desires yt and than be we sure to win
everlasting life / unto the which Ihesu bring you and me. Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Tytus a wise man and dyscrete
which ordained in his days such a law y^ what knight dyed in his Empire
should be buried in his armure / and who someuer presumed to spoil any
knights armure after he were deed he should dys without any withstondynge or
saying. It befell after within few years that a Cite of yt Empire was besyeged
of themperours enmyes wherefore that Cite was in peril of lesynge / for none
that wass within that cite might not defend them self by no manner of craft /
therefore great sorrow and lamentacyon was universal thrught out the cite. But
at the last within few days there came to the Cite a young knight and a full
fair and doughty to do deed of arms whom the worthy men of the cite
beholdynge and understanding his doughtynes cried with one voice. O thou most
noble knight we beseech the if it please thy worthynesse to help us now at
our most need / lo ye may se this ryte is in peril of lesynge. Than answered
he and said / se ye not serys that I have no armoure / and if I had armor I
would gladly defend your Cite. This hery^ge a mighty man of the cite he said
to hy^ in secret wise. Sir here was sometime a doughty knight which now is
deed and buried within this cite according unto the law / and if it please
you to take his armoure ye might defend this cite and deliver us fro peril
and that shall be honor unto you and prouffyte unto all the Empire. When this
young knight had herd this he went unto yt grave and took his armoure and
arrayed him self therewith and faughte mygtely against his enemies / and at the
last he opteyned and had the vyctorye and delivered ye cite from peril. And
when he had so done he put the armoure again in to the grave. There were some
men in the cite that have great Indygnacyon and envy upon him because that he
opteyned the vyctorye and accused him unto the Judge saying thus. Sir a law was
made by themperoure that who so ever dyspoyled a deed knight of his armoure
should deye. This young knight found a deed man and took away his armoure
therefore we beseech the that thou proceed in the law against him as against him
that is breker of the law. When y^ Justice herd this he made the knight to be
taken and to be brought before hy^. And wha^ he was examyned of this trespass
against the law he said thus. Sir it is written in the law that of two harms
the leest harm is to be chosen. It is not unknown to you that this cite was
in peril like to have be lost / and but I had taken this armoure I had
nouther saved you ne the cite / therefore as me thinks ye ought rather to
honor me for this good deed that I have done to you than thus shamefully to
repreue me / for I am ladde as he that is ready to be hanged / and also good
syrs an other reason I may lay for mine excuse. He that stelethe or robs
vyolently purposes not to restore the thing yt he robbed / but it is not thus
with me / for though I took the armoure of the deed knight for your salvation
/ when I had opteyned the vyctory I bare it again to the same place and so the
deed knight has that is his by ye law. Than said the Justice a thief that
breketh an house that he may stele and bear away such as he may find and
though he bring again that he has taken. I ask of the if that the brekynge
of the house be lawful or not. The knight answered / sometime the brekynge of
an house may be good where as it is made in feeble place which should cause the
lord of the house to make his wall stronger that thieves after that break not
the walls so lightly in voydynge of more harm Than said the Justice if the
brekynge of ye house be good nevertheless in that brekynge vyolence is done to
the lord of the house. And so though thou dydest good with the armure of the
deed knight neuerthesse thou dydest wrong to the deed knight in taking away
his armoure. The knight said I have told you now that of two harms the leest
is for to be chosen. And that harm where thrughe great goodness comes ought
not for to be called harm / but it should be rather called good. For if that
ouy house within the Cite were on fire and began for too brenne it were more
better too throw it to the ground and three or four houses thereby than they
should be set on fire also whereby all the Cite might be brent. Right so if
the armure of the deed knight had not be taken of the Cite and all ye had been lost. And when the Justice hard that he answered so well and so resonably
he might give no Judgment against him. But they which that had accused this
knight slew him for whose death there was great wepy^ge through all the cite /
and his body was worshypfully buried in a new tomb.

Dear friends this Emperor is the fader of heaven / and this Cite is the world
the which is besyeged of the devil and deedly sin. And as many as were
within this Cite were all in peril to be lost. This young knight that came to
the cite is out lord Ihesu christ which had not the armoure of our manhood
till he went unto the grave / that is to say to the womb of ye glorious
vyrgyn Mary by the annu^ciacyon of ye angel saying. The holy ghost shall
light in the. etc. Lo thou shall conceive and bear a sone. And thus in the
womb of the vyrgyn he took the armure of the deed knight / yt is to say he
took ye manhood of Adam our form fader and saved the cite that is yt world
with man kind from peril by his blyssed passion which he suffered on the
cross / and than he put his armure again in to the grave when his blyssed
body was buried / but ye cytezyns enuyed him / yt is to say the Jews and the
paynyms of Iewrye accused him to pylate and laid the law before them against
him saying / if thou suffer him thus thou art not friend to Caesar the emperor /
we have a law and after that law he ought to dye / and thus our lord Ihesu
christ of his enmyes was dampened to death hanging on the cross buried in his
grave arose the third day fro death to life and after ascended up to heaven.
Unto ye which Ihesu bry^ge us all.

Amen.
THere reigned sometime in ye cite of Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named
Betolve which ordained a law that what woman were taken in auoutry her
husbonde being a live that she should be cast in to perpetuell prison. There
was that time a knight which had a fair lady to his wife which did auoutry
under her husbonde and was with child therefore by the law she was put in prison
/ where within short time after she was delivered of a fair sone. This child
grew up till he was seven year old / his mother daily wept hertely. And when
the child herd this he said to his mother thus. O mother why weep ye thus / and
for what cause is your body thus turmented. Than said his mother. O thou my
sweet sone I have great cause to morn and thou also / for above our hedes is
the walking of people and the son shyneth in his clerenesse / and great
solace has all men that are above us / and we be here contynually in such
derkenes that I may not se the ne thou me / alas / alas / that ever I conceived
the. Than said the sone / such Joy ne such light as thou spekest of saw I
never ne yet perceived / for I was borne here in this derkenesse therefore if I
had mete and drink enough here would I live all the days of my life. Therefore
mother weep ye not but show unto me solace. The while the lamentacyon was
between the mother and the sone / themperours stywarde stood above their hedes
and herd all their mourning / wherefore he had great conpassyon of them and
went unto the Emperor and knelynge be sought him of his grace for the mother
and the sone / that they might be delivered of prison. The Emperor as a
merciful lord granted that they should be delivered. Neuerthesse if they
tresspased so in time to come they should be punysshed with double pain / and
after that they were delivered this woman ended herlyfe in that cite.

Dear friends this Emperor is the fader of heaven which made this law that
what wedded woman / that is to say what soul which is wedded to our lord do
aduoutrye / that is to say deedly sin should be cast in ye prison of hell
/ therefore a sinful soul has great cause to weep for she is departed fro
light / that is to say from the Joy of heaven Her sone that desired mete and
drink ben the mighty men of this world which sayen to the prelates of yt
church and to the prechours which preche unto them the Joy of heaven / that
while we may live and have all the solace of the world we desire none other
Joy of heaven. The stuarde which herd their lamentacyon is our lord Ihesu
the which knows all the preuytees of our hertes and contrycyon of out sins
besought the fader of heaven for us that we might be delivered from the prison
of sin / and that we may come to everlasting life / unto the which bring
us our derelorde Ihesus.

Amen.


IN Rome dwelled sometime an emperor named Pomper which above all other
things was mercyful. This Emperor let cry thoroughe al his Empire a great
feast and that poor and rich should come to this feast. And who so ever came
to that feast should not only be well fed but also he should have great
gifts. When ye heraude had warned al manner of me^ to come to this feast at
the time there were two feeble men lyenge by the way and the one was lame and
y^ other was blind. This blind man said unto the lame man. Alas and woe to me
and the how shall we do / for themperoure has let cry a feast and who so
ever comes thereto shall not only be well fed but also he shall have right
great gifts / and I am blind and thou art lame how shall we do. What said
the lame man to ye blind man I shall tell the good counsel / if thou will do
after me thou shalt let for no thing. I am lame and feeble and may not goo
nevertheless I may see / and thou art strong and blind and may not see /
take thou me upon thy back and bear me and I shall led the / the right way
and thus shall we both come to ye Emperors feast. Than said the blind man
after thy good counceyll I do / come on my back and I shall bear the and thou
shalt led me ye right way / and so they did that both of them came to
that feast and received great reward and gifts among other men / and thus
ends their lives in pease.

Dear friends this Emperor is our lord Ihesu christ the which let cry a
general feast / that is to say the Joy of heaven / unto ye which Joy he
called all mankind and forsakes no man that will come unto him. This lame
man betokens the prelates of the church prechours and confessors which
that have no thing of theyrowne but lyuen by techynge and alms of other men.
And this blind man betokens lay men which knows not the right way unto
heaven. It behooves that the blind man / that is to say the lay men to bear
the lame man / that is to say the prelates of the church susteynynge and
fedynge them with the tythynge of alms and other oblatyons / than the
prelates be beholden to teache and infourme us the way toward heaven where as we
shall not only have a feast but also great Joy and reward / to the which
god bring us thereto.

Amen.


Sometime in Rome dwelled an Emperor named Folliculus y^ which was right
wise merciful and ryghtfull in all his works this Emperor builded in the
eest a noble cite when rein he put al his tresoure and precious stones / and
riches to be kept / unto this cite was the way stony and full of brymbles and
sharp thorns / and three knights were armed ready to fight with them that
would come to that cite. Therefore the emperor ordained yt who soever overcome
these knights should enter the cite and take at his will of themperours
tresoure. After y^ this Emperor let make in ye northewest a cite wherein he
ordained all manner of pain tormentynge sorrow and myscheef to ye which was a
broad way full delectable growing full of roses and fail lelyes / and in that
way were three knights ever waiting if any man came toward the cite of the
north to serve him with all manner of delycates and things necessare / and if
it fortuned any man to enter within that cite the custom was such of that
cite that the people should take and bind them hand and foot and cast him in
prison there to abide to ye coming of the Justice. when this was cried
thrughout all the Empire / there were two knights dwelling in a cite there
beside one hight Ionatas and was a wist man that other hight Pyrryus and he was
a fool / nevertheless there was between them great love. This Ionatas said unto
Pyrryus / dear friend there is a comu^e cry made through all lands that
the emperor has made a cite in the eest wherein he has put all his tresoure /
and who so ever may enter that cite shall take of the tresoure what him list
therefore my counceyll is that we go to cite / than said Pyrryus thy comfort is
good and I desire to fulfill it. The wise knight said / if it be so that thou
will follow my counseyll I pray y^ that faithful frendshyp may continue
between us / and in token of love thou shalt drink my blood / and I shall
drink thine that none of us depart ne fail other in this Journey. The
folysshe knight said / it pleases me right well all that ye say / wherefore
they were both leten blood and eueryche of them drank others blood when this
was done they went together forth upon their Journey / and when they had gone
three days Iourneys toward the cite where the tresoure was / they came unto a
place where were two ways / one was sharp stony and full of thorns / that
other way was plain and fair and full of swetenes and delytes. Than said ye
wise knight to his fellow / dear friend here be.ii. ways one sharp and thorny
/ netheles if we go this way we shall come to this cite that is rich / and
there shall we have that we have desired. Than said this folysshe knight to his
fellow. I wonder gretely of you that ye speak such things / for rather I will
believe mine eyes than your words. I se here openly and so do ye that here is
an hard way and full of thorns / and as I have hard say there be three
champyons armed in this way ready to fight against all men that gone that way
toward the cite of the Eest / and therefore I tell you that I will not go that
way. But here is as ye may se an other way plain enough and easy to walk /
and in this way there be three knights ready to serve us and give us all manner
things necessary to us / and therefore by this way I will go and not by that
other way. Than said the wise knight certainly if we go by that way we shall
be led de in to the Cite of the north where in there is no mercy but perpetuel
pain and sorrow / and there shall we be taken and bounden and cast in to
prison. Certainly said y^ folysshe knight this way is the ready way / and as I
believe it is more profitable than that other way / than went they both forth
the fair way / and anon three knights met with them which received them
reverently as for a night and gave them all manner of thing that was
necessary to them and on the morrow they took their Journey forth toward the
cite. And when they were within the cite anon ye Emperor officers met with
them and said. Dear friends why come ye hyder in so much that ye know the
law of this Cite so cruel of long time here before sothly ye shall be served
now after the law. Anon they took the wise knight and bound him and put
him in prison / and after that they took folyssh knight and bound him fast and
cast him in to a dycke. Soon after that it befell that the Iustyre came to
the cite to give Judgment upon them that trespassed against the law and
anon all the prisoners were brought forth before the Justice among whom
these two knights were brought forth / one from prison / and ye other from
the dyke. Than said y^ wise knight unto the Justice / reverent lord I
complain of my fellow that he is gylty of my death / for when we two came to
the two ways whereof that one led to the cite in the eest / and the other to
this cite I told him all the peril of this said cite / and the reward of
that other cite / and he would not believe me / and said unto me in this wise. I
believe mine own eyes better than thy words / and because he was my fellow I
would not let him goo alone in this / way. And thus came I with him this
way. Wherefore he is cause my death. Than said the folysshe knight I complain
that he is the cause of my death. For it is not unknown too you all that I am
a fool and he a wise man and therefore he should not so lyghtely have followed
my folly. For if he had forsaken this way I would have followed him / and
therefore he is the cause of my death. Than said the Justice to the wise knight.
Because that thou with all thy wisdom and great understanding so lyghtely
consented and followed the will of the fool and all his folysshe works / and
thou fool because that thou would not do after the counseyll / ne fulfill
the wholesome words of this dyscrete and wise man and believe him. I give
Judgment that ye both be hanged for your trespass / and so it was done /
wherefore all men praised gretely the Justice for his dyscrete Judgment.

Dear friends this Emperor is our lord god / and in the eest is the cite of
heaven wherein is tresoure Infynyte. And unto this cite is an hard way and full
of thorns / that is to say the way of penance by the which way full few
walks / for it is so hard and so strayte according to the holy scripture
saying thus. Est art a via que ducit ad vitam. It is a full strayte way that
ledeth mankind unto everlasting life. In this way ben three knights / that
is to say / the devil / the world / and the flesh with whom it behooves
us too fight and to obtain the vyctory or we may come to heaven. The second
cite that is in the north is hell. And to this accords the scripture saying
thus. Ab aquilone pandet^ o^ne maiu^. Out of the north comes all evil.
Certainly unto this cite is ye way plain and broad and walled about on every
side with all manner delycates / wherefore many men walks by this way. The
three knights that gives every man going this way what thing them needs
ben these. Pride of life / couetyse of eyes / and concupyscence of flesh in
the which three yt wretched man gretely delyted and at the last they led
him in to hell. This wytty knight betokens the soul / and the folysshe
knight betokens the flesh the which is always folysshe and at all times
ready to do harm. These two ben fellows and knytte in one / for eueryche of
them orynketh others blood / yt is to say they shall drink of one cup
either Joy or pain they shall have after the day of dome. The soul cheseth
all the way of penance / and in as much as she may she styreth the flesh
to do the same / but the flesh thinks never what is to come after / and
therefore she gooth in the delight of this world and flees ye way of penance /
and thus the soul after the death is cast in to hell / and the flesh is
cast in to the dycke / that is to say in to the grave. But than the Justice
comes / that is our lord Ihesu christ at the day of dome to deem all
mankind. Than the soul shall complain upon the flesh / and y^ flesh upon
the soul. But than ye Justice which will not be deceived neither by prayer ne
by price shall condemn the soul because she followed the fragylyte of ye
flesh. And also he shall condemn the flesh because it would not believe
the soul / wherefore let us study to tame our flesh that we may obey god
and than shall we have everlasting life. Unto the which bring us our dear
lord Ihesus christ.

Amen.


THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Frederyk which had no
chylderin save a daughter to whom this Emperor after his dyscesse byquethed
all his Empire This understanding an earl yt dwelt there be side came unto
this young maiden and wowed her and styred her unto sin all that he mught /
wherefore this young lady in short process enclyned to the earl / and this
earl anon lay with her and defoyled her / and after that he put her from her
heritage and chased her out of her Empire wherefore she made great lamentacyon
and fled unto the realm there beside where as she daily wept and mourned.
It befelie after on a day yt while she satte mourning by a side way there
came by her a fair knight riding young and right honest upon a good horse
which that came to ward her a swyfte pace and worshypfully saluted her and
asked yt cause why that she so sore mourned. Than answered she and said. My
reverent lord. I am an Emperors daughter comen of royal kynne / my fader is
deed which that left me all his Empire by cause he had none other heir / and
after his dyscesse an earl there beside dysceyued me and took from me my
maydenhode / and after that he put me vyolently out of mine heritage so ye I now
am feign to beg my bread from door to door / and this is the cause of my
sorrow. Than said the knight / fair damoysell I have great compassyon on thy
fayrenesse and of thy gentylnesse / therefore if you wylt grant to me one thing
I shall fight for the against the earl and I behote unto the ye vyctory. Than
said she. Alas alas I have no thing that I may give unto the but my self. And
I ask no more of the said the knight but yt thou would by my wife and love
no man so much as me. Than said she. Reverent sir that will I do gladly and
more if I might. Than said the knight I will in certaynte that thou shalt do
for me one thing / that if it fortune me to dye in battle for the and to
opteyne the vyctory that thou shall take my blody sherte and hang it upon a
perch in thy chamber / and this shalt thou do for two things. The first is
that when someuer thou behold este the sherte thou shalt weep for me. The
second is that what someuer man come for to wowe the to be his wife / than
thou shalt hastily run unto thy chamber and behold my blody sherte and
think hertely within thy self thus. The lord of this sherte dyed for my love
in battle the which recovered mine heritage / god forbede that I should take
oony other man after his death. Than said she. Reverent sir all this I shall
fulfylle by the grace of god. And when the knight herd this he gave battle
against the earl and opteyned the vyctory / and the earl was overcome and
fled / and this young lady was brought and received again in to her
heritage: Neuerthesse this knight was deedly wounded in that battle whereof
he dyed / but or he dyed he byquethed his bloody sherte unto this danioysell
desiring her to keep her promise. When this young lady herd of his death she
wept sore and made great lamentacyon for his death. And in his sherte was
written this verse. Think on him and have mind / that to the was so kind.
Anon when she had received the sherte she hanged it upon a perch in her
chamber / and as oftentimes as she beheld it she wept bytterly. It befelle
not long after that the states of her Empire came to her and desired and
counseylleo her for to take an husbonde / But than she went unto her chamber
and beheld the blody sherte / than waxed she sorrowful and said oftentimes
alas alas thou suffered death for my love and thou also recouerest again mine
heritage / god forbede that ever I should take any other man but ye / and thus
she answered every man that came to her and so they went away vnspedde and
she ended her life in pease and rest.

Dear friends this Emperor is the fader of heaven / and this daughter is the
soul of man made at the symylytude of god / to whom god gave and byquethed
the Empire of paradyse. But there came an earl / yt is to say ye devil and
styred her to syn^e wha^ sheet of y^ appel and said unto her thus. in what
hour ye ete of yt appel ye shall be like gods where for brekynge gods
commandment we were all exyled out of paradyse and chaced unto the realm of
this world here to live in great wretchedness / like as the psalm says. In
sudore vultus tui etc. In the sweet of thy vysage thou shall ete thy bread. But
that came a fair young knight and a strong / that is to say our lord Ihesu
christ which had compassyon on mankind and took our flesh and our blood and
gave battle to ye devil and overcame him / and thus wanne he again our
heritage. Therefore late us do as this young lady did put we this blody sherte
/ that is to say y^ mind of the passion of christ in the perch of our heart
and think we how our lord Ihesu christ shed his blood for sv. And if any
man / that is to faye / ye devil or any other would styre us to sin / anon
think we on ye passion of christ and say we thus. I shall take none other but
the which have shed thy blood for me And thus shall we win ever lasting
life. Unto the which god bring us all Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Apolloninus which ordained
for law yt every man upon pain of death should worship the day of his
natyuyte. This Emperor called unto him a clerk yt hight Virgyll and said. My
dear master there ben many heed sinned done contrary to the law / therefore I
pray yt that thou by thy conning would make some craft whereby I might know
who trespassed against the law pryuely or pertly. Than said Virgyll My reuernt
lord your will shall be done. Anon this Virgyll through his craft made an
image in ye mids of the cite of Rome which desceuered and told themperours
messangers who trespassed against the law and who trespassed not. There was
that time owellynge in ye cite of Rome a smyth that hight Focus which for no
thing would worship the natyuyte of the Emperor. It befelle upon a night
while the smyth lay in his bed / he thought upon the image which had
accused so many men before / and dredde lest the image would accuse him /
wherefore he arose and went to the image and said. I make a vow to god if ever
thou accuse me I shall break thine heed and when he had thus said he went home
The Emperor on the morrow after following sent his messengers unto the image
as he was wont before to know and to understand who had trespassed against
the law And to them than said the image / lift up your eyes and behold what
is written in my forhede. And tha^ they looked up and saw this poyse written.
Tempore mutant^ hoi^es detminant^. Times ben changed / and men ben worse and
worse. For who will say the troth shall have his heed broken therefore go ye
forth unto your lord and tell him all that ye have read and seen. The
messengers went forth and told the Emperor all that they had herd and seen
Than said the Emperor / arm your self and goo ye to the image / and if that
ye find any man that has bostyd / and look if any man have thretened the
image / bind him hand and foot and bring him unto me. Than went the
messenger forth unto the image and said unto the image. Tell us the troth if
any man has thretened the and we shall avenge the anon. Than said the image.
Take ye smyth Focus for he is that man that will not honor the Natyuyte of
the Emperor. Anon the messengers led forth that smythe before themperoure /
and anon examyned him why he kept not the day of the Emperors natyuyte in
reverence and honor according unto the law. Than answered the smyth and
said. Reverent lord I beseech you that ye would here mine excuse / and if I
answer not resonably to all manner of points that ye will ask me I will put me
only in your grate. Than said the Emperor. I shall here the and that / that
is ryghtfull I shall do. Than said ye smyth. It behooves me to have.viii. d.
every day in the weke / and that I can not get without great labor / and
therefore I may in no manner wise keep that day holy day mote than other days.
Than said the Emperor / why behooves it the to have this.viii. d. Than said
the smyth / I am behold to pay daily.ii. d. and.iid. I lene and.ii. d. I lose
and.ii. d. I exspende. Than said the Emperor / tell me more expressly of
these.viii. d. Than said he I am bound every day too pay.ii. d. to my fader
/ for when I was young my fader spente on me.ii. d. daily / and therefore I am
behold to help him and to pay him again his.ii. d. for his sustentacyon.
Also.ii. d. I lose on my wife. Than said the emperor / why lesest you that.ii. d.
on thy wife. Than said he where se ye ever woman but she had one of these
points outher she is wylfull or contrary to her husbonde or of hot
complexcyon and therefore that I give her I lose. Also ii. d. I lene to my sone
wherewith he is sustained that when I come to age and pouerte that he may pay
me again.ii. d. like as I do to my fader Also I spend.ii. d. on my self in
mete and drink and that is little enough. Than said themperoure thou have
answered well and wisely. Not long after that it fell that themperoure dyed
and this smyth Focus was chosen to be Emperor because he spended this.viii. d.
so wisely and so proffytably / and thus he ended his life in pease and in
rest.

Dear friends this Emperor is our blyssed lord Ihesu Christ which ordained
by his holy law that every man should worship the sunday. This Vyrgyll
which made this image is the holy ghost which is set up among us a precher
to teache virtues and to repreue vices and that he should not spare the poor ne
the rich. But now if a precher would say troth against any man anon he
sHall be menaced and thretned of the enmyes of christ / that is to say by
evil men which that loved neither god ne man / wherefore ye precher may say
now adays that people which was written in ye forhede of ye image. Times ben
changed from good to ruyl / and men be daily worse and worse. For who so
would say the troth now a days shall have his heed broken. Therefore it is
need they be armed / that is to say that every precher be armed with good
deeds in ensample of other / and than it needs not to dread in so much that
they have god and troth to stand by them / according to the appostles
saying thus. Si deus nobiscu^ quis contra nos. If god be with us who may be
against us. By this smyth Focus in understand every good christian man which
daily should work merytory deeds / and than he ought to be presented before
the heavenly Emperor. This Focus paid.ii. d. to his fader / and so we shall
pay to our fader of heaven.ii. d. that is to say honor and love. For when
we were the chylderin of wretchedness and but in boundage almighty god sent
down to y^ earth his sone to redeem us Accordyinge to saint Johan yt
Euangelyst saying thus Deus dilexit mundum vt filium suum vn^genitum daret pro
mundo. God loves the world so well that he would give his oonely sone for
the salvation of the world. Also this Focus lent.ii. d. to his sone / that is
too say every christian man ought to lene / to the sone of god our blyssed
lord Ihesu Christ good will and merytory deeds in our life that he may pay
us again at the day of dome when soul and body shall be gloryfyed / and in
that he is our brother and it may well be proved by the text of Ysaye saying
thus. Puer natus est nobis.etc. A child is borne to us. This Focus lost.ii. d.
upon his wife. Thy wife betokens thy flesh upon whom thou have lost.ii. d.
yt is to say unlawful love and consent of sins / for why / the flesh is
contrary to the ghost and ever is ready to harm. This Focus also spended.ii. d.
on him self / that is to lay / by the first penny thou shall understand
penance done in ye which the soul gretely delyteth in heaven and there is
gloryfyed / And by the second penny we ought to understand yt sted fast
abiding in doing of penance / for he that abides unto the end shall be
saved. And who that spended well this.ii. d. shall opteyne everlasting life.
Unto the which bring us our lord Ihesus christ.

Amen.
Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor which among all other virtues
loved best mercy / wherefore he ordained a law that every blind man should
hane an hundred.s. by year of his tresoure. It befelle upon a day that there
came certain men to a tavern to drink wine / and after that these men had
sytten in the tavern three days y^ fourth day they were gretely in the
tauerners debt and had no money to pay for their wine wherefore ye tauerner
came to them and charged them that they should not void till they had paid
for their wine. Than said one of y^ drynkers to his fellows syrs quod he
the emperor has made such a law that every blind man shall have an
hundred.s. of his tresour therefore cast we lotte among us / and to whom the
lotte falls late his eyes be put out and so may he go to themperours palace
and get the hundred.s. and thus this gretely reioysed and said that the
counceyll was right good / wherefore they cast lottes among them and the lotte
fell on him that gave the counceyll / and than his folowes forth with put out
his eyes. And when he was blind he went forth to themperours palace and axed
of the steward an hundred.s. according to the emperors law. Dear friends
said ye steward thou myghtest se with both thine yesterdaye / and thou also
understand ye law amys / for the law is made for men that are blind
through infyrm y tees or by the will of god and yesterdaye thou had thy
sight in the tavern / but wylfully thou have lost thine eyer therefore go thou
to the tavern again to thy folowes and make thy pease and quyte thy self for
here getest thou not a ferthynge. Than went this wretched man forth and told
his fellows of the steward answer / and with that came in the tauerner and
dyspoyled them of all their clothes and beat them and thus drove them with
shame out of the cite and so were they there never seen after.

Dear friends this Emperor is our lord Ihesu which ordained for law that
every blind man should have an hundred.s. of his tresoure. This blind man
betokens every sinner which sinned through infyrmytees of entysy^ge of the
devil the world and the flesh which shall receive an hundred.s. if he be
Inwardely repentaunt of his sins / that is to say he shall have an hundred
times more / Joy according to the scripture saying thus. Centuplu^ accipietis
and vitam eternam possidebitis. Ye shall receive an hundred times more Joy if
ye be repentaunt and torn from sin / and also ye shall have everlasting
life. These men that came to the tavern and drynkyn the wine be sinners which
oftentimes comen unto the tavern of our aduersarye the devil and drynken /
that is for to say / they do consume and there wast a way all goostly virtues
which they received when they took crystendome at the font stone / wherefore
the devil our enemy dyspoyleth them and makes them to lose all their good
deeds that ever they wrought before they casted lottes / that is to say they
cast among them the custom of sin / and this lotte of sin falls on
them that is worshypful and without mercy and such a man wylfully becomes
blind / yt is to say he becomes wylfully a foul sinner like Judas that
betrayed our lord without any subgeccyon or entysynge / and therefore such
men sin more grievously when they come before the steward / that is to say
before the prelates of y^ church they may not lightly opteyne the Joy of
heaven / for why / they be not in the right way to leave their sin. Therefore
study we with all our dylygence to plese god ye we may opteyne everlasting
reward. Unto the which bring us our lord Ihesus Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Pylomius which had no child
but a daughter a fair maiden and a gracyous in the sight of every man and was
named Aglaes. There was also in themperours palace a gentle knight that loved
this lady above all thing in the world. It befelle after upon a day that
this knight taked with this lady and vttred in secret wise his desire to her
Than said she curtoysly / sith ye have vttred to me the preuytes of your heart
I shall in like wise for your love utter to you the secrets of my heart / and
truly I say that above all other I love you best Than said the knight I
purpose to vysyte the holy land / and therefore give me your troth ye
this.vii. year ye shall take none other man but only for my love that ye shall
so long abide me / and if I come nor again to this day. vii. year take than
what man that ye list best. And in like wise I shall promise you yt within
this.vii. year I shall take no wife. Than said she / this covenant pleases me
well when this was said eueryche of them bytrouthed other / and than the knight
took his leave of this lady and went forth to the holy land. Anon after that
the emperor treated with the king of Hungry of marriage for his daughter. Than
came y^ king of Hungry to themperours palace to se that young domoysell / and
when he saw her maruaylously he lyked her of her fayrnes and goodness so that
the Emperor and the king were accorded in all things touching y^ marriage
upon the condycyon that ye damoysell would consent. Than called the emperor the
young lady to him and said. O my sweet daughter. I have provided for the that a
king shall be thy husbonde if ye list to thyn assent / therefore tell me what
answer thou will give to this. Than said she to her fader it pleases me well
/ but of one thing dear fader I you beseech if it might please you to grant
me for the love of god. I have auowed my chastyte only to god for this.vii.
year / therefore dear fader I beseech you for all the love ye is between your
gracyous fader hode and me that ye name no man to be mine husbonde till this
seven year be ended / and than I shall be ready in all things to fulfill your
will Than said themperoure. Sith it is so that y^ will none husbonde have
this. vii. year I will not break thy vow / but when the. vii year ben passed
thou shall have y^ king of Hungry unto thine hushonde. And than themperoure
sent forth his letters unto the king of Hungry praynge him if it might
please him to abide.vii. year for love of his daughter / and than should he
speed of his entente without fail. Hereof the king was pleased and granted to
abide. And wha^ this.vii. year were ended save a day the young lady stood in
her chamber wyndowe and wept sore saying thus. Alas alas to morrow my love
promised to be with me again fro the holy land / and also the king of Hungry
will be here to morrow for to wedde me according to my faders promise / and if
my love come not at a certain hour than am I utterly dysceyued of the
inward love of him. When the day came y^ king arrayed him toward the
Emperor with a great company to wedde his daughter and was ryally basene and
arrayed in purple And while ye king was riding upon his way there came a
knight suddenly riding by him / to whom the said thus. Dear friend whens art
thou and whens comes thou The knight answered and said I am of thempyre of
Rome and now am come late fro the holy land and am ready to do you service
such as I can. And as they rode talking on the way it began to rain so fast
that all the kings array was almoost lost. Than said the knight / my lord
quod he ye have done folysshyly for as much y^ ye brought not with you your
house. Than said the king / how speaks thou so mine house is large and broad
and made of stones and mortar how should I than bear with me my house thou
spekest to me like a fool. When this was said they rode ferther till they came
to a great water and a deep / y^ king smote his horse with his spors and lepte
in to the water too that he was almoost drowned. When the knight saw this and
was over on that other side of the water without peril / he said to the king
/ ye were in peril and therefore ye did folysshely because yt ye brought not
with you your bridge. Than said the king / thou spekest meruaylously my
bridge is made of lyme and stone and conteyneth in quanty te more than half a
mile how should I than bear with me my bridge / therefore you sepkest folysshly.
Well said y^ knight my folysshenesse may torn ye to wisdom. When ye king had
ryden a little ferther he axed of the knight what time of the day it was. Than
said the knight / if any man haluste to ete it is time of the day to eter and
therefore my reverent lord I pray you to take a soppe with me for that is no
dysworshyp to yon but great honor to me before ye states of this Empire. Than
said the king I will gladly ete with the / they sat both down in a vine
gardeyne and all that were with the king and with the knight dyned. And when
the dinner was ended and the king had wasshen the knight said to the king. My
lord quod he ye have done folysshely for that ye led not with you your fader
and your mother. Than said the king what say thou my fader is deed and my
mother is old and may not travail how should I than bring them with me /
therefore to the I save the troth a folyssher man than thou art saw I never
Than said the knight every works is praised at the end When the king had
ryden a little ferther and was nyhan de themperours palace the knight axed leave
to goo from him for this cause he knew a nerer way to the palace to y^ young
lady that he might come first and led her with hy^ Than said the king I
pray the sir tell me by what place purposest thou to ride. Than said ye knight
I shall tell you troth / this day.vii. year I left a net in a place / and
now I purpose to vysyte it and draw it to me / and if it be broken I will leave
it / and if it be hole than will I take it to me and keep it as a precious Jewel
/ and when he had said what him list he took his leave of the king and rode
forth / and the king kept the kings hye way When themperoure herd of the
kings coming he went against him with a great company and worshypfully
received him and let do of his wete clothes and arrayed him again with new
clothes And when the Emperor and the king were set to mete the Emperor
did him all the chere and solace that he could. And when they had dyned yt
Emperor axed tidings of y^ king. My lord said he I shall tell you what I
herd this day by the way. There came a knight to me and reverently salued me
/ and anon after yt there came a great rain and confounded gretely my
clothing / and anon the knight said / sir thou have done folysshely for so
much thou brought not with the thine house. Than said the emperor what
clothing had that knight on him a cloak quod the king. Than said the emperor /
forsooth that was a wise man / for the house whereof he spoke was a cloak and
therefore he said to you that ye did folysshely by cause ye came without your
cloak / for if ye had brought with you a cloak than had your clothes ben
defoyled with the rain. Than said the king when we had ryden a little ferther
we came unto a deep water. I smote my horse with the spors and almoost I was
drowned / and he rode on the other side of the water and found no peril / and
than said he to me / ye have done folysshly for so much that ye led not
with you your bridge. Forsooth said the Emperor he said troth / for he called
the bridge your squyres which should have ryden before and assayed the
depnesse of the water. Than said the king we rode ferther more and at the
last he prayed me to dyne with him / and when we had dyned he said I did
vnwesely for I led not with me my fader and my mother Sothly said the emperor
he was a wise man and said troth / for he called your fader and your mother
bread and wine and other vytayles. Than said ye king we rode ferthermore / and
anon after he asked me leave to go from / and I asked dylygently whether he
went. And he answered again and said under this form. This day.vii. year
said he left I a precious net in a preuy place / and now I will ride and
vysyte it / and if it be broken or to torn than will I leave it / and if it be
hole as I left it than shall it be to me right precious and I shall bear it
with me. When the Emperor herd this he cried with a loud voice and said. O
ye my knights and my servants goo ye lightly unto my daughters chamber for
sothely that is the net where of the knight spoke. And anon his knights and
his servants went unto his daughters chamber and found her not / the
foresaid knight had take her with him. And thus the king was dysceyued of the
damoysell and he went home again to his own country confounded.

Dear friends it is Emperor is our blyssed lord Ihesus Christ. And this fair
daughter is everlasting life the which that the emperor had ordained for
kings knights and for men. The knight that loved this young lady is every
good christian soul which holds him self not worthy to come in ye sight of
god unto such Joy. As the appostle says. Non est condign passionis huius
temporis ad futuram gloriam. The be not so worthy of sufferynge to come unto
yt glory that is to come. This knight went seven year on pilgrimage / like as
a good christian man all the days of his life should labor in fnlfllynge the
seven works of mercy. By this king that comes wtoute cloak in the rain is
to vndestande the mighty men of this world / as Justices Mayres and balyes
which had noclokes to cover al their other clothes by this cloak is vndsta^de
charity / ye which as the appostle says. Caritas cooperit multitudinem
peccatorum. Charity couerth all our sins. But many men have not this cloak /
wherefore they be wete in ye rain of pride auaryce / and lechery. This king
was also almoost drowned for by cause he lacked his bridge / yt is to say
parfyte faith. For we see daily that there may no man pass over a great water
broad and horrible deep without a bridge or sum other thing that is able for
to bear him. Right to without faith it is Impossyble for to please god / and
thus may no man be saved without faith when they set their life in worldely
Joy or wordely help more than in the help of almighty god which is mighty
for to do all things / wherefore he says himself thus. Saluator si habueritis
fidem sicut granu^ sinapis poteritis et cetera. If he have faith as the grain
of mustarde / than may ye say unto the hills. Goo thou forth and it shall
goo. But many of us now a days has to over feeble a faith and therefore they
shall sodanly fall in the claye of desperacyon / and by deedly sin often
times they offend god. Also this king had not brought with him his fader and
his mother. By the father which is cause of gouernacyon is understand humylyte
without whom there is no virtue in no man. And thereto accords saint Gregory
saying thus Si quis ceteris virtutes sine humilitate congregat et cete. He that
gadereth al other virtues without humylyte is like a man that casts duste in
the wind. His mother betokens hope therefore he that will opteyne everlasting
life him behooves to have the cloak of charity / bridge of faith a fader of
meekness / and a mother of hope / as the appostle says. Spe salut facti sumus.
Also this knight went the strayte pathe way / and the king the broad way /
for he that will be saved behooves to goo a strayte way / yt is to say / the
way of fasting / alms deeds / chastyte / and penance / of ye which way
speaks the appostle. Stricta est via que ducit ad vitam eternam. The way is
strayte that ledeth to everlasting life. But many men gone that other way
which ledeth to hell / that is to say by the way of flesshely lust and
such men gone out of the way of everlasting life / but such men be
deceived thrughe ye way. Therefore study we to walk that way whereby we may
opteyne everlasting life.

Amen.


Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty strong and a bataylous Emperor named Agias
which had with him a knight whom men called Gerarde which was a doughty
warryour neuerthe less he was as meke as a lamb in the Emperors hall / but
in the field he was like a lion. This Emperor had a fair daughter whom the
strong and mighty exle of palaster rauysshed dysfloured neuerthesse it
dysplesed more the emperor the dyffoylnge of his daughter than the rauysshynge /
wherefore he called unto him his counsel and said dear friends it is not
unknown to you the despyte and vyolence done unto me in deflourynge of my
daughter and therefore Iaurpose to give barayle to the earl / wherefore I pray
you to be ready at a day set to proceed with me to battle. And they said
lord we ready to live and dye with you in battle. When the day of battle
came they met on both sides and a cruel hard betayle was given on both
sides / and all that were of themperours party were slain. And as the emperor
should have been byheded the knight Gerarde put him self among this enemies
before the emperor and fought manfully and so the emperor escaped and the knight
abode and slew the earl / nevertheless this knight had diverse wounds. This
not withstondynge he abode and fought styll^tyll the blood ran to his helys.
And wha^ his enemies saw that the Earl was slain they fled / and the knight
with his people followed on the chase till he came to the place where
themperours daughter was and led her with hy^ and thus with tryumphe and
vyctory he returned again to the emperor. For ye which vyctory and getynge
again of themperours daughter he was gretely praised of all people. Not long
after it befell that this knight had to do in themperours court wherefore the
knight came unto the emperor and prayed him mekely to be favorable in his
cause / and ferthermore he prayed him to do that reason asked. When the
emperor had herd him he called to him a Justice and said goo thou and do
Justice to this knight and that / that y^ law will. And whah the knight herd
this he cried with a loud voice. Alas alas who herd ever such a thing of an
Emperor / thou were said he in battle where thyn heed should have be smyten
of / and I in mine own person and none other men put my self in Ieoperdy for
the and saved the / and now thou have assygned an other man to be Judge in my
cause / alas that ever thou were borne. And with that word the knight did of
all his clothes and showed the wounds that he had received in the battle unto
all the men that where there present and said. Loo what I have suffered for ye
and I put none other man in my stead / and now thou assygnest an other man in
my cause. Forsothe I say to the that I never served such a lord before. When
themperoure herd this being almoost confounded in him self said thus. O dear
friend all that thou say is troth / thou sauedest me from death / thou
wonnest my daughter again and for my sake thou have suffered many wounds.
Forsothe it is right that I come down and make an end of thy cause such as
may be honor and Joy to the. And than the emperor labored besely in his matter
and made thereof an end according to the knights entente / wherefore all men
gretely commended the Emperor.

Dear friends this Emperor may be called every christian man or else all
mankind which had a fair daughter / that is to say the soul made at the
symylytude of god This earl betokens the devil which rauysshed and defouled
by sin the soul of man thrughe etynge of the tree knowing good and evil /
wherefore all mankind was in seruage till a strong and valiant knight came
and put him self on the cross between the devil and mankind. For if that
had not ben we had all be dampened euerlastyngely / and this knight brought
again the soul of man unto the church / wherefore he suffured many great
wound in his body. And now this knight / this is for to say our lord Ihesu
christ has a matter for to do among us / that is to for say / for to find in
us perfyte life / wherefore he calls on us daily ye we should be ready at all
times / saying thus in ye Apocalypse tercio. Eccsto ad hostium et pulso / si
quis miche aperuerit introibo et cenabo. That is to say^. Loo I stand and
knock at the door / if there any man will open to me I shall come in and soupe
with him. But many men does as this Emperor did the which gave the knight an
other. Judge than him self. But now a days there ben some men that will do no
penance for the love of hy^ which assygned no man but him self for to fight
for us. And therefore against unkind men it shall be said thus. Loo he hangs
on the cross dyspoyled of all his clothing / and shows unto us all his
wounds that he suffered for us. Be we therefore kind that we may suffer for his
love some penance and that at the day of dome we may say thus. Have we not
done penance in our life. For he that suffers pain for the love of god
shall receive an hundred times more reward and also he shall opteyne
everlasting life unto the which bring you and me and all mankind.

Amen
Sometime there dwelled in Rome a wytty Emperor named Pompey which had a fair
daughter whom men called Aglaes. This daughter had many virtues above al other
wymen of that Empire. First she was fair and gracyous in the syghte of ever
man. She was also swyfte in rennynge y^ no man might overtake her by great
space. When the Emperor understood these two virtues in his daughter he was
right Joyful / wherefore he made proclaim thoroughe all his Empire that what
man poor or rich would run with his daughter should have her to wife with
great richesse if he might over run her and come rather to the mark tha^ she
/ and if she over run him and come rather to ye mark than he his heed should
be smyten of. Wha^ the states of ye Empire both dukes earls barons and
knights herd this crpe they offered them self one after an other to run
with her / but ever this yo^ge lady over raune them all / wherefore they lost
their hedes according to the law. That time there was a poor man dwelly^ge
in Rome which thought within him self I am a poor man and come of poor
kynrede there is made a comen cry ye what man so ever might over run the
Emperors daughter by any wise should be promoted unto great honor and
richesse / therefore if I might overcome her by any manner way I should not
oonly be promoted to honor but al my kynne. This poor man provided him self
for three Jewels whereby that he might win her. First he made a garlande of
reed roles and of white. The second he made a fair gyrdell of sylke craftily
wrought. The third he made a purse of sylke set full of precious stones /
and within the purse was a balle of three colors / and upon this purse was
written this poyse / who plays with me shall never be weary of my play. Than
put he these three things in his bosom and went forth to the palace gate
cryenge / and saying / come forth fair lady come forth for I am ready to run
with the and fulfill the law in all things. When the Emperor herd this and
his voice he commanded his daughter to run with him. This young lady went
in to her chamber wyndowe / and when she saw him she despised him and said. I
have ouercomen said she many worthy knights and now must Irenne with a churl
/ nevertheless I shall fufyll my faders commandment. Anon the damoysell
arrayed her for to run with him. And at ye last they ran together / and
within short space the damoysel went far before him. When this Iougeler saw
this he threw forth the garlande of flowers before her And when the myaden
beheld and saw that she stouped down and took it up and set it upon her
heed and that while the Iougeler went before her. And wha^ this young damoysell
saw this she weptesore and for sorrow she threw the garlande in a dytche and
ran after him dylygentely and at the last ouertoke him and lift up her
right hand and gave him a buffet saying to hy^ thus abide thou wretch it
besemeth not thy faders sone for to have me to thy wife / and this young lady
went before him a great space. And when he Iougelour saw this he took out the
gyrdeil of his besome and threw it before her. And when that she saw ye
lyghtely she stouped down and took it up and anon gyrte her therewith / and
than the Iougeloure went again before her. And than when she saw that she
made great lamentacyon and took the gyrdell with her teeth and all to tare it
in to three pieces and than threw it from her / and than she ran fast after,
him and at the last she ouertoke him / and than she took up her hand and
gave him a great blow saying unto hy^ these words. O wretch said she wenest
thou for to overcome me / and with that she ran before him a great space but
than ye Iougelour went again before her. And wha^ she saw that she made great
lament acyon. The Iougelour was sly and subtle and abode till that she was
almost at the mark and than he threw for the before her a purse And when
she saw this purse anon she stouped down and took it up / and anon she
opened it and found the balle and read the poyse who so plays with me of
my play he shall not be fulfilled. And than began she to play / and so long
she continued in playnge till that the Iougeloure was before her at the mark /
and thus he wanne the Emperors daughter.

Dear friends this Emperor is our blyssed lord Ihesu Christ / and his fair
daughter is man's soul which was made clean with the water of the holy font
and was also full light to run / that is to say / in virtue while that she is
in clennes so that no deedly sin might overcome her. This Iogeler that is
come of so wyly blood is y^ devil the which studyeth day and night to
dysceyue Innocents / he prouydeth him of three things / first of the garlande
which betoke neth pride by this reason. For why a garlande of flowers it not
set upon the arm nor upon ye foot / but upon the heed that it may be seen.
Right so pride would be seen / against proud men speaks ye holy man saint
Austyn saying thus. Quecu^que superbiu^ videris filiu^ diaboli dici non
dubitetis. That is to say / what proud man that thou may see doubt ye not
to call him the sone of the devil / do y^ therefore as the maiden did by
weep thy sin and thrawe of the garlande of pride and cast it in the dytche
of contrycyon / and so shalt thou give the devil a great buffet and overcome
him But when this Iougeloure / that is to say our gostely enemy the devil
sees and perceyueth in him self ouercomen in one sin / than he retorneth
and tempted a man in another sin and casts before man ye gyrdell of
lecherye. But alas there be full many gyrded with the gyrdell of lecherye. Of
the which gyrdell speaks saint Gregory saying thus. Gyrde we our buttockes
with the gyrdell of chastyte. For who someuer is gyrte with this gyrdell shall
lose the course of life. Than casts the Iougeler forth / that is for to say
the devil / the purse with the balle. The purse that is open above and closed
under betokens ye heart which that evermore should be closed under against
erthly things / and open above to heavenly Joy / and the two strings that
opens and shytteth the purse betokens the love of god and of our
neighbors The balle which is round and meuable to every part of his
dyffrence betokens couetyse which moves ever both in young and in old /
and therefore the poyse was good and true that was written on the purse / who so
plays with me / that is to say with couetyse / they shall never be fulfilled.
Therefore says Senecke. Cu^ omnia peccata senescunt sola cupiditas iuuenescit.
When that all sins waxen old than couetyse all only waxes young. Therefore
late us take heed that we play not with this balle of couetyse / and than
without doubt we shall opteyne and win ye game with the tenes balle in the
bliss of heaven that never shall have end. Unto the which bliss bring us he
that shed his blood for us upon the robe tree.

Amen.
Sometime in rome dwelled a mighty emperor and a wise named Theodose which
above all thing loved best melody of harp and hunting. It befelle after upon
upon a day while this Emperor hunted in a forest he herd so sweet a melody
of harpes that thrughe the swetnes thereof he was almoost rauysshed from him
self / wherefore he sought about the forest to find that melodye / and at the
last he aspyed in the end of the forest a poor man sitting beside a water
playnge on an harp so swetely that the emperor before that day herd never so
sweet a melodye. Than said ye Emperor good friend comes this melodye of thyn
harp or none The poor man answered and said / my reverent lord I shall tell
you the troth. Beside this water my wife and my child and I have dwelled.
xxx. year and god has given me such grace that when so ever I touch mine
harp I make so sweet melodye that the fysshe of this water comes out to my
hand and so I take them wherewith my wife my child and I ben fed daily in
great plente. But alas and welawaye on the other side of this water there
comes a whysteler and whysteleth so swetelye that in many days my fysshe
forsakes me and gooth to his whystelynge / and therefore my reverent lord I
beseech you of help against his hyssynge and whystelynge. Than said the emperor
/ I shall give good help and counsel. I have here in my purse a golden hoke
which I shall give the / take thou it and bind it fast at the end of a
rod and with that smite thy harp / and when thou see the fysshe styre
draw them up to the land with that hoke and than his whystelynge ne hyssynge
shall not auayll. When ye poor man herd this he reioysed him gretely and did
all thing like as the Emperor had taught him / and when this poor man began
to touch his harp the fysshe meued / and than he took them up with his hoke
and lived thereby long time / and at the last ended gracyously his life.

This Emperor betokens Ihesu christ which gretely delyteth for to hunte the
soul of mankind in the foreste ye is holy church. He loves also ye melody
of ye harp / ye is to say / he loves much to teache the holy word of
theology. This poor man that satte by the water side betokens ye prelates
of the church / and the prechers of the word of god which ought to sytte
beside the world and not in ye world / that is to say he should not set
his delight in worldely things. This precher ought to have y^ harp of holy
scripture wherewith he may praise and honor god / and also therewith draw out
of this world the sinners. Therefore says the psalmyst thus Praise ye god in
tympans and crowdes and sing ye to him on the harpe^ and the psauter of. x.
strenges. But now a days the precher may say alas / for when I preche and
teache holy scripture / ye devil comes and whysteleth so swetely that the
sinners draw to him and will not here the word of god but they turn them
self only to ye delight of sin. The devil dysceyueth also mankind by
diverse ways. First in time of prechynge he makes some to sleep / and them
that he can not make sleep he causes and puts in them to clater and to
talk / and them that he can not make to clater he makes them so dulle that
they may not savor ne understand what the precher says / and them that he
can not begyle in these means he puts in them besynes and causes them to
goo out of the church Loo so many ways the devil has to deceive mankind
and to let the word of god. Therefore every prelate and every precher
behooves the golden hoke of gods grace against this whystely^ge by ye which
grace they may draw sinners out of this world up to heaven. Unto the which
bring us our lord Ihesus Christ.

Amen.
THere dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise man the which was named
Polemus which had no child save a daughter whom he loved so much ye daily
and nyghtlye he ordained her for to be kept with armed knights. And above
these knights he ordained a master well taught in every conning for to
teache them and for to enfourme them how they should do. He ordained also a
stywarde for to gyde his husholde. And when all this was done as he lay in his
bed on a night he bethoughte hy^ so that he would visyte the holy land. And
then when all thing was ready for his Iourneye according unto his purpose / he
called unto him his steward / and said. Dear friend I purpose to se the holy
land and therefore I leave my daughter in thy keeping and also I charge the that
she fail ne thing / but ye she have all manner of Joy and gladness that
perteyneth to a vyrgyn. Secondly I leave in thy kepy^ge five knights that been
her kepars ye they lack no thing that to them behooves. Also I leave with the
my grehou^de that thou nourysshe and feed him as it perteyneth for him to be
fed / and if thou fulfill all this that I have said thou shall at my coming
again receive great reward. Than said the stywarde / my lord quod he all
that I may I shall fulfill your will. When this was said ye Emperor took forth
his Iourneye to ward the holy land / and the stywarde a long time kept well
and truly themperours ordinance / but at the last it befell upon a day that
this stywarde had aspyed this young lady walking alone in an orcheyarde with
whose love he was suddenly taken / wherefore anon maugre her will he de floured
her. And when he had sinned with her he said and hated her more after that than
ever he loved her before and drove her out of ye palace wherefore this damoysell
for great pouerte and defaute went fro door to door and begged her bread. But
when ye knyghttes y^ were her kepers herd of this they repreued shamefully y^
steward of ye synful deed. Tha^ ye steward waxed wroth and for great hate y^
he had in his heart he dyspoyled the knights of all their goods and drove
them from the palace / and when they were thus robbed and exyled some for
defaute of gods be came thieves and some manquellers / and that through this
Inco^uenyent they wrought great harm Soon after this there came 'tydynges ye
the emperor was aryued in far lands coming homewarde. And when ye steward
herd this he was gretely troubled and meued in him self / and thus thinking
in him self he said thus. This may not be but needs I shall be acused for my
trespass that I have done against themperours commandment. He is my lord and
mercyable / therefore better it were ye I goo and mete mete with him with all
honor / and humylyte and accuse my self to him and ask him mercy than any
other should go before to accuse me to my lord of my treason. Than this
steward anon did of all his clothes save his breche and his sherte and took
three ropes with him in his right hand and bare foot went and met the
Emperor But when the Emperor had aspyed him coming a far in such a wise
he wondered gretely. And when the steward was come so nere that he might speak
to the emperor he fell down on his knees and saluted him reverently. Than said
the Emperor / what is to the befallen y^ thou metest me in such array for as
much as thou art my steward y^ sholdest have meet me with a great company of
knights A my lord quod he there is befall me an heavy case for the which it
behooves me thus to mete your highness. Than said the Emperor what case is
that / that ye is befalle. My reverent lord quod he it behooves first your
highness to ask of me why I bring with me these three ropes. Than said the
Emperor why berest thou these three ropes in thy hand in such a wise. Than
answered this woeful steward and said. This first cord I bring with me to
bind my hondes and feet so hard till the blood breast out on every side for
that I have well deserved. The second rope I bring with me to draw me by
horse tail upon the pauement till that my bones be bare without flesh / for
that shall profit me for the great treason that I have done against you. The
third rope that I have brought is to hang me with upon an high galous so
long that the birds light on my heed and on my body and feed them self of my
flesh / and these things ben due to such trepassers and brekers of the law
as Iam / and therefore my reverent lord have mercy on me / for I dare not
knowledge my trespass till I be certain of thy mercy and pity. Than said
the emperor I see in the great meekness and contrycion therefore tell forth thy
trespass and sothly thou shall find mercy and grace. Alas alas than said he I
have defouled thy daughter and put her out of thy palace / and now for great
defaute she beggeth her bread from door to door. I have also dyspoyled thy
knights of all their goods / and now some of them for defaute of gods ben
thieves and some manquellers And the master of the knights I have slain. But
I have fed thy grehounde with the best as long as I might and tied him with
a chain / but at the last he brake his chain and went his way / so that
now he renneth about in the country. When the Emperor herd this he waxed sore
astonyed and said. Have thou thus defouled my daughter whom I loved so well /
and also exyled my knights and slain their master / and the grehounde which
I loved best of whom I gave the charge is gone also / so thely were it not
that I had forgyuen it the and that thou mekest thy self so gretely I
should put the unto the most bylonest death that be could be thought.
Therefore go thou anon and bring again my daughter than thou may wedde her
/ and if that any harm here after befalle to her in thy defaute than shall I
double thy pain. Also bring thou a gain my knights and restore unto them
their goods and set them into their state and office ye they were in
before. And seche me also my grehounde dylygently till thou find him / and
than bind him fast so that in you here after may be found no defaute. And
when that y^ steward herd this he bowed down his heed and thanked the
Emperor of his great mercy. And than he went forth and sought thorughe out
all the Empire so long till he had founden themperours daughter / and the
knights and also the grehounde and brought them again. And after that wedded
the young lady with great honor and Joy / and also restored again the
knights goods / and at the last he ended his life in pease and in rest.
Amen.

This Emperor betokens our lord Ihesu christ. His daughter betokens the
soul of man made at the symylytude of our lord god. And the.v. knights
betokens ye.v. wits armed with the virtue of baptyme to keep y^ soul. The
master of ye knights is reason which ought to govern the wyrtes. The
grehounde is ye flesh of man. The steward betokens every man to whom god
has given life and soul to keep under pain of lesynge of everlasting life.
But a wretched man not remembrynge that is to come full often corrupted and
defoyled his soul by sin and dryued her from the palace of heaven / and than
goothe she fro door to door / that is to say from sin to sin. He
dyspoyled these five knights of their goods / that is to say the five wits
of their virtues taking away the lawful sight fro the even and
exortyngetheym unlawfully / and also styrynge his eeres to here s^lau^der and
bachytynge and so forth of all other wits and thus some be made thieves and
some manquellers. The master of these five wits is slain when someuer man
is ruled by will and not by reason. The grehounde / that is the flesh wherein
a man delyteth was fed and bound with ye chain of reason which he breketh
full often and renneth out and does much harm. The comy^ge again of this
Emperor from the holy land betokens the coming of our lord Ihesu christ
at the day of dome to deem all mankind. Therefore do we as ye steward did
accuse first our self of our sin lest the devil and the world accuse us
and than it were to late to axe mercy / therefore do we of our clothes by time /
that is to say our synful life / and take we three ropes in our hondes. The
first rope that should bind our hondes and feet betokens ye rope of
contrycyon which not only ought to bind our hondes and feet but also our
other members both within and without so hard that ye blood brast out on
every side / that is to say that the sin might void. Her to accords
Ezechiel saying thus. Inquacu^^^ hora egerit penytenciam peccato^ saluus erit.
When somene^ ye sinful man does penance he shall be saved. The second cord
for to draw the trespasser is confession which should draw us from the
beginning of our life unto this day by the penance of our mouth unto the
time that the flesh be fall from the bones / that is to say till the lust
of the flesh be turned away by the stones of penance. For in like wise as
the stone by nature and by kind is hard. And right so penance ought for to
be hard. And the third rope which should hang the fello^^ is the rope of
satysfaccyon of which hanging speaks the appostle and says. Suspende elegit
anima mea. My soul has chosen to be hanged. For like as a man is lift up
from the ground by hangy^ge. Right so a sinner is lift up fro sin toward
heaven unto god by the hanging of satysfaccyon upon this galous we should hang
till the birds of heaven came down / that is to say till the Appostles come
down for to feed us with our good deeds. For there is more Joy of one sinner
doing his penance before ye angels of god in heaven. etc. Like as the steward
brought again themperours daughter. So it behooves us for to seche about by
diverse works of mercy and find our soul which we lost and bring her
again to the church and govern well our five wits / and fe dde our
grehounde as should and make our life so clean and pure ye we fall not again
in sin for dread if it fortune us worse and that we have no layser for to
ask mercy again at our need. And if we fulfill all this truly till our lives
end without doubt we shall opteyne euerlasty^ge life. Unto ye which our lord
bry^ge us al Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor and a wise named Edfenne / the
which ordained for law ye who someeuer rauysshed a maid should be at her
will / whether she would put him to death or that she would have him to her
husband. It befelle after on a day that a man rauysshed upon a night two
maidens / the first damoysell desired that she should dye / and the second
desired wedding. The rauyssher was taken and led before the Inge that should
satysfye to the these damoysels thrughe his wisdom and ryghtfulnesse. The
first maid ever desired the death according to the law. And than said the
second and I desired him for to be my husband / for like wise as thou haste
the law for the / in like wise I have it for me. And nevertheless my petycion
is more and better than yours for it is more chary table / therefore me thinks
in my reason that the Justice should give sentence with me. Than ye Justice
understanding the great mercy of the second maiden gave Judgment that he
should wedde her and so it was done.

This Emperor betokens our lord Ihesu christ. The rauyssher beketoneth
every sinner which rauysshed gods mercy as often as he dyffoyleth the
commandments of god by sin / for ye devil may never overcome man but if
it be suffered by will. For saint Austyn says. Non est peccatum nisi sit
volu^tariu^. It is no sin but if it be volu^tary. The sinner rauyssheth the
mercy of god as often as he has very contrycon. The rauyssher also is called
before ye Justice when the soul is departed from ye body / and anon the
first damoysell ye is the devil larde against the sinner that ought to dye
euerlastyngely by the law of ryghtwysnesse. But that other maiden that is
christ laid for her y^ mercy of god ought to help by contrycyon and
confession which is the high way to everlasting life. Unto ye which god
bring both ye and me.

Amen.
Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor and a rich named Lypodyus which
took to his wife a fair virgyn and a gentle and was ye king of Assyryens
daughter. This young lady conceived and bare a child / and in the birth of her
sone she dyed And anon after her dyscesse this Emperor wedded an other wife
and begat her with child also. And anon after ye these chylderne were borne
he sent them both in to strange land for to be nourysshed. Than said the
mother of the second child. My reuerente lord. x. year ben passed sythen I
bare my child and yet saw I him never but ones and that was the first day
of his birth / therefore I beseech the my lord to send for him that I may ones
rejoice me of his sight. Than said the Empeperour. I have quod he an other
child by my first wife and if I send for thy sone than I must send for
both / and than anon he sent for them. And when they were comen they were
passing fair / and well nourysshed well taught and passing like / in all
manner things that vnthes one might be known from that other but if it were
only of the fader. Than said the mother of the second child. A my lord tell
me which of these is my sone / and he called him her sone that he begat on
his first wife. When thempresse herd this she gave all her cure to nourysshe
and to teache him and despised y^ other. When the emperor saw this he said to
his wife / so thely I have dysceyued the for bym that thou love so much and
nourysshest is not thy sone but ye other is thy sone. Than setre she all her
cure upon the second and forsook the first. When the emperor saw this he said
/ truly I have dysceyued the yet without doubt this is not thy sone / but one
of them. ^. is thy sone. Than said the mother. A my lord for his love y^ did
on ye rode tell me without cauelacyon which of them is my so^e. The Emperor
answered and said certainly I will not tell you till they be come unto manhood
for this reason. First I told you that this was thy sone / and him thou
nourysshedest as thy sone and forsokest that other / and when I told you that
this was thy sone than thou despysedest the first and cherysshedest the second
therefore I will that thou shalt cherysshe and nourysshe them both till they
come to that thou may have. Joy of them. When thempresse herd this she
nourysshed them both in like wise. And when they were both come to age
the emperor made a great souper / and before his gestys he told his wife openly
which of them was her child. Than reioysed she gretely / and with her sone
she ended her life in pease and rest.

This Emperor betokens those that be chosen to ever lasting life / and ye
ben not chosen. The mother of them is ye church that nouryssheth them both.
Therefore our lord will not that the church should know which be chosen /
and which be not chosen. For if she knew that tha^ would she love that one
and hate that other / and so should charity be overthrown among us and should
live in dyscorde and strife / but troth at the day of dome shall tell us
which of them shall be saved / and which shall be dempned. Therefore pray we
in this world that we may come to the everlasting feast in heaven. Unto the
which god bring both you and me Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Pelennus which had three sons
whom he loved much. It befelle upon a day when this Emperor lay upon his
bed / he bethought him to which of his sons he might give his realm after
he dyscesse. Than called he to him his three sons and said / which of you three
ye is slowest shall have my realm after my dyscesse. The first sone answered
and said / thy realm by reason shall be mine / for I am so slow ye if my foot
were in the fire I had lever y^ it should be burnt than take it out. Than said
ye second I am quod he more apt to the king than thou / for though there
were a rope above my neck wherewith I should be hanged / and if I had a sharp
sword in mine hand for great slowth that I have I would not put forth mine hand
to cut the rope in saving of my life. And when these two brethern had said
the third said for hy^ thus I ought to be king quod he before you both for I
pass you in slowth and that will I preue thus I lie vpryght in my bed and
there droppeth water upon both mine eyes / and for the great slowth that I have
I meue not my heed neither unto the right side of the bed neither to the
wrong side for saving of my self when the Emperor herd this than he
byquethed the realm unto the youngest sone as to the slowest of the brethern.

This Emperor betokens the devil which is lord and fader over the church
of pride. By the first sone is understand a man that comes in evil
felawshyp by whom he falls in mysgouernaunce and had lever to be burnt in
ye fire of sin than depart from them. The second sone betokens him that
knows him self bound with y^ band of sin wherewith he is to be hanged on
the galous of hell and is so slowthfull that he will not cut them away with
the laufull sword of confession. By the third sone is understand a man that
hereth y^ techynge of Joys of paradyse and of the pains of hell and will not
meue himself to the right side for love and desire of reward / nor to the
lift side to forsake his sins for dread of tormentynge. Such a man without
doubt for his slowth shall opteyne the realm of hell. From the which
realm keep us our lord Ihesus Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Alexander / the which
besyeged a Cite of ye kings of Egypt with a great host Nevertheless this
Emperor lost many mighty knyghts without any hurt of stroke And thus from
day to day his people dyed sodeynely / wherefore this Alexander wondered
gretely and was full sorrowful thereof in his mind / and anon let call before
him ye wysest phylosophres that might be found and prayed them for to tell
him why his people dyed thus suddenly without wound. The phylosophres answered
and said. My lord it is not wonder / for upon the walls of that castle
within the ^^te there is a Cockatryce thrughe whose sight your men dies / for
they ben Infected with the venym yt comes of his eyes and anon they dye. Than
this Alexander asked if there were any remedy against ye Cockatryce. The
ppylosophres answered and said. My lord there is a good remedy which is this
/ late set up a large myrrour of clear glass before against the Cockatryce
between your host and the wall of the cite / and when the Cockatryce
beholds him self in the myrour the deedly natyuyte of her venymous sight
shall rebounde again to her self and thus she shall dye / and your men shall
be saved. The Emperor wrought by the counceyll of the phylosophres and let
set up anon a large myrour of glass / and thus was the Cockatryce slain /
and the Emperor with his host made an assauvnto the Cite and opteyned the
vyctory.

This Emperor may be called any christian man the which ought to gader an host
of virtues / for without virtue there may no man fight goostely. The Cite
against whom ye shall fight is ye world wherein there is an high castle /
that is to say vanyte of vanyte^s. Vanitas vanitatu^. and all vanyte in this
vanyte stands the Cockatryce / yt is to say pride of life / desire of eyes /
and lusts of flesh / wherefore this pride Infected so many that they dye at
the last euerlastyngely. Therefore the grettest remedy against this pride is the
consyderacyon of our uncleanness how we came naked in to this world / and if it
be asked why a man is proud certainly it may be answered thus / for the
defaute of clothing of virtues / what shall we do when we dye thus goostly
but set up and poor myrour of conscience and by that conscience we may
consider our will and our brytylnes as in a glass where thou may see thine
own defaute / and if we do this without doubt the Cockatryce that is pride
of life / desire of eyes and lust of flesh we shall utterly destroy and
opteyne ye vyctory of this worldely cyre and than be we sure to win
everlasting life unto the which bring both you and me.

Amen.
A Mighty Emperor sometime dwell led in Romenamed Archelaus / the which in his
old age wedded a young and a gentle lady who me a young knight loved and had
to do with her as often times as him lysted. It befell upon a night that this
Emperor be thought him in his bed to vysyte the holy land / wherefore
without more delay he ordained all thing necessary to his Journey and took his
leave of thempresse and of the states of his Empire and went toward ye holy
land on his Journey. When thempresse herd this she took ye master of the
ship and said if y^ will co^sente to me and be true ask on me what thou will
desire and thou shalt have it. The master of the ship was smyten anon with
couetyse and said. O my fair lady what so ever that thou will command me I
shall without fail fulfylle it so that ye will reward me for my labor. Than
said thempresse or thou do ought for me I shall give the what thing the list
to have so that thou will swear to be true to me and keep my counceyll. The
master of ye ship anon made his oath to be to true to her. Than said the
Empress / my lord gooth with you in your ship therefore when he is in the
mids of the sea cast him out ye he may be drowned and ye shall opteyne your
reward without any withsaynge. Than the master of the ship swore a great oath
and said / by almighty god after he comes ones within my ship ye shall neuerse
him after. Than the lady paid him as much gold as he would have and forth he
went to his ship. And within short time after the Emperor took his ship /
and when he was in the mids of ye see the master of the ship took the
Emperor and threw him over the board in to these / than the master returned
again and told the Empress ye the Emperor was casten in to the sea of whose
tidings she was very glad. This Emperor ye was thus cast in to the sea had
learned in youth to swymme / and swamme forth till that he saw an ylonde in the sea / but ever in his swy^mynge when he was faynte and like for the have been
drowned he prayed god to be his help and wept sore till at the last he came
into this little ylonde wherein was no thing but lions and lyopardes and other
diverse bestes which ye swamme from other lands thither. When this Emperor
had taken land in that isle he aspyed a young lion fighting with an old
lyoparde and the lion was almoost ouercomen. The Emperor had great compassyon
of the lion and drew out his sword and slew the lyoparde. The lion ever
from that time for the followed the Emperor and would not leave him for no
thing / but every day the pray that this lion took he brought and laid it
before the Emperor / and anon the Emperor smote fire on the flynte stone
and boiled the body in the skin and thus was he fed long time / till at
the last as he walked to the sea stronde he saw a ship come saylynge by / and
anon with an high voice he cried And when the shypmen herd this voice they
wondered what it might be / wherefore they sailed toward him / and when they
came to him he said / good friends take me we you and I shall pay you a good
frayght. And anon they took him in their ship / and the lion followed
hymswymmynge in the sea after the ship. And when the lion was in point to be
drowned the shypmen had great pity on him and took him within the shypborde.
And when the Emperor came unto the land he paid his frayght. And when he had
paid them he went forth till he came nere his own palace where he herd
taboures harpes / trompettes and claryons and all manner of mynstralsye / and as
he herkened what it might be / there came fro the palace a squyre toward him
that was of his knowledge / but the squyre knew not him to whom the Emperor
said thus / good friend I pray the tell me what melodye is this that I here.
The squyre answered and said thempresse is weded this day and there ben all
states of this Empire at her feast and therefore they make such melodye to
make her gestes merry. Than said the emperor to ye squyre / where is her husbonde
that was Emperor before. The squyre said that he was gone to the holy land
and he was drowned by ye way in the sea. Than said ye Emperor I pray the sir
what thou would do mine erande to thempresse and to that lord y^ would be
her husbonde that I may come in to the palace and play before them with my
lion. The squyre granted to do his erande and went in and told the lord
and lady There was standing at the gate a goodly old man that desired to come
in and play with his lion before the lord And than said the new wedded lord
bring him in and if he be worthy percas he might get his mete for his play
when the Emperor with his lion was brought in ye lion anon without any
comfort or setting on ran upon the young knight that was but newely wedded
and slew hy^ and when he had so done he ran upon the the impresse and
devoured her to the hard dones before all the lords of the Empire. And when
the states saw that they were gretely aghast and began to flee / but the
Emperor with his fair speech comforted them and said: Loo this is the
vengeance of god / for this is my wife that has used auoutrye long time
with this knight that lies here deed / and she I magyned my death with the
master of ship / and here up on the master threw me in to the sea / but
god saved me from that death and because I helped ones the lion at a need he
forsook me never syns / and now as ye see all wha^ I came in to my palace
without any comfort of me he has slain both the auoutrers. And therefore
understand ye for truth that I am your lord ye Emperor. Anon when they
herd this they lift up their eyes / and beheld him / and at the last they
knew him for their lord / wherefore they were gretely gladded / and praised
god for that miracle which had saved their lord and Emperor And the lived in
rest and pease.

By this Emperor ye may understand every christian man that purposed to vysyte
the holy land / that is to say togete everlasting life through works of
mercy. But his wife / that the wretched flesh murmured against ye soul and
loves better her lemman / that is deedly sin tha^ her husband. This
Emperor went in to the ship taking his Iourneye to ward the holy land /
that is for the say he went unto holy church which is the way to god. But
ye wife that is to say flesshly men accused him to ye master of the ship /
that is to say to the prelates of the church for great mede which oftentimes
blyndeth the sight of many Justice where thrughe many parfyte men ben cast out
of the ship in to the sea to be drowned / that is to say out of the church
into the sea of this wretched world. But what shall he do than that is thus
casten to be troubled in this world / certainly thus ought he to do / let him
learn to swymme / that is to say let him put all his hope in god and than by
the grace he shall come to an ylonde / that is to say the relygyon of clean
heart / and that he shall love ever the better to keep himself out of this
world / and therefore says saint James thus. A clean relygyon and ^ndefoyled
is a precious thing in the syghte of god / and he that is in this relygyon
shall find a lion to whom him behooves to give against ^^ euyil. This lion is
our lord Ihesu christ that came of the kynrede of Jude which ^ fyghteth ever
against the devil. And if a man has helped this lion at any time trust well
than that he will not forsake him but be with him at all his need /
according to the psalmyste saying thus. Cu^ip^o sum in tribulacio^e. I am with
him in trouble. By this lion thou may take thy wife / that is to say thy
flesh with penance and slay thy sin and than without doubt thou shalt
optcyne the Empire of heaven. Unto the which bring us our lord Ihesus, Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Gorgony which had wedded a
gentle damoysell and a fair to his wife / this young lady within due process
conceived and bare him a sone a fair child and an amyable. When this young
child was. x. year old / his mother the Emppresse dyed. And after the Emperor
wedded an other wife. This second wife loved in no wise the Emperors sone /
but did him all the shame and repreef that she might. When ye Emperor had
perceived this willing for to please his wife exyled his sone out sone out of
his Empire. And wha^ this child was exyled / he went and learned physyke / so
that within a short time he was a subtle and a conning physycyen. It befell
sone after that the Emperor his fader sykened and was almoost deed wherefore
when he herd that his sone was such a physycyen he sent for him by letters
praynge him that he would come to him without delay. And than the sone
willing to obey and to fulfill his faders commandment in all thing and so
in all have came to him. And when he had seen his fader and groped his pouces
and his veins / all manner of sykenesse that he had was soon helyd with his
medycynes from all manner of dangers. Soon after that the Empress his
stepmoder began to wax syke. And many physycyens said ye she would deye and
when the emperor herd this he prayed his sone for to help her of her
sykenesse. Than said his sone / certainly fader I will not lay hand on her.
Than ye Emperor at this began to wax wroth and said / if thou will not
obey my commandment thou shalt void my felaushyppe. His sone answered and
said / if ye do so dear fader ye do vnryghtfully for well ye know ye ye
exyled me out of your Empire thrughe her suggestyon / and mine absence was cause
of your sorrow and sickness. And in like my presence is cause her sickness /
and therefore I will not medell with her / and also I will use no more medycynes.
for oftentimes physycyens ben desceyued / and therefore I bare not lay hand on
her lest men would say that if it fortuned her to dye that I were cause
thereof. Than said the Emperor she has quod he ye same sekenes that I had His
sone answered and said / though she have the same sekenes never thelesse ye be
not of one complexyon. For what so ever I did to you ye held you content.
And when ye saw me come with in the palace ye reioysed of my coming and
gretely were eased for to see him that ye begat. But wha^ my stepmoder saw me
she swelled for anger and waxed evil at ease / and therefore if I should speak
to her her sorrow would increase / and if I touch her she would be from her
self. And also a physycyen prouffyteth naught but where as the seek man
delyteth in him: And when the child had said he escaped and went his way.

This Emperor betokens every christian man which is wedded to his crystendome
at the font stone for when the soul is made the spouse of christ on whom man
begeteth a sone / that is to say reason. But this wife / that is to say
crystendome dies when someuer a man lies in deed ly sin and after her a man
wedded a stepdame / that is to say wickedness as oftymes as he is governed by
will and not by reason / wherefore a man that lives by flesshely lust of time
eryleth reason / and than anon the soul waxes seek for the absence of reason
is cause of the sickness of the soul. But when reason which is both goostly
and bodily the physycyan is bryngy^ge again by works of mercy tha^ anon man
is heeled of his sykenes. But than the stepmoder waxed seek / that is to say
when froward will waxed seek than is the flesh oppressed by penance. And
therefore study we to oppress our flesh so by penance ye we may come unto
euerlestynge Joy. Amen.



IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Folemus which had wedded the
kings daughter of duchelonde a fair lady and gentle which within short
time was conceived and bare a sone. When this child was borne the states of
the Empire came unto the Emperor and eueryche of them syngulerly besought the
Emperor to nourysshe his sone. The Emperor answered and said / to morrow
shall be a torneye and there shall ye all be / and which of you does best and
opteyneth the vyctory shall have keeping of my sone / and if he nourysshe him
well I shall promote him to great dygnyte and honors. And if he do the contrary
he shall dye the foulest death y^ can be thought. Thansayd they. Right reverent
lord all this pleases us well. On the morrow wha^ every man was come to the
torney. The states Iusted and scarmusshed full manfully long time till at the
last there came a doughty knight named Iosyas ye so manfully bare him self
among them all that he wanne the vyctory. And anon when all was done / this
Iosyas took ye child and led him forth with hy^ / and because this Emperors
sone shol de be received in his country he sent before to his castle and
commanded his officers ye it should be dyght bo the without and within / and
that the chyldes bed should be made in the mids of the castle / and also
the seven s^yences should be painted above the chyldes bed ye when the child
wakened out of his sleep he might lie in his bed and read his lesson. This
knight had a fructefull and an wholesome well by the chyldes beds side wherein
he used to bathe him self therein / and ye knights wife bare the keye of this
well^ there was a wyndowe y^ ye son might come in and shine. It fortuned upon
a day ye the lady ye kept the keye left the wyndowe open thrughe neclygence.
And when ye lady had done there came a bear and saw the wyndowe open and went
unto ye well and vathed him therein / of whose bathing the well sauoured after
for great hete ye was ye time / wherefore whose so ever drunk thereof waxed
lepre within short time. And so it fortuned within a little space after ye
the lord and the lady and also their household were lepers and not withsto^d
y^ge it app^ered not suddenly. And in the mean time there came a (...) Egle in
at the wyndowe there as the Emperors sonclaye and bare the child away out
of his cradell. And when the knight perceived this he wept bytterly and said.
Alas alas and woe to me wretched creature ye ever I was borne what shall I do
for now I am the sone of death / for I am a foul leper and so is my wife and
also all mine household. And the while he was thus mourning there came unto him
a physycyen and said to him in this manner. Sir if ye well do after my counceyll
it shall not repent you. First it behooves you and your wife and all your
household also for to be laten blood / and after that to be hathed and wasshen
clean / and than shall I lay to my medecyne. And when y^ art hole tha^ shall
you and your wife and also all your household walk unto the mountains and
hills and seek the Emperors sone for the Egle has leten him fall in to some
place. The knight wrought all thing by ye counceyll of this physycyen / and
anon after he was leten blood and had received the medecyne / and than he was
hole and his wife and also all his houssholde wherefore he lepte on his horse
and took with him three squyers and robe forth and sought and child. And at ye
last he found him hole and sound lyenge in a baleye and tha^ he was gretely
reioysed. And for the great Joy and gladness that was in him for finding of
his lord the Emperoures sone he made a great feast / and after the feast so
done he led the child home to the Emperor. And when the Emperor saw his
sone in good health he was right glade / wherefore he promotd hy^ to great
worship which lived after that long time in great honor and worship and
at the last he ended his life in pease and in rest.

This Emperor betokens the fader of heaven His sone betokens our lord
Ihesu christ whom many men desire to nourysshe at eester when they receive the
sacrament. Nevertheless he ye hest Iusteth with ye devil and ouercometh him
thrughe penance The knight ye took this child with hy^ betokens a good
christian man ye fasted truly and blyssedly all ye lent before / therefore do we
as the knight did send we before messengers to dyght and to make clean the
castle of our heart from all spotte of sin by works of mercy and so shall
this child Ihesu rest and light in the mids of out heart. The well
betokens mercy which ought to be next our lord For who souer is without
mercy and troth may not nourysshe ye blyssed child Ihesu. But it happened often
ye the knights wife ye is the flesh of man bered the keye of mercy and often
left the well open / and than comes the bear ye is the devil and cast the
venym in to the well of mercy / and who ye have thereof shall be Infected with
the leper of sin. The wyndowe wherein the son shyneth is ye grace of the
holy ghost by whom men lived and are comforted goostly by this wyndowe the
Egle comes in / yt is to say ye power of almighty god and took away ye
Child Ihesu from the heart of man and than man had great cause to weep / but
what shall he do when ye child is gone but send for a subtle physycien, that
is to say a dyserete confessoure which shall give him counseyll to let hy^
blood and all his houshol de yt is to say to put out sin thrughe very
confession of tongue before his ghoostly fader. Than must be bathe himself with
teres of contrycyon and co^punccyon of tongue / and after ye take the medycyne
of satysfaccyon and than shall he be made clean from all manner of sin. And
wha^ he has done thus he must lepe on the palfray of good life and tide forth
we his three souyres / yt is to say we fasting prayer and almesdedes / and
than without doubt he shall find ye child Ihesu in the valey of humylyte and
not in a hill / yt is to say pride / and if he do this doubtless he shall have
might and power to nourysshe that blyssed child Ihesu / for whose nourysshy^,
ge the fader of heaven shall promote him unto everlasting Joy. Unto the which
Joy god bring us all.

Amen.
Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor which was named Fulgenctus which
governed his people nobly / and loved them so much ye he made to proclaim
thrughe out all nacyons ye who someuer would come to hy^ryche or poor at a
certain day should have their petycyon what someuer it were. When the mighty
men herd this they we re glad and came at a day assygned and put forth their
pertycyons every man syngulerly to ye Emperor / and anon their pertycyons was
grant and fulfilled. In so much that almoost all the Empire was departed
among them. And than every man was Joyful and went home again and took
seasyen in such lands and castelles as that the Emperor had given them.
Anon after the poor men and simple gadred them to gyder and thus they said.
A commune ctye was made ye all men both poor and rich no person except
should come unto the Emperors palace and there they sholhaue what someuer they
asked. And ye rich men have been there but late and opteyned their petycyons.
Therefore go we now and wit if we may obtain any good of ye Emperor That
counsel was approbate and allowed among them all wherefore they went forth
straight tylle they came unto the Emperors palace / and there they put for the
their petycyons according to ye Emperors proclamacyon. And when that the
Emperor herd them come he answered them so and said Dear friends I have
herd all your petycyons / and it is truth that my proclamacyon was this wise
as that every man Indyfferently should come and they should have their
petycyons. But the rich men and the mighty men hauve ben here before you to
whom I have given all that I had save only the royalte of my lordeshyppe unto
them and so have I nothing left for to give you. A good lord have mercy upon
us and let us not go void agay / for we know well that it is in our own
defaute that we came not rather with these other rich and mighty men. But
sythen that it is so we ask your grace that we may opteyne somewhat by the
which we may live. Than said the Emperor. Good friends here ye me for though
I have given all my lands / rentes / and tenementes / and all ye castelles to
the rich men which came before you. Nevertheless I have kept still in to my
own hondes the lordeshyp over them / and that lordeshyp I give unto you so
they shall be your servants and be obedyent unto you all. And when the poor
men herd this they were gretely gladded and kneled low down unto the
Emperor and thanked him saying thus. Lo though we come late yet we be made
lords over all these other. And with this they took their leave and wenvnto
their own dwelling. But when the rich and the mighty men herd that they
were gretely meued / and set a commune parlyament among theymselfe. And thus
it was spoken among them. Alas alas unto us how may we serve them that
sometime were but churles and our subgettes in all manner things and now they
be made lords over us. Therefore goo we all with one assente to the emperor and
pray we him of remedy. When this was said their counsel was commended and
forth they weure to the Emperor and said to him. Reuerente lord what may
this be tho the which were our servants be made our lords we beseech you
mekely that it may not be so. Than said the Emperor / good friends I do
you no wrong for my cry was commune that what soever ye asked of me ye should
opteyne your petycyon / and ye asked nothing of me but lands rentes and
honors and all that have I granted you at your own will / in so much
that I kept nothing for my self and each of you were well content at your
away going / and after that came simple men and poor and asked of me some
goods according unto my proclamacyon / and I had nothing to give them for I
had given you all that I had before save only the lordeshyppe over you
which I kept in my hands / and when the poor men so cried on me I had
nothing to give them save only the lordeshyppe over you and therefore ye
should not blame me for that ye asked ye had. Than said they. A good lord we
pray you effectually of your counsel in this case and of your help. The
Emperor answered and said. Syrs if ye will work after me I shall give you
very good counseyl and prouffytable. Than said they. Lord we be ready for to
fulfill what some ever ye say unto us for our prouffyte. Than said the
Emperor. My good friends ye have of me both lands and tenementes and rentes
with other meuable goods and that great plente the which by my counsel ye
shall depart with the poor men! that they may grant you the lordeshyppe and
anon these great rich men gladly granted to this and departed all their
goods among the poor men and that they gave them again the lordeshyppe
over them like as they had of ye rich men y^ lordshyp over them / and thus
were they both content and the emperor was greatly commended of all peope
because he accorded to both y^ parties so wisely

By this Emperor is understand our lord Ihesu christ which made a
proclamacyon by his prophets patryarkes appostles and prechours that every man
both poor and rich should come and asked everlasting Joy and without
doubt they shall opteyne their petycyon. But the rich and the mighty men
asked none other thing but worldely honor and richesse transytory / for this
world shall pass and all this couetyse / wherefore he gave them so much of
worldely goods that he left no thing to him self according to the
scripture / the birds of heaven have nestes and foxes in earth have caves / but
the sone of god has no thing in earth where he may put his heed. The poor
men be such as ^e meke in heart of the which poor men speaks our lord
saying thus / blyssed be the poor men wherte / for why thy kyndome of heaven is
theyrs / and if it should seem that they have lorshyppes above mighty men of
this world. Therefore these rich men ought to depart their richesse with
poor men according to the scripture saying thus Give ye alms and all thing
shall be clean to you and thus may ye get a lorshyppe in heaven unto ye which
lorshyppe I beseech almighty god to bring us Amen.

IN Rome sometime dwelled a mighty Emperor named Domicyan which had two
daughters of whom one was passing fair and that other foul and oughly to
behold wherefore he let cry thrughe all his Empire that what man would have
his fay daughter to wife should have no thing with her but her fayrenesse. And
who that wedded his foul daughter should have all his Empire after his death.
And when the proclamacyon was made there came many lords and desired to wedde
his fair daughter. To whom the Emperor answered thus. Sir quod he ye wot
never what ye desire right well ye know that if yewedde her ye shall have no
thing with her but her fayrenesse / and furthermore if I give her to one of
you and not to another than will ye strive for her. Therefore if ye will needs
have her and forsake my foul daughter / you be houeth first to Just for her
and he that wynneth her shall wedde her. Than were the grettest states of the
Empire gretely gladded / and anon only for her love they would Just and also
fight / wherefore they set a day of battle / and many worthy men were slain
on both sides. Nevertheless one opteyned the vyctory and wedded that young
and fair lady. The second daughter that was foul and oughly saw this that
her sister was wedded with great solempnyte mourned and wept daily / wherefore
ye Emperor her fader came to her and said / dear daughter why mornest thou
thus. Alas dear fader quod she it is no wonder though I mourn seeing my
sister wedded with so great honor and gladness and every man is feign of her
and no man loves my felaushyp / and therefore dear fader what may I do best
sothely I know it not. Then said the Emperor. O my sweet daughter all y^ is
mine is thine and yt is not unknown to you that he which wedded thy sister had
no thing with her but her fayrnesse / and therefore I shall proclaim in mine own
person thrughe all mine Empire that what man that weddeth you I shall make him
sure by letter patent of all mine Empire after my death Than this young lady
thought she was foul and oughly nevertheless she reioysed in the promysse of
her fader / and anon after the proclamacyon was made / than there came a young
knight and a gentle and wedded that lady / and after the death of the Emperor
he seized all the Empire and was crowned Emperor and she Empress.

This Emperor betokens our lord Ihesu christ which has two daughters /
that one fair and that other foul. That one fair betokens this world
which is full fair and delectable unto many men. That other foul betokens
pouerte and trouble whom few men desire to wedde. Nevertheless a comen cry
was made by holy scripture that who so would have his fair daughter that is
the world should have nothing with her but her fairnes / that is to say ye
worldly vanytees which faden and fall away like as the fayrnesse of man. But
who that will wedde the foul daughter / that is to say wylfully to receive
pouerte and trouble for gods love / without doubt he shall opteyne the
Empire of heaven according to the scripture saying thus. ye that have forsaken
all thing for my love to to follow me shall have everlasting life. Full many
noble and worthy men have Iusted for the fair daughter / that is to say have
foughten both by see and by land for this world for couetyse of worldely
richesse / and art last there be many slain / for there is no thing here
but pride of life or courtyse of eyes or of flesh where thrughe all the
world is put unto great myscheef. But he that weddeth the fair daughter that
is the world is he that sets all his affecte and desire in the
wretchedness of this world and will not for no thing forsake this world /
like as a wreetche and covetous man. But he that wedded ye foul daughter is a
good christian man which that love of ye kyngedome of heaven forsakes all this
world / and not only he does thus but also despised him self bodily obeynge
to his souereynes in all thing / and such a man certainly shall opteyne the
Empire of heaven Unto ye which Ihesu christ bring both you and me Amen.



Sometime there dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Andromyke which above
all thing loved melody. This emperor had with in his castle a well of such
virtue that so ever were dronken / and drank of that water of this well
should be contynent fresshe again and be delivered from all manner of
dronkenesse. There was also dwelling in this Emperors court a knight named
Yorony whom the Emperor loved much / but often times he was dronken the
which vice the Emperor hated above all thing / and when this knight
understood him self that he was dronken. Than would he goo to the well and
drink of that water and refresche him self so well that what soever the
Emperor put to him he would answer him so reasonably / that no sin of
dronkenesse might he found in him / and for his wytty answer and his wisdom
he was greatly beloved of the Emperor. Nevertheless his felawes of y^ court
enuyed him much and ymagyned among them self how they might depart the
Emperor love fro him It fortuned upon a day that this Emperor went to the
forest as he herd the nyghtyngale which is a gentle bird sing merely /
wherefore this Emperor often times after that would rise erly in y^ morning and
also some time from his mete and walk unto the wode for the sweetness of her
song / wherefore many of his men said among them self. Thus our lord
delyteth so much in the nyghtyngales song that he recketh little of our
profit in so much that thrughe two things his love is worawen from us. That
is to say by ydronye ye knight and by the sweet song of ye nyghtyngale. Than
said an old knight the which was among them Syrs quod he if ye do by my
counceyll I shall deliver you of the knight Ydronye / and of the nyghtyngale
without hurt or death. They answered and said what thing that ye bydde us do
we shall fulfill anon with all our heart. When this knight herd this within a
while after he aspyed this ydrony that he was drunk wherefore he locked the
well fast and as this knight ydrony came to refresshe him self and found
the well locked. The Emperor had a great matter to trete / wherefore he sent
in have for this knight by cause of his gre fore he sent in have for this
knight by cause of his great wisdom that was in him to have his counceyll. And
when he came before yt Emperor he was so drunk that he might not ones meue
his tongue neither he had wit / reason nor understanding to answer y^
Emperor to his matter But when the Emperor saw this he was gretely grieved for
so much y^ he hated namely yt vice / wherefore he commanded anon that from
that day / forth he should not be seen within his land upon pain of death.
This herynge his fomen gretely were gladded and said unto the old knight in
this manner of wise. Now be we delivered of this knight ydrony. There is no more
to do but that we might find yt way and remedy that we were deiyuered of the
nyghtyngale in the which the Emperor delyteth so much the song. Then said
this old knight your erys shall here and your eyes shall see y^ this
nyghtyngale shall be destroyed in short time. Not long after this old knight
aspyed y^ y^ nyghtyngale used to sytte upon a tree even above this same well
where as her make that was y^ make after the course of nature came and gendred
with her. Nevertheless the absence of her make she took often time another make
and did auoutry / and when she had this done. Than would she descend to the
well / and bathe his self that when her make come he should feel no sauoure /
ne evil odoure of that she had done / when the knight had seen this on a
time he locked y^ well / and when the nyghtyngale would have descended to bathe
her self after her auoutry she found the well closed wherefore she fled up
to the tree again and mourned sore in her manner and left of her sweet song.
Than came her make and saw that she had trespassed against her nature he went
again / and in short time he brought again a great multitude of nyghtyngales
which slew his make and ^are her in small gobettes / and thus was the wise
knight put away and the nyghtyngale slain / and the Emperor put and
delivered from his pleasure and great solace such as he was wont to have.

This Emperor betokens our lord Ihesu christ the which loves gretely the
song of perfyte devotion. For when we pray we speak with god and when we read
god speaks with us. The well that was in the palace betokens confession
that is in the church. Therefore if any man be dronken with sin / let him
drink on the well of confession / and with out doubt he shall be safe. This
ydrony betokens every man that wylfully torneth again unto sin after his
confession / like as a dog which makes a voment and casts out the mete
that he has eten before / and after when he is hungry comes and eteth it
again Nevertheless if a man that has sinned thus will drink of the well of
confession he shall receive his goostly strengthes. The nyghtyngale that satte
on the tree betokens y^ soul that sytteth on a tree of holy doctrine. And
her song betokens the soul that sytteth on the tree in the devout prayers
to god. But this soul does auoutry as often times as she consents to sin.
Nevertheless if she run to confession and bathe her with the water of
contrycyon god shall love her. But her totemen which betokens the sendes of
hell seeing this yt god so merciful / they stop the well of confession /
that is to say the mouths of men that would shryue them self / with shame
and with dread of their penance that they dare not tell forth their sins to
their confession. And thus ben many exyled and put to death everlasting. And
therefore study we to bathe our life in the well of confession with ye water of
contrycyon / and than may we be sure to come to everlasting life. Unto the
which I pray god bring both you and me Amen

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Darmes which had a
mighty strong Cite and well and strong walled about and a belle hanging in
the mids of the Cite and when so ever this Emperor went to battle without
the cite this belle should be ronge / but there should no man ring the belle
but a vyrgyn / wthin short time after it befelle that dragons and serpents
and many other venomous beestes empoysened much people so yt the cite was
almoost destroyed wherefore the states of yt Cite went by one assent to the
Emperor / and said. Lord what shall we do lo our goods / and our Cite are
destroyed and ye and we both in peril to be perysshed thrughe these fell
beestes that consumes us. Therefore take we good cou^ceyll or else we ben all
lost. Than said the Emperor what say you is best to be done in this matter
/ and how may we best be defended. Than answered one of them that was wysest
and said my lord here my counceyll and do thereafter and ye shall not for
think it / ye have quod he in your place a Lion / and set up a cross and
hang this lion thereupon with nails and when other venymous beestes se him
thus hanging on the cross they will dread and so shall they forsake this cite
/ and we shall be in rest and ease. Than said y^ Emperor it pleases me well
that he be hanged in saving of you. Than took they the lion and hynge hy^ on
y^ cross fast nailed. And other lions and venymous dragons come toward the
cite and saw yt lion thus hanging they fled away for dread / and durst
come no nere.

This Emperor betokens the fader of heaven the cite well walled with the belle
in the mids betokens y^ soul walled about with virtues. The bell
betokens a clean conscience which warns a man to battle when he should
fight against the devil that he might arm him self before with virtues. The
vyrgyn that should ring this bell is reason the which as a vyrgyn declyneth
all to right full clennesse The venymous dragon that bears fire betokens the
flesh of man which bears y^ fire of glotonye and lechery y^ which brent
Adam our formest fader when he ete of the forboden appell. The venymous beestes
that poysoneth thus the men betokens the fendes of hell which for the most
part has destroyed mankind. The states of the cite betoken Patryarkes and
prophets which besought god of good counceyll and remedy that mankind might
be saved and anon it was counseyled for y^ best remedy that a lion that is
christ should be hanged upon a cross according to y^ scripture saying in this
wise. ^xpedit vnus mor^atur homo pro populo et non gens ^eat etc. That is for
to say. It behooves a man to dye for the people less all folk be perysshed.
Than took they christ and henge him on the cross / for y^ which ye deuyil
dredeth christian men and dare not neyghe them and thus by the grace of god
christian men shall come to everlasting bliss unto the which bring us he /
that for us dyed on y^ rode tree Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in y^ cite of Rome a mighty Emperor and a merciful
which was Named Menalaye which ordained such a law yt what mysdoer were
taken and brought in to prison if he might escape and come to the Emperors
palace he should be there safe for all manner felons / tresons / or trespasses
that he had done in his life time. It was not long after but it befelle that a
knight trespassed wherefore he was taken and in prison strong and derke where
as he had been long time and had no light but at a little wyndowe where as a
skante light shone in that lyghtned him to ete the simple mete that was brought
unto him by his keeper wherefore he mourned gretely and made great sorrow that he
was thus shette up fast from yt sight of men. Nevertheless when yt keeper was
gone there came daily a nyghtyngale in at that wyndowe / and sange right
swetely of whose song this woeful knyghyt often time was fed for Joy / and
when this bird seized of her song than would she fly in to the knights
bosom and there this knight fed her many a day of y^ vytayle that god sent
him It befell after upon a day that this knight was gretely desolated of
comfort. Nevertheless the bird sat in his bosom etynge nuttes / and thus he
said vnde the bird. O good bird I have sustained the many a day / what
shalt thou give me now in my desolacyon to comfort me. Remember the well
that thou art yt crature of god and I also. Therefore help me now in my great
need / when that bird herd this / she flewe forth from his bosom and tarried
from him three days. But the third day she came again and brought in her
mouth a precyons stone and laid it in the knights bosom. And anon wha^ she
had so done she took her slyght and flewe from him again. The knight
meruayled of the stone and of the bird / and there with he took the stone in
hand and touched the geuys and anon fell of his fetters and all his cheynes
where with he was bound suddenly brake. And anon he arose and touched the
doors of the prison and anon they opened and so he espcaped and ran fast
unto the Emperors palace / when the keeper of the prison perceived this he
blewe an horn theyse and thus he raised up all the folk of the cite and led
them forth cryenge with an high voice. Loo the thief is gone follow we him
all. And with that he ran before all his fellows toward the knight and when
he came nyghe him / the knight bente his bow and shot an arowe wherewith he
smote the keeper in the lounges and slew him / and than he ran to the palace
where as he found socoure according to the law.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens our lord Ihesus Christ which ordained
for law that what mysooer that is to say / what sinner might escape and come
unto the palace of holy chi^che thrughe confession and contrycyon should find
there perpetuell socoure and help. This knight betokens every sinner which
is taken in deedly sin / and Judged unto the prison of hell by the law of
god. And he is straytely bound with cheynes of sin wherefore he wepeth and
mourns daily for his trespass. The keeper of this prison betokens the devil
the which kepe^h such a man hard bound in sin / and serves him with
richesse and delytes of this world that he should not escape from him. The
bird that syngeth so swetely betokens the voice of heaven the which says
unto the synnet thus. Reuertere reuertere sunamitis. Turn again now turn
again thou prisoner / that is to say / turn again thou heavenly sinner and
I shall receive the to grace. For when mankind was in Lymbo Patrum which was
a certain prison of hell before the compynge of christ Th^s came a bird /
that is to say / the godhede berynge with him a stone which betokens our
lord Ihesu christ accordy^ge unto holy scripture saying thus. Ego sum lapis
etc. I am a stone. The soul of christ descended with y^ godhede and brought
with him all mankind out of the prison of hell. Therefore if any of us be in
the prison of deedly sin touch we our sins with this stone / that is to
say with the virtue of our lord Ihesu christ by confession and contrycion /
and than withouten doubt the cheynes of our sins with his stone shall be
dronken and fall from us / and the doors of heavenly grace shall be opened / and
we shall opteyne help and socoure in the palace of the church And if the
keeper of the prison / that is to say y^ devil which is the blower of the
horn of pride / lechery / or couetyse / styre upon any sinners. Than torn we
again toward him manly and shote at him the arowe of penance and withouten
doubt he shall flee from us. And than by the grace of god we may opteyne the
palace of heaven. Unto ye which bring us lord that shed his own precious
blood upon the rode tree for all mankind. Amen.

IN Rome there dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor and a merciful named
Ebolydes. It fortuned on a day that this Emperor walked unto the foreste
where as he met suddenly with a poor man. And anon when this Emperor saw
him he was gretely meued with mercy and said. Good friend whens art thou. My
sovereign lord quod he I am youres and borne in your land / and now I am in
great pouerte and need. And than said the Emperor if I know that thou were
true in every thing I should promote unto the great richesse. Therefore tell
me what is thy name. My lord qoud he I am called Lentyculus / and I behote you
my truth / and true service / and if I do otherwise I submytte me unto you
and to all manner of pain that ye can put me to / when the Emperor herd this
/ he promoted him anon unto great richesse. And anon after that / he made hy^
a knight and steward of his land. And when he was thus exalted to richesse
and honor he waxed so proud that he despised him that were worthyer than he
and despyed such as were simple and poor. It was not long after yt it be
fell that this Steward rode by a foreste where as he mete with the Fostere /
and charged him that he should make an hondreth pyttes in the ground and hele
them over with grene grass and small bows that if will de bestes fortuned by
the foreste that way / that / they should fall in them and so should they
be taken and brought to the Emperor. The fostere answered and said. Sir as ye
have said it shall be done. Not long after it fortuned that this steward rode
to this forest again to se if these pyttes were made. And as he rode he be
thought him how great a man and how mighty he was made / and how that all
thing in that Empire obeyed unto him and al ready at his will. And as he rode
thinking thus he said to himself. There is no god save only I. And with that
he smote his horse with his spores / and suddenly he fell in to one of the
deep pyttes that he had ordained before him self for the wild beestes and
for the great depnesse / thereof / he might not rise again by no manner of
craft / wherefore he mourned greatly. And anon after hy^ came an hungry lion
and fell in to the same pytte / and after the lion an ape and after the ape a
serpente / and when the steward was thus walled with these three beestes he was
gretely meued and dredde sore. There was that time dwelling in the cite a
poor man named Gye the which had no manner good save an ass wherewith daily he
carried stocks and fayllynge wode and such as he could get for the forest to
the market and sold them and in this wise he sustained him self and his wife
as well as he might. It fortuned that this poor Gye went to his foreste as he
was wont / and as he came by the deep pytte he herd a man cryenge and said. O
dear friend what art thou for gods sake here me and I shall quyte the so
well that thou shalt ever after be y^ better / when this poor Gye herd that
it was the voice of a man he meruayled and stood all on the pyttes brynke and
said lo good friend I come for thou have called me. Than said y^ knight dear
friend I am the Emperoures steward of all his land thus by fortune I am
fallen in to this pytte and here be with me three beestes / that is to say.
Alyon / an Ape / and an horrible Serpent / which I dredde most of all / and I
wot not of which of them I shall be first be devoured. Therefore I pray the
for gods sake get me a long cord wherewith thou may draw me out of this
foul and horrible deep pytte / and I shall make the warentyse to make the
rich in all thing for evermore herafter for but I have the rather help I
shall be devoured of these beestes. Than said this poor Gye I may full evil
entende to help the / for I have no thing to live on but as I gader wode and
carry to y^ markette to selle wherewith I am sustained Nevertheless I shall leave
my labor and fulfill thy will / and if ye reward me not it shall be great
hurt and hyndraunce to me and to my wife both to be lettyd for you. Than ye
steward made a great oath and said that he would promote him and all his the
next morrow unto great richesse. Than said Gye if thou will fulfill thy
promise I shall do that ye bydde me. And with thatwente again to cite and
brought with him a long rope and came to the pytte and said. Sir steward loo
I let down a rope to the / bind thy self by the mids there with that I
may pulle the up. Than was the steward glad and said. Good friend let down
the rope. And with that he cast the end of the rope down in to y^ pytte. And
when ye lion saw that he caught the rope and held it fast / and Gye drew
the lion up wenynge to him that he had drawn up the knight. And when he had
so done the lion thanked him in his manner and ran to ye wode. The second
time this Gye let down the rope / the Ape lepte unto it and caught it fast
and wha^ he was drawn up / he thanked Gye as could and ran to the wode.
Third time he let down the rope and drew up the Serpente which thanked him
and went to ye wode. The steward cried with an high voice. O dear friend now
an I delivered of three venymous bestes Now let down the cord to me that I
may come up. And this poor Gye let down the rope and the steward bound
him self fast about the mids of his body / and anon Gye drew him up.
And wha^ he was thus help thus said he ^o Gye. Come to me quod he at three of
the clock to the palace and than I shall make the rich for ever. This poor
Gye reioysed thereof and went home without any reward. Than his wife
demanded him why he gadered no wode wherewith they might live that day. Than
told he her all the process as it befell as it is written above how the
stuarde fell in to the pytte and the lion / the ape / and the serpent fell in
to the pytte that he had made in ye said forest and how he helped him out with
a cord and saved him from devouring of the three venymous beestes / and how
he should goo to the steward and fetch his guardon and reward on y^ morrow.
When his wife this herd she rioysed gretely and said. If it so shall be / good
sir arise to morrow at due hour and go unto ye palace and receive your reward
that we may be comforted well thereby. The morrow came and Gye arose and went to
the palace and knocked at the gate. Than came the Porter and asked the cause of
his knocking. I pray the quod this Gye go unto the steward and say to him
that here abides a poor man at the gate that spoke with him yesterdaye in
the forest. The porter went in and told the Steward like as the poor man
had said. Then said the Steward. Goo thou again and tell him that he
lies / for yesterdaye spoke I with no man in the forest / and charge him that
he go his way and that I se him there never after. The porter went for the
and told the poor Guy how the steward said / and charged him to go his way.
Then was this Guy sorrowful and went home / and when he came home he told
his wife how the Steward answered him. His wife comforted in all that she
might and than said. Sir go ye again and preue him thryse. Then on the
morrow this Guy arose and went to the palace again praynge the porterons to
do his erande again to the steward. Than the porter answered and said /
gladly I will do thyn erande: but I do dread me sore yt it shall be thyn hurt.
And than went he in and told y^ steward of yt coming of this poor man /
wha^ the steward herd yt he went out and all to bette this sely gye and left
hy^ in peril of death / wha^ his wife herd this she came with her ass and led
hy^ home as she might and al yt she had she spe^te upon surgyens and phecycyens
for to help him. And when he was perfytely heled he went to the foreste as he
was wont for to gader styckes and small would for his living. And as he went
about in that foreste he saw a strong lion dryuynge before him Asses that
were charged with chafer and marchaundyse. This lion drove forth the Asses
before Gye which dredde sore the lion lest that he would have devoured hy^.
Nevertheless when he beheld the lion better. He knew well that he was the
same lion which he drew out of the pytte. This lion left not Gye till all
the asses with y^ marchaundyse were entered in his house / and than the lion
did him obeysaunce and ran to the wode. This Gye opteyned these fardels and
found great richesse therein wherefore he made to do proclaim in diverse
chirches if any man had lost such goods but there was none that challenged
them. And when Gye saw this he took the goods and bought therewith house and
land and so he was made rich. Nevertheless he haunted the forest as he did
before. And after that as he walked in the foreste to gader wode he aspyed the
ape in the top of a tree. The which brake bows besely with his teeth and with
his claws / and threw them down / so that in short time that Gye had
ladyd his ass / and when the ape had so done she went away to the wode /
and Gye went home and on the morrow Gye went to the forest again / and as he
sat byndynge his fagottes / he saw the serpente that he drew out of the
pytte come toward him berynge in his mouth a precious stone of three colors
the which stone y^ serpente let fall at Gyes foot. And when she had so done
she kyssed his feet / and than went her way. This Gye took up this stone /
and meruayled gretely of what virtue it might be / wherefore he arose him up
and went to a seller of precious stones named Peter / and said dear brother I I
pray the tell me the virtue of this stone / and I shall reward the well for
thy labor / when this stone seller had well beholden and understood the
nature of this stone he said good friend if thou list to selle thy stone I
shall give the / therefore an. C. mark* Than said Gye thus I will not sell my
stone till thou tell me truly yt virtue thereof. The merchant answered and
said. without doubt this stone has three virtues / the first virtue is this
that who bears this stone upon him shall have Joy without sorrow / the
second virtue is that he shall have plente without defaute / the third virtue
is he shall have light without derkenesse / and also it a another virtue that no
man may selle it but for so much as it is worth / and if he does the
contrary y^ stone retorneth again to the first owner when Gye herd this he
was right Ioyefull and said to him self in a good hour I dread the beestes
out of the pytte. Not long after it befell that his Gye by virtue of this
stone was made passing rich and bought great possessions / and lyuelode /
wherefore within a while he was made knight. It was not long after the Emperor
had knowledge how sir Gye had a stone of such virtue / wherefore he sent for
sir Gye co^mau^dynge him to come in all have to him and so it was done. And
when sir Gye was come to the Emperor the Emperor said unto him thus. My
friend said he I have herd or this that sometime thou were in great pouerte and
now made by the virtue of a little stone yt thou art rich Therefore I pray
the that thou sell me that stone Sir Gye answered and said that may not I do
for so long as I have that stone I am sure of three things that is to say of
Joy without sorrow plente without defaute / and light with out derkenesse when
the Emperor herd this he attempted much egrely to by that stone than he dyed
before. And said Sir Gye of two things thou must chese one / that is to say
chose whyther thou will forsake this Empire and all thy kynredde or else
fell me thy stone. Tha^ said sir Gye. My lord it must needs be thus be it
at your will. Nevertheless I shall ^eell you the peril of this stone For
if ye pay not therefore as it is worth without doubt it will come to me
again. Than said the Emperor sothely I shall give the suffycyent for thou
shalt receive of me a thousand pound therefore / and so it was done / sit
Gye received the money and went home. On the morrow erly opened his cofer and
found the stone / and than told he to the lady his wife how he had sold the
stone to the Emperor and delivered it / and how he found it again in his
cofer. Than said the lady his wife good sir in all the haste that ye can goo
again unto the Emperor and take to him the stone for dread that he be not
wroth / and thoroughe malice put some fraud in us Then went sir Sir Gye
for the again unto the Emperor and said unto him in this wise. My lord
yesterdaye I sold you a stone / which it might please you I would feign see.
The emperor went for the stone to his tresoure and found it not / wherefore
he was right sorowefull and came again and told Sir Gye how it was lost.
Than said. Gye. My lord grieve you naught for I told you yesterdaye that I
might not selle it but if I had the value thereof / and yesterdaye I received
a thousand pound of you therefore / and this day I found it in my cofer
again / and therefore if I had not brought you the stone again /
peradventure ye would have showed me your heavy lordeshyppe / and with that he
showed forth the stone / wherefore the Emperor meruayled gretely and said.
Sir Gye by the truth that thou owe to me tell me how thou came by this
stone. Than said Sir Gye By my faith that I owe to you I shall tell you truly
the very truth as touching this stone / your steward which is promoted
up to naught let make many deep pyttes in your foreste / and it fortuned not
long after that he fell in one of them him self / and might not rise again
for depnesse of the pytte / it fortuned also the same day that a lion an ape
and a serpente fell in to him. That time was I poor man and as I walked in
the foreste with my ass for to gader wode he cried unto me that I should help
him out of the pytte and save him fro the death / for there were in the pytte
with him three venymous beestes / That is to say a Lion / an ape / and a foul
serpente. And than he behyght me by mouth to promote me and al my kynne unto
great richesse And when that I herd that I was glade and let down a cord
supposing to have drawn up him / and than I haled up a lion and after that I
drew up an ape / and than a serpente / and at last your stewade. The lion
gave me ten asses charged with marchaundyse / the ape gave me wode as much as
mine ass might here / and the serpente gave me this stone that I have sold you
but your steward beat me and wounded me so sore for my good deed that I was
borne home upon mine ass when the Emperor herd this his heart was m^ued
gretely against the stuarde wherefore he called him and examyned him of that
false deed / but he was dombe and would not speak / for so much that he could
never his false head deny. Than said the Emperor. O wretched creature /
unreasonable bestes as the lion that ape and the serpent rewarded him for his
good head / and thou which art a reasonable man haste beten him almoost to
death that saved the and drew the out of the pytte. Therefore for thy falshede
and wickedness I Judge the to be hanged this day on ye galowes / and al thy
goods and lands I grant unto gye / and also I ordeyne yt sir gye shall
occupye thy place and be stuarde and so it was done. Wha^ sir Gye was the
reward by the Emperor and made stuarde he was well byloued of every man long
time / and at the last ended his life with honor and good pease

This Emperor betokens y^ fader of heaven The poor man betokens every man
the which comes in to this world feeble and naked from his moders belly / and
at the last is promoted to great richesse and worldely honor as the Salmist
says. De stercore erigens pauperent. God lyfteth up the poor man out of fylth
/ and many such men know neither god ne him self but makes him self to
make deep pyttes / that is to say unkindness and malice they ordeyne against
simple men in the which pytte the devil causes them often time to fall
according to a text in y^. ^^cctiastico foueam qui alteri facit ipse incidit
in eam / that says thus / who makes a pytte to another man oftyme he falls
therein him self / the which text was well proved by Mardochy / and anon this
Gye that went daily to y^ forest with his ass to gader wode betokens every
ryghtfull man dredynge god in the foreste of this world the wode that he
gadereth betokens his merytory works that he carried on his ass which
betokens y^ body of man wherewith his soul may Joy and live in the
tabernacle of heaven and as that stuarde / the lion / the ape / and the serpente
that fell in to the pytte. Right so when a fynfull man falls in the pytte of
fynne True lion of the kynred of Jude that is god almighty descends with him
as often time as the sinner has will to come to grace. Therefore says the
Salmist thus. ^um ipso sum in trybulacyone. That is for to say I am with him
in trybulacyon. This Gye draws up the lion / that is to say almighty god
out of the pytte by the rope of virtues. He drew up the ape also that is to
say contrary will to reason that he might obey unto reason. For of all manner
of beestes the ape is most like unto man. Right so among all the
strengthnesse of soul will owes namely to be lykened to reason and to ^bey
reason. He drew up also a serpente by the which is understood penance for
two causes. For ye serpente bears in his mouth venym / and his tail is a
medycyne. Right so penance bears at the beginning bytternesse unto the doer.
Nevertheless it is full sweet and medycynable unto the soul at the end. And
therefore every right wise man should draw unto him the serpente of penance.
And at the last he drew up the steward from the pytte of sin according
unto Crystes saying thus. I am not come only to call to me ryghtfull / but
sinners unto penance.

Also it is written that Seneca called Senck that taught an Emperor many lores
and virtues of truth. And at the last like this steward he let slay his
master Senek.

Also Christ gave power unto Judas to work miracles like as he did unto other
dyscyples. Nevertheless he bytrayed him at the last. Right so now a days
be many children of Bellyall which delyteth more to do harm tha^ good in
especyall to them that would teache them in parfyte both for soul / and for
body. The Lion gave unto the ^yghtfull man ten asses charged with marchaundyses
that is to say our lord Ihesu christ gives unto every ryghtfull man ten
commandments charged with virtues by the which he grows in to the
richesse of heaven.

The ape also gadred him wode as often as the ryghtfull man worcheth wylfully
the deeds of charity. For wode is profitable for two things / that is to say
to make fire and to build an house. Right so perfyte charity heteth the
angel both accordy^ge to y^ scripture saying thus. Q ma magis gaudium est
angelis. etc. That is to say. More Joy is to aungelles for one sinner doing
penance. etc. Charity also arayeth the house of heaven against the coming of
y^ soul. The serpente also gave him a stone of three diverse manner of colors
the which betokens our lord Ihesu christ whom we seek by penance.
Therefore says saint Jerome in the second table thus. ^ost naufragium est
premiam. That is to say. We should do penance: after our trespaas. That
christ is a stone may be proved by him self saying thus. E^go sum lapis viuus.
That is to say I am a stone of life. Christ has three colors which by
tokeneth the might of the fader the wisdom of the sone / and the meekness of
holy ghost. Therefore who that may get this stone shall have the Empire of
heaven / and Joy without sore and plente without any manner defaute / and light
without derkenesse. Unto the which light bring us our lord Ihesus Christ
that dyed for the and me and all mankind. Amen Amen Amen for saint charity.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor which was named Anselme which
wedded the kings daughter of Jerusalem a fair lady and a gracyous in the
sight of every man / but she was long time with the Emperor or she was
conceived with child / wherefore the nobles of the Empire were right sorowefull
because their lord had none heir of his own boody bygoten. Till at the
last it befelle that this Anselm walked after souper on a night in his
gardeyne / and ^ythoughte him self how he had none heir and how the king
of Ampluy warred on him contynually for so much that he had no sone to
make defense in his absence / wherefore he was right sorowefull and went to his
chamber and slepte* and at the last him thought he saw a vysyon in his sleep
that the morning was more clear then it was wont for to be and that the moon was much more paler on that one side then on that other side. And after
he saw a bird of two colors and by that bird stood two beestes which
fed that little bird with their hete / and after that came many mo bestes and
bowed their hedes toward the bird and went their way. And than there came
diverse birds that song so swetely and so shyll yt the Emperor awaked. In
the morning e^ly this Anselme remembered his vysyon and wondered much what it
might sygnyfye / wherefore he called unto him his Philosophers and also yt
states of his Empire and told them his dreme chargynge them to tell him the
sygnyfyenge thereof upon the pain death. And if they told him the true
interpretacyon thereof* he behoted them great reward. Than said they. Lord
tell us your dreme and we shall declare unto you what it betokens. Then
the Emperor told them from the beginning to the end like as it is written
before. When the Philosophers herd this / with glad chere they answered and
said. Lord the dreme that ye saw betokens good. For thy Empire shall be
more clear than it is. The moon that is the more pale on the side than on yt
other betokens y^ Empres which has lost part of her color through y^
c^cepcion of a sone which she has conceived. The little bird betokens yt
sone yt she shall bear. The two bestes that fed this bird betokens all the
wise men and rich men to this Empire shall obey thy sone. These other beestes
the bowed their hedes to the bird betokens that many other nacyon shall do
him homage. The bird that song so swetely to this little bird betokens
the Romans which shall rejoice and sing because of his birth. Loo this is
the very interpretacyon of your dreme when the Emperor herd this / he was
right Ioyefull. Sone after that the Empress traueyled and was delivered of a
fair sone / in whose birth was great Joy made withouten end. When that the
king of Ampluy herd this / he thought within him self in manner following.
Loo I have warred against the Emperor all the days of my life / and now he
has a sone the which will revenge all the wrongs that I have done and
wroughte against his fader when that he comes to full age. Therefore it is
better that I send unto the Emperor and beseech him of trewes and pease that
his sone may have no thing against me When that he comes unto manhood / when
he had thus said unto him self he wrote unto the Emperor besechynge him of
him pease / when that the Emperor saw that the king of Ampluy wrote to him
more for dread then for love / he wrote again unto him that if he would
find good suerty for to keep the pease / and bind him self all y^ days of
his life to do him service and homage and to give him yearly a certain
trybute / he would receive him to the pease / When the king had read the
tenoure of the Emperors letters / he called his counceyll praynge them to
give him counceyll how he might best do as touching to this matter. Than said
they. It is good that ye obey the Emperors will and commandment in all
things For in the first he desires of you suerty for the pease. And as to
this we answer thus said that ye have but a daughter / and the Emperor has
but a sone / wherefore let a marriage be made between them / and that may be
perpetuell sykernesse of the pease. And also he asks homage and rentes which
is good for to fulfill. And then the king sent his messengeres unto the
Emperor saying / that he will fulfill his entente in all thing if it might
pleas^ his highness that his sone and the kings daughter my^hte be wedded
together. All this pleased well the Emper^ure Nevertheless he sent again that
if his daughter were a clean vytygne from her birth unto that day / he would
consent unto that marriage. Then was the king right glade / for his daughter
was a true vyrgyne / therefore wha^ the lettres of couenauntes and sykernesse
were sealed. The king did make array a fair ship / wherein he might send
his daughter / with many nobie knights / ladies / and great richesse unto the
Emperor for to have his sone in marriage. And when they were sayllynge in the sea toward Rome / the storm arose so feruentely and so horrybly that the
ship all to braste upon a roche of stones / and they were al drowned save
only the young lady which set her hope and her heart so gretely on god /
that she was saved. And about three of the clock the tempest seized / and the
maiden drove forth over the wawes in that broken ship which was cast up
again / but an huge whalle followed after ready to devour both y^ ship and
her / wherefore this young lady when night came she smote fire with a stone
wherewith all the ship was gretely lyghtned and than the whalles durst not
adventure toward the ship for dread of fire / but at the cock crowynge
this young mayo was sore weary of the great tempest and trouble of the sea that
she slepte / and within al little while yt fire was out and then came the
whalle and devoured her. And And when she wakened and understood her self in
the whalles ^ely she smote fire and within a little while she wounded the
whalle with a knyfe in many places / and when the whalle felt him self
wounded and hurt according unto his nature he swamme to land. There was that
time dwelling in that country an Earl that was a noble man which was named
Pirris which by cause or recreacyon walked by the sea strande / and as he was
walking thus in his dysporte he saw where as the whalle was coming toward
the land / wherefore he returned home again / and gadrede many strong men
and came thither again and faught with this whalle / and wounded him sore / and
as they smote the maiden that was within her ^ely cried with an high voice and
said / o gentylsyrs have mercy on me for I am a kings daughter and a true
vyrgyn from the hour of my birth unto this day. When the earl herd this he
wondered / and opened the side of the whalle and found the young lady and took
her out. And when she was thus delivered she told by order by and by whose
daughter that she was / and how she had lost all her goods in the sea / and
how she should have been married unto the Emperors sone. And when the earl herd
this he was right glad / wherefore he conforted her the more and kept her
still with him till she was well refresshed. And in the mean time he sent
messengers unto the Emperor lettynge him wit how that this kings daughter
was saved. Then was the Emperor right glad of her salvation and of her
coming / and had great compassyon on her saying thus. O good maid for the
love of my sone thou haste suffered much thing. Nevertheless if thou be
worthy for to be his wife soon shall I preue. And when he had thus said he
let bring forth three vessels. The first was made of pure gold couched
well with precious stones without and within full of deed men's bones / and
there upon was this poyse written / who so chieseth me shall find that he
deserves. The second vesselle was made of fine silver filled with earth and
worms and thus was the superscrypcyon / who so cheseth me shall find that
his nature desires. The third vessel was made of led full within of
precious stones / and thereupon was written this poyse / who so cheseth me shall
find that god has dysposed for him. These three vessels the Emperor showed
to the maiden and said. Loo here daughter these ben noble vessels if thou chese
one these wherein is profit to the and to other than shalt thou have my sone.
And if thou chese that wherein is no profit to the nor to none other / s^thely
thou shalt not wedde him / when the maiden saw this she left up her hands
to almighty god and said. Thou lord which knoweste all things / grant me
grace this hour so to ch^se that I may receive the Emperors sone. And with
that she beheld the first vessel of gold that was lorged and graued royally
/ and read the scripture* Who cheseth me. etc. saying thus. Though this
vessel be full precious and made of pure gold. Nevertheless I wo^te never
what is within. Therefore my lord this vessel will not I chese. And then
byhelde she the second vessel that was of clear silver and redd^ the
superscrypcyon who so cheseth me shall find that which his nature desires.
Thinking thus within her self / if I chese this vessel what is within know
I not but well I wot there shall I find that nature desires / and my nature
desires the lust of y^ flesh / and therefore this vesselle will I not chese
/ when she had seen those two vessels and given an answer as touching to
them / she beheld the third vessel of led and read the superscrypcyon /
who so cheseth ^e shall find that god has dysposed. Thinking within her
self. This vessel is not passing rich ne precious without forth.
Nevertheless the superscrypcyon says who choseth me shall find that god has
dysposed and withouten doubt almighty god never dysposed any harm. Therefore
as as now I will chese this vessel / when the Emperor saw this he said. O
good maiden open thy vessel for it is full of precious stones and see if thou
haste well chosen or none / when this young lady had opened it at the
Emperors commandment / she found it full of gold and precious stones like
as the Emperor had told her before / and than said the Emperor O my dear
daughter because thou haste wisely chosen therefore thou shalt wedde my sone.
And when he had so said / he ordained a marriage and wedded them to gyder
worthily with much Joy and honor. And so they contynned to their lives end
both in Joy and solace.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens the fader of heaven the which was long
time without a carnal sone / wherefore many men were perysshed and went unto
hell The Empress conceived when the angel Gabryell said Loo thou shalt
conceive and ^ere a child. And then yt Fyrmament began to clear when this
little child lyghtened the world with his birth. The moon began to wexe pale
when the face of the vyrgyn Mary was over shadowed by the virtue and grace of
the holy ghost / and not only her face was thus shadowed / but also her body
for she thus shadowed but also her body for she was with child as an other
woman wherefore Joseph would have forsaken her pryuely and gone away. The
little bird that come from the one side of the moon betokens our lord
Ihesus christ which at mydnyght was borne of our lady wrapped in clothes and
laid in the ox stalle. The two bestes betoken the ass and the ox that
Joseph brought with him which honored him in his birth. These other bestes
that came from far country betoken the herdes on the field to whom the
angel said thus. ^cce nuncio vobis gaudiu^ magnum. Lo I show to you great
Joy / the birds that song too swetely betoken the aungelles of heaven which
song at his birth this merry song. ^loria in excelsis. Joy to god above / and
pease to men in earth. The king of Ampule which held war against the
Emperor betokens all mankind that was contrary to god as long as he was
in the deuylles power. But anon when our lord Ihesu cyrste was borne he bowed
him self to god and besought him of peace when he received his crystendome. For
at our crystenynge we behote to draw only to god and forsook the devil and
all his pompes. This king gave his daughter in marriage to the Emperors sone.
Right so each of us ought to give his soul in marriage to gods sone for he
is ever ready to receive our soul to his spouse according to the scripture
saying thus. Dispensabo ip^am michi. I shall spouse her me / but or that soul
may come to the palace of heaven her behooves to sail by the sea of this world
in the ship of good life / but often times there ryseth a tempest in the sea
that is to say the trouble of this world the temptacyon of the flsshe and the
suggestyon of y^ devil aryseth suddenly and dreweth the virtues which the
soul receives at y^ font stone. Nevertheless yet falls she not out of the
ship of charity but keeps her self surely there by feyth and hope. For as
the apostle says. Spe saltu facti sumus. By hope we be saved. For it is
impossible to be saved without hope or feyth. The great whalle that followed the
maiden betokens the devil which by night and by day lies in a wait to
overcome the soul by sin therefore do we as did the maiden smite we fire of
charity and love out of the stone that is christ according with his own words
saying thus. ^go sum lapis. I am a stone. And certainly the devil shall have
no power to grieve us. But many men begin well as did the maid / but as y^
last they be weary of their good works / and so sleep they in sin. And
anon when the devil parceyueth this he deuoureth the sinner in evil
thoughts delytes consent and work therefore yfon^ of us feel our self / in
such life under the power of the devil / late him do as did the maiden.
Smite the devil with the knyfe of bitter penance then kyndell the fire of
charity and without doubt he shall cast the unto the land of good life. The
earl that came with his servants to slay the whalle betokens a dyscrete
confessor / the which dwells beside the sea that is to say beside the
world and not in the world. That is to say not drawing to worldely
dylectacyons but ever is ready with good words of holy scripture to slay the
devil / and to destroy his power we must all cry with an high and loud
voice as did the maiden knowlegynge our sins and than shall we be best
delivered from the devil and nourysshed with good warkes. The Emperor
shows this maiden three vessels / that is to say. God puts before man life
and death / good and also evil. And which of these that he cheseth he shall
opteyne: Therefore Sampson says thus. Ante hominem mors et vita. Death and life
is set before man chese which him list. And yet man is uncertain whether he
be worthy to chose life before death. By the first vessel of gold full of
deed men's bones we shall understand worldely men as mighty men and rich /
which outward shyneth as gold in richesse and pompes of this world.
Nevertheless within they be full of deed men's bones / that is to say the
works that they have wrought in this world ben deed in the sight of god
through deedly sin. Therefore if any man chose such life he shall have that he
deserves / that is to say hell. And such men be like Toumbes that been white
and ryally peynted and arrayed without and covered with clothe of sylke and of
gold / but within there is no thing but dry bones. By the second vessel of
silver we ought to understand the Justices and wise men of this world which
shyneth in fair specke / but within they be full of worms and earth / that is
to say their fair speech shall avail them no more at the day of dome than
worms or earth / and perauenture less for than they shall suffer everlasting
pain if they / dye in dedly sin. By y^ third vessel of led full of gold
and precious stones we ought to understand a simple life and a poor which
the chosen men choseth that they may be wedded to our blyssed lord Ihesu
christ by humylyte obeysaunce / and such men bear with them precious stones /
that is to say merytory works / plesynge to god by the which at the day of
dome they be wedded to our lord Ihesus christ and opteyne the heritage of
heaven unto the which our blyssed lorlde Ihesus Christ that dyed on rode tree
for the and me and all mankind Amen.



THere dwelled in Rome sometime a mighty Emperor named Calopodu which wedded a
fair lady to his wife / they were not long together but that this Empress
conceived and bare hy^ a sone a goodly child and a fair / and set him to
scole. And when he come to.xx. year of age / he desired his faders heritage
say^ge thus. Dear fader ye are an old man and may not govern your Empire.
Therefore if it list you to give it me it shall be to your profit. Than
answered the Emperor and said. Dear sone I dread me sore that when Empire is
in thy power thou will not fulfill my will ne my desire. Than answered the
Empress for so much she loved his sone better that her husbonde / and said
my lord quod she that may not be for thou have but one sone / and therefore as
I believe he will fulfill thyn entente in all thing and this same Empire may
help him right well. And therefore it is best to grant him the Empire. Than
answered the Emperor and said. I will first have of him a letter ablygatorye
that when someuer he do oony thing against my will that I will not have done
/ that than I shall depryue him of the Empire without any witstendynge. The
son granted this and let make the oblygacyon / and sealed it. And when
this was done / this young Emperor waxed so proud yt he dredde neither god
ne man and he did very much harm. But ever his fader suffered it pacyently
for he would not be corrected by no man. Tylle at the last there fell a
great hungre and a derthe in that Empire so that many men dyed for defaute.
This old Emperor was by him self and began for to have need wherefore he
went unto sone for to have get on him some sustenaunce. That his sone
granted and suffered for a while. But within short time his fader began for
to wax seek wherefore he called his sone and prayed him for to give him a
draught of must. His sone answered and said. That will not do for I must is
not good for thy complexyon. Then said the Emperor. I pray the sone give me
a draught of thy wine. His sone answered and said that he would have none / for
my wine is not yet fined / and if I touch it / it will trouble and therefore I
will not tame it tylle it be clear and fined. Then said his fader than give
me some of thy second tonne. That will I not do quod he / for that wine is
passing mighty and strong / and such wine is not good for a seek man. Then
prayde his fader him hertely for a draught of the fourth tonne. Than he
answered and said / thereof get ye none. For it is feeble and without any
sustentacyon / and such wine is not good for you for it is not confortable.
Then said ye old Emperor now good sone give me then the fyfth tonne. That
will I not quod he for that tonne is full of leys and dregs and such is not
for men vnthes for hogs / when his fader saw that he might get no thing of
him and after that he was hole as ever he was / than he went unto ye king of
Jerusalem and made his complaynte of his sone / and showed him the letter
oblygatory ye his sone had made / whereby his fader might put him out of the
Empire without any withsay^ge / when the king herd this he called y^
Emperors sone to answer to his fader. And when he came he could not answer
to his fader well with no reason / wherefore the king put him from his
Empire and seasened his fader therein again and so he continued all the days
of his life.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens our lord Ihesu christ according to the
psalm / saying thus, He is thy fader that has the in possessyon / and made
the of naught. The sone betokens man to whom he gave all the Empire of this
world according to this scripture. ^elum celi domino.etc. That is for to
say. Heaven he has given our lord / and earth to man. Mankind made an
oblygacyon unto our lord Ihesu Christ when he received his crystendome at
the font stone / where he behyght him suerly to serve him truly and to forsake
the devil and all his pompis and vain glory. This Emperor began for to
wax seek upon a day / that is for to say in english our lord Ihesu christ
is troubled as often time as a christian man synneth and breketh his
commandments neclygently / wherefore he trusts gretely the help of our
soul and than asks he a draught of the first tonne. That is for to say he
asks of man the first age of his chyldehode to be spente in his service. But
anon the wicked man answered and said. I may not do so / for my chyldhode is
must that is for to say in english. It is so tender and so young it may
attempt so sone to serve god / which is openly false. For the child of one
day age is not without sin. For saint Gregory says also in his dialog. That
children of.v. year of age put out fendes from the bosoms of their faders.
And when god sees that he may not have of y^ must of his chyldhode. Then
desires he the wine of the second chyldhode. Than answers the wicked man
and says that his wine is not yet clear enough that is for to say / he is
not apt for to serve god and when god may not have of ye second tonne. Then
asks he of the third tonne / that is for to say of the third tonne of his
youth. Then answered the wicked man and said / that wine is to strong and
mighty. And therefore his youth ought for to be spended about needs of this
world / and not in penance which should make him feeble and weyke when god
sees that he may not have of this tonne. Then asks our lord Ihesu Christ
of the fourth tonne of age. And then answred the wicked man and says that an
aged man is feeble and may not fast ne do none hard penance / and if he did
he should be cause of his own death. And then asks our lord of the syfte
tonne. That is for to say / of his old age when he does crepe and may not
goo without a staff / But the wicked man excuses him self / and says that
this wine is to feeble for to give such a man that is feeble / for if he should
fast one day / it were time on the morrow to make his grave. And when out
lord Ihesu christ sees that may not have of the fyfth tonne. Than asked he of
the syxth tonne. That is to say when man is blind and man not goo to sin no
more / yet desires he of such a manner drink that is for to say the help of
his soul. But y^ wretched man lyenge in despair says. Alas alas to me for
because I served not almighty god my maker / and my redemer here in times paste
while I was in my youth / and in my prosperyte. But now there is no thing
left but only the dregs and the leys of all wretchedness. Therefore what
avails now for to turn me to godwarde / but for such men me should
mourn. Nevertheless god is so merciful that though he might have no service
of man in all his time / yet is he content to have the leyse of his tonne / yt
is to say his good will though he may not serve him other wise / and so shall
his good will stand him in good stead of penance. For in what hour the
sinner does his penance he shall be saved. As Ezachiel witness. The apostle
says thus Alas alas and welawaye for there be full many that will not give
wine ne none other thing unto him wherefore god shall complain unto the king
of Iherusalem / that is to say to his god head at the day of dome / and
than god and man shall give a sentence defensable against such men saying
thus. ^suriui et non dedistis. I have hun / gred and ye have me no mete. And I
have thursted and ye gave me no drink. Loo thus sHall he reherce unto the /
the suen wrekes of mercy / and when this is done then shall they be put unto
everlasting pain / and y^ ryghtfull men into euerlasty^ge life where they
shall Joy without end unto ye which bry^ge us he yt dyed for us on the rode
tree.

Amen.
Sometime there dwelled in Rome a mighty emperor Named Antony under whose
reygne y^ rowers of the sea had taken prisoner a mighty man's sone of another
region / and brought him to the Emperors prison fast bound / when this
young man was this in prison he wrote to his own fader for his ransom but
his fader would no ransom pay me none other thing send to the conforte of
him. This herynge his sone wept sore and might not be conforted for the
unkindness of his fader. This Emperor had a fair daughter which every day
vysyte this prisoner and conforted him as much as she might. Too whom the
prisoner answered thus and said. How shall I be merry / or how may I Joy thus
for to lie fast bound in prison from y^ sight of man / and notwithstanding
this it greueth me more that my fader will not pay my ransom / when this
maiden herd this she was meued with pity and said. Dear friend I am sorry for
the. Nevertheless if thou will grant me one thing I shall deliver the from
this anguysshe and pain / what thing is that. That thou will take me to thy
wife. Than said the prisoner. I behote you surely to fulfill your entente. And
for the more sykernesse I give you my troth / when he had so done it was not
long after the maiden delivered him out of prison and fled away with him
home to his faders house / when the fader saw his sone and the maiden together
/ he asked the cause why he brought her with him. Than said he. Sir this
damoysell delivered me from prison and therefore she shall be my wife. Tha^
said his fader. I will not concent yt she shall by thy wife for.ii. reasonable
causes which I shall show. The first is this It is not unknown to the yt the
Emperor her fader might have had for thy delyueraunce great good / and for so
much that she was untrue to her own fader and true to the / it seems well
that thou should not trust in her long / for who is false to her own fader
by reason should be very false and untrue to another man. The second reason
is this / the cause why she delivered the fro enprysonmente. It was not for
pity ne for lou^ but for flesshely lust that she had to the. For at thy
delyueraunce she made covenant with the to be thy wife / and had of thy thy
troth / and therefore sone it is not reason that she should be thy wife. The
maiden answered to this questyon and said. As for the first reason that thou
layest against me that I should be untrue unto my fader / that is false / for
my fader has plente of richesse and thy sone is but poor and therefore I help
him for pity and for none other cause / and Nevertheless thou which art his
fader would no^ pay his ransom that he might be delivered from prison. Loo
for this cause I have delivered hy^ therefore I am kynder unto him than thou
which art his own fader / and he is more byholden to me then to the. Unto
the other reason where thou say that I delivered him die cause of flesshely
lust I answered and said plainly that is is not truth. For all manner of
flesshly love it caused for strength orelles for fayrnesse. But thy sone is not
strong / for his emprysonement has done away his streng the. He is not fair
/ for by the pain that he had in pryso^ he is made low and vnlustye to the
sight / and therefore pity only moved me for to deliver him / and not flesshely
lust Than said the sone / to his fader Dear fader for so much that I was in
parell of death / and wrote unto the that thou would pay my ransom that I
might be delivered / and thou would not help me. But this maiden of her
gentylnesse and for pity saved me from death and delivered me from prison.
Therefore sothely she shall be my wife / wherefore he wedded her forthwith great
honor and with her ended he his life.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens the fader of heaven. The young man that
was taken with the rowers of ye see betokens all mankyned which was taken
with the devil by the sin of our fore fader Adam and was cast in to the
prison of belle with great sorrow and pain. His fader would not ransom him /
that is to say ye world would do no thing for him. This fair daughter
betokens the godhede which came down from heaven and took manhood of the
vyrgyn mary / and so made a goostly marriage between him and man. And upon this
condycyon he delivered mankind out of the prison of hell when he came fro
heaven and forsook ye felawshyp of aungelles for to dwell with us in this
wretched valey of tears. But the fader the which betokens the world
grutched ever against him and would not suffer that the soul of man Should
become the spouse of Ihesu Christ / but that she should always serve him and
forsake our lord. Therefore if we follow y^ world and his vanytes sothly we
shall fall in the snare of the devil. Fro the which defend us our lord
Ihesus Amen.

Sometime there dwelled in Rome a mighty emperor of great lyuelode Named
Alexsander / y^ which above all virtues loved largess / wherefore he ordained
a law for great curiosyte that no man under pain of death Should torns a
playse in his dysshe at his mete / but only eete white side and not ye black
/ and any man would attempt to do ye contrary he should die without remedy / but
or he dyed he should ask iii. bones to the Emperor what so him list except
his life which should be granted him It befell after on a day that there
came an Earl and his sone of a strange country to speak with the Emperor. And
when this Earl was set to mete he was served with playse / and he which was
hungry and had appetyte to his mete / and after he had eten the white side he
turned the black side and began to ete there of wherefore anon he was accused
to the emperor because he had offended against the law. Than said the Emperor
late him dye according to the law without any delay / when the Earls sone
herd that his fader should dye anon he set him down on both his knees
before the emperor / and said. O my reverent lord for his love that henge on
cross late me dye for my fader. Then said the Empeour It pleases me well
that one dye for the offense of y^ law. Than said this earls sone sithe it is
so that I shall dye I ask the benefytes of yt law that is to say that I may
have three petycions granted or I dye. The Emperor answered and said / ask
what thou wylt there shall no man say nay. Than said this young knight. My
lord ye have but one daughter the which I desire of your hygnesse that she
may lie with me a night or that I dye. The Emperor granted though it were
against his will in fulfyllynge of his law. Nevertheless this knight
deffloured her not as that night. Therefore he plesed the Emperor gretely. The
second peticions this I ask all thy tresoure / and anon ye Emperor granted
because he should not be called a breeker of own law. And when this earls
sone had resceyued the Emperors tresoure he deperted it both to poor men and
rich / wherefore he opteyned there good will. My third peticion is this. I
ask my lord that all their eyes may by put out in contynent which saw my
fader etynge of the black playce wherefore the Emperor let make an
inquisycyon anon who it was yt saw the earl turn the playce / and they that
saw him turn yt playce / bethought them and said within them self. If we
knowledge that we saw him do this trespass than shall our eyes be put out.
And therefore it is better that we hold us still / and so there was none found
that would accuse him / when this Earls sone saw this he said unto the
Emperor. My lord quod he ye se that there is no man accuses my fader /
therefore give ye ryghtfull Judgment. Than said the Emperor. For so much
that no man will knowledge yt they saw him torn the playce. Therefore I will
not that thy fader shall dye Lo the sone thus saved the life of the fader. And
after ye desease of the Emperor he wedded his daughter.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens the fader of heaven which ordained for
law that no man Should torn the black side of ye playce that is to say.
There Should no man labor for richesse or lordshyppe by couetyse and
falsehede The Earl that came to yt Emperor betokens Adam our fore fader
which came out of the land of Damasse to the court of paradyce and turned up
the black side of the playce wha^ he etc of ye apple / wherefore he should have been dampened unto everlasting death and eternal death. But his sone which
betokens our lord Ihesu Christ. For he took flesh of Adam seeing this
proffered him self wylfully to deye for him the fader of heaven granted that he
should go down to dye for mankind. Nevertheless or he dyed he asked three
petycyons of his fader of heaven. The first was this that he might have by him
his daughter which betokens the soul of man / and bring her with him in to
the bosom of heaven according to the words of. Osye saying thus. Dispensabo
eam mihi. That is to say I shall wedde her to my wife. The second petycyon
was this. All themperours tresoure which betokens the tresoure of heaven
according to this scripture. Situt disposint micht pater. Like as my fader
has dysposed for me so I dyspose for you. The third questyon was this / yt
all their eyes should be put out / that is to say / that the devil which
daily accuses man that he might be put fro the light of heavenly grace. And
thus sued he mankind and led him up with him unto the palayce of heaven unto
ye which palayce bring us our lord Ihesus.

Amen.
THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Lemicius which on a
day rode in dysporte to a foreste where as he met suddenly with a poor man to
whom he said thus / friend whens come thou and who art thou. My lord quod
he I came fro the next cite and your man I am. Then said the Emperor thou
semest poor / therefore if thou will be good and true I shall promote the to
great richesse and honor. Then answered this poor man and said. My lord I
promise you my fay the fullly for to be true unto you as long as yt I live.
The Emperor anon made him knight and gave hy^ great richesse. when he was
thus promoted he waxed so proud that he thought him self more able for to be
an Emperor than his lord / wherefore he made suggestyon unto diverse lord of
that empire that he might usurp and take upon hy^ thrughe strength of them
to be Emperor. when the Emperor herd this anon he exyled him and all tho
that were consenting to him so that they were put in great wretchedness and
sorrow and than ye Emperor ordained other men in their stead and gave them
all the possessions of the traitors and of there felawshyppe. And when the
banysshed men herd that strangers had take possessyon in their land and
goods. Anon they conspyred against him and thrughe treason prayed them unto
a feeste / and they as Innocents thinking no treason came at the day
assygned / and were served with five meases / which were enpoysoned / wherefore
as many as tasted of that vytayll dyed in contynent / when the Emperor herd
this / he was gretely moved and called his counceyll to wit what was best to
be done of this treason and of their death. Than said ye Emperors sone. My
lord I am your sone / and ye be my fader / and therefore I shall give you good
ceunsell and profitable to all men. Not far hens is a little realm wherein
dwells a fair maiden and gracyous in the sight of every man which has an
orcherde wherein there is a well / whereof the water is of such virtue / that
if it be cast upon a deed man / anon he shall live again and recover his
life, Therefore my lord I shall descend unto the realm and seek that water by
the which they that were slain at the feast might rise again to life. And
when the Emperor herd this / he was gretely gladded and said Sone thy
counsel is right good and anon the Emperors sone went in to the said realm
and fell in conceyte of the maiden in so much that he entered in to the
gardyne and said of the well. And when he had so done he made five deep
trenches in the ground in the which the water ran tylle it came where the
deed men lay buried / and anon when the water touched them they arose from
death to life / and then the Emperors soon led them unto his fader. And
when The Emperor saw this he was right Joys full / wherefore he crowned his
sone with a lauryate croune in token of vyctorye / and so he ended his life in
pease.

This Emperor betokens yt fader of heaven. The poor man that was promoted
betokens Lucyfer y^ which was made of naught and exalted in the Empire of
heaven in so great Joy and clerenesse that him seemed thrughe his pride that he
would be like almighty god / and not only like him self but also more than
almighty god / wherefore the fader of heaven exyled him and all them that
consented unto him to hell / and in their place man was exalted to great Joy
and honor. The devil seeing this enuyed him that man should come to such
glory and honor / and bad Adam and Eve. unto a feast when they ete of the
apple against gods commandment / and counceylled them thus saying. In what
hour he ete of the apple ye shall be like gods. And in this cursed feast
they were served with five meases the which were enpoysoned / that is to say
/ their five wits were accorded in etynge of yt apple whereof man was infecte
and dyed. This herynge ye Emperors sone meued with mercy came down from
heaven in to this world and acquaynted him so well with the blyssed vyrgyne
Mary that he found in her the well of man hode and conjoined it to his godhede
acordynge to the scripture. I am the well of life who drynketh on it shall not
thirst. After that he let make five trenches in the ground / that is to lay
five wounds in his body of the which ran both blood and water whereby all
mankind were raised fro death to life / and so he led them up in to the
palyce of heaven Unto the which our blyssed lord Ihesus Christ that shed his
blood upon the rode tree for the and me and all mankind Amen Amen Amen for
saint charity



Sometime there dwelled in Rome a mighty emperor the which was named Dunstane.
In whose Empire dwelled a gentle knight ye which had two sons. One of his
said sons wedded him self astaynst his faders will to a comune woman of the
bordell. The knight herynge this exyled his sone from him. And when he was
thus exyled he begat on this woman a sone / and sone after that he wexed seek
and needful wherefore he sent messengers to his fader besechynge him of his
mercy. This herynge his fader had compassyon and ruthe of him wherefore he was
reconsyled. And when he was thus brought again to his faders grace / he gave
his sone which he had begoten before of this nedeful woman to his fader. And he
kyndely received it as his sone and norysshed it when his other sone herd this
he said to is fader. Fader quod he it seems yt thou art out of thy right
mind the which I preue by this reason. For he is out of his mind that
receives a false heir / and nouryssheth him / whose fader has done him
anguysshe and disease before. But my brother which begat this child has done
the great Iniurye when that he wedded ye comune woman against thy will and
commandment. Therefore me seems that thou art out of thy right mind.
Then answered ye fader and said. By cause that thy brother is reconsyled thou
art enuyous to me and also unkind to thyn own brother / willing for to put
him from my felawshyp for ever more and sothely none unkind man shall have mine
heritage but if that he be reconsyled. But yet you were never reconsyled of his
unkindness for thou might have reconsyled him but thou would not / therefore
of mine heritage get est thou no part.

The fader of the two brethren betokens the fader of heaven. And this two
sons betokens yt nature of aungelles and nature of man. For man was wedded
unto a comune woman of the bordelle when he ete of the apple against the
commandment of god wherefore he was exyled by yt fader of heaven and put fro
the Joys of paradyce. The sone of the comune woman hetokeneth mankind. This
knights sone that is to say. Adam began to be needful / for after his sin
he was put from Joy in to this wretched valey of tears and weeping
according to this scripture. In sudore vultus. etc. In the sweet of thy vysage
thou shalt ete thy bread. But after by the passion of christ he was
reconsyled. But the other sone which betokens the devil was ever unkind
and grutcheth daily against our reconsylynge saying that by sin we ought
not to come unto the heritage of heaven. Unto y^ which bring us our lord
Ihesus.

Amen.
THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named donate which let
make.iii. images. Of ye which one held out his hand straight unto the people
and had on his finger a ring of gold. The second image had a berde of
gold. And the third had a manteli of purple / commaundynge upon pain of death
that no man should rob these images of the ring berde nor of the mantell. It
befell after upon a time that one Dionyse a tyrant came in to ye temple and
took away the ring from the first image / the berde from the second / and
the mantell from the third And anon when he had thus done he was accused
unto ye Emperor and brought before him and was examyned of that trespass /
why that he dyspoyled yt images against the Emperor commandment. Then said
this dionyse. My lord it is lawful to answer for my self / where none will
answer for me / when I entered in to the temple the first image held forth
his hand streyghte to me / as who says. I give the this ring / and therefore
I took the ring at the gift of the image. And when I saw the second image
having berde. I thought thus with in my self I knew sometime the fader of
this image which had no berde and now his sone has a berde which is against
reason the sone to have a berde and the fader none and therefore I took fro him
his berde that he should be like his fader. After that when I saw the third
image closed in a mantel of gold I thought that a mantell of gold was not
byhouable to him in winter / for gold is naturally cold yt myt because of his
death / and therefore I took it fro hy^ because it was to cold in winter / and
to heavy in somer. When Dyonyse had excused hymby these reasons. The emperor
answered and said. Thou have answered wyckedly for they self / what should
cause the rather than any other man to dyspoyle these images / for so much
that I commanded that no man should do them any harm / and thyn own mouth
has dempned the / and anon the Emperor called to him one of his squyers and
charged him to smite of his he de and so it was done.

Thus Emperor betokens all mighty god the faderot heaven. The three images
betokens the poor men the rich men / and the mighty men of this world. The
tyrant Doynyse betokens Justices / sheryfes baylyes / catchepolles / and all
other officers which take away fro poor men the ring of the rich and says
thus. I may take that is given me. But when the poor man has ought to done he
must needs put for the to give whyder he will or none if he shall speed. They
take also the berde from the rich men and says thus / this man is rycher than
his fader / Therefore take we his lyuelode fro him and make him like his forne
faders. They take also the mantelle of gold from them when they se any man
of honor and of good living willing to corecke such mysdoers than say they
this man is to cold / for he enclyneth no thing to our opinyones / and also he
is to hot of power in werkynges against us therefore goo we and take from him
the mantell of might and so they accuse him and puts him out of office. But
certainly all such men stands tin peril of everlasting death. From the
which save us he that dyed for us upon the rode tree. Amen for saint charity.

IN Rome there dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Euas / which had a
young lady to his wife on whom he had begoten a fair sone / when the states
of ye Empire herd this they came unto the Emperor and besought him to have
the keeping of his sone. Anon the Emperor sent a sergeau^t thrughout the
cite saying that in whose house were first found fire and water / the good
man of that house should have his soon in keeping and to nourysshe / and that
the Emperor made proclamacyon that who so ever had his sone to keep should
norysshe him clenly and feed hy^ with wholesome vytayle. And when the child came
to age than should the keeper be promoted to great honor wherefore many men
let make ready fire and water in hope to have the child. But on the night
when every man was a sleep there came a tyrant named Sulapyus the which
quenched the fire and threw out the water. Nevertheless among all the other
/ there was a man named Ionathas which labored so dylygently that he kept
both day and night fire and water. In a morning erly the sergeaunt at the
Emperouers commandment went thrughe the cite and sought in every house for
fire and water but he could none find till he came to Ionathas house where as
he found both fire and water ready / wherefore he was brought before the
Emperor and his sone delivered unto him according to his proclamacyon / when
Ionathas had themperours sone he led him home to his house / and sone after
sent for masons and carpenters and let make a strong chamber of lyme and
stone. And when y^ chamber was made he sent for paynters and let paynte in the
wall of the chamber within ten images with this poysy written above their hedes
/ who defoyleth these images shall dye a foul death. And that he drew on the
door a galowes / and a figure of hy^ self hanging thereupon with this poysy
written above his head. So shall he be served that nouryssheth themperours sone
amys. Also he let make a chair of gold / and him self sitting therein
crowned with a crown of gold with this superscrypcyon / above his head / who
that nouryssheth ye Emperors sone clenly thus shall he honored wha^ this was
done. Oftymes in his sleep he was tempted to defyle the images / but anon he
read the superscrypcyon above their hedes / and than all yt temptacyons
seized. And when the Emperors sone was cuyll kept than went he to the
galowes / and read the poysy that was written above his own head and for dread
thereof he kept the child yt better and was dylygent to tend on him. And when
he beheld the chair and him self sytteynge therein crowned with gold he was
right Joyful / thinking to have a good reward for keeping of the Emperors
sone / when the Emperor herd of his dylygente demenaunce about his sone he
sent for hy^ and for his sone both / thanky^ge hy^ for his weil keeping and
nourysshynge of him / and after promoted hy^ to great honor and worship.

This Emperor betokens the of fader heaven the Empress betokens the
blyssed vyrgyn Mary the emperors sone betokens our lord Ihesu christ The
sergeaunt that was sent thrughe the cite betokens saint Johan yt baptist
which was sent before our lord / to make ready for him according to the
scripture. Ecce mitto angelu^. Lo I send my angel before me. etc. The states
which desires the Emperors sone to nourysshe betoken the patryarkes and
prophets which desire gretely to nourysshe our lord and so to se him but
they might not se him / ne norysshe him for fire and water which should be
causet of their sight were not with hy^ persyghtly. The fire betokens the
holy ghost that had not yet a pered in them / for they were not wasshen the
water of the font. Also ye may understand by the fire perfyght charity / and
by the water true contrycion which two now a days fails in many men / and
therefore they may not have the little thylde Ihesu in their hertes. Ionathas yt
waked so well betokens a good christian man which studyeth ever to wake in
doing of good works / yeldynge to god for sins the fire of charity / and
the water of contrycyon. But often times the tyrant which betokens the
devil puts out ye fire of charity fro men's hertes and casts out the
water of contrycyon so yt they may not Nourysshe this little child Ihesu.
Therefore awake we as Ionathas did yt we enter not in temptacyon. And call we
to us masons yt is to say dyscrete co^fessours / which can make in our hertes
a chamber of stone / yt is to say a sure feyth and hope. Tha^ call we to us
peynters yt is to say prechours of gods words which can paynt in our
hertes ten images / yt is to say ten commandments which if you keep and
preserve daily / and devoutly without doubt you shalt behonoured in heaven. And
if you keep well the Emperors sone you shall sytte in chair of gold crowned
with a crown of gold / and if you nourysshe not well without doubt you shall be
hanged on yt galous of heil / from the which save us our dear lord Ihesus.

Amen.
IN Rome there dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Menaly the which had
wedded the kings daughter of hungry a fair lady and gracious in all her works
/ and specially she was merciful as ye emperor lay in his bed he bethought hy^
ye he would vysyte ye holy land / and on the morn he called to hy^ the
Empress and his own only brother and thus he said dear lady I may not ne I
will not hyde fro the / the preuytees of my heart. I purpose to vysyte the holy
land / wherefore I ordeyne the pryncypally to be lady and gouernoure over all
mine Empire and over my people. And under the I ordeyne here my brother to be thy
stywarde for to provide all things that may be profitable to me and to my
people Than said the Empress. Sith it will none other wise be but needs ye
will go to the holy land I shall be in your absence as true as any turtyll
that has lost his felawe. For as I believe ye shall not escape thens with your
life. The Emperor anon conforted her with fair words and kyste her and
after that took his leave of her and of all other and so went forth toward the
holy land. And anon after yt the Emperor was gone his brother waxed so
proud that he opressed poor and robbed tyche men and yet he did worse for
daily he styred the Empress to sin with him. But ever she answered again as
an holy and a devout woman and said. I will quod she never consent to you /
ne to none other as long as my lord lives. Nevertheless this knight would
not leave by this answer but ever wha^ he found her alone he made his
compleynt to her / and styred her by all the ways that he could to sin with
him / when this lady saw that he would not seas for none answer ne would not
amend him self when she saw her time she called to her three or four of the
worthyest of that Empire and said to them thus it is not unknown to you that
my lord ye Emperor ordained me pry^cipally governor of this Empire / and
also he ordained his brother to be steward under me and that he should do no
thing without my counceyl but he does all the contrary / for he oppresses
poor men gretely and robs rich men / and yet he would do worse if he might
have his entente wherefore I command you in my lords name that ye bind him
fast / and cast him in prison. Then said they sothely he has done many
harms sith out lord went / therefore we be ready to obey your commaandement /
but in this matter ye must answer for us to our lord the Emperor. Than said
she dread ye not for of my lord knew what he has done as well as I he would
put him to the fowlest death that can bethought. Anon these men set hands
on him and bound him fast with iron cheynes and put him fast in prison /
where as he lay long time after / tylle at the last it fortuned there came
tidings that the Emperor was coming home and had opteyned great worship
and vyctory / when his brother herd of his coming he said / would god my
brother might find me in prison for then would he inquire the cause of mine
emprysonement of the Empress / and she will tell him all the troth / and how I
desired her to sin / and so for her I shall have no grace of my brother but
lose my life this know I well therefore it shall not be so. Then sent he a
messenger unto the Empress praynge her for crystes passion that she would
vouchsafe to come unto the prison door that he might speak a word with her.
The Empress came to him / and inquired of him what he would. He answered and
said thus O lady have marcy upon me For if the Emperor my brother find me in
this prison then I dye without remedy. Then said the Empress if I might
know thou would be a good man and leave of thy folly thou sholdest have grace.
Than did he behote her sykerly to be true and to amend all this trespass /
when he had thus promised the Empress delivered him anon and made him to be
bathed and shaven and arrayed him worshyppefully according to his estate / and
than she said unto him thus. Now good brother lepe on thy stead and come with
me that we may mete my lord. He answered and said lady I am ready to fulfill
your will and your commandment in all things. And than the Empress took
him with her and many other knights and rode forth to mete with the Emperor
/ and as they rode together by the way they saw where a great heart ran before
them / wherefore every man with such hounds as they had chased him on horse
back / so that there with the Empress was left no creature save only the
Emperors brother / which seeing that no man was there but they two / this he
said unto the Empress. Loo lady here beside is a preuy foreste and long it is
agone that I spoke to the of love come now and consent unto me that I may lie
with the. Than said the Empres a fool what may this be / yesterdaye I delivered
yt from prison upon thy promise in hope of a mendement and now thou art
returned to thy folly again / wherefore I say now to the as I have said before
there shall no man do such thing with me but only my lord the Emperor
which owes of very duty and right so for to do Then said he / if thou
will not consent to me I shall hang the here upon a tree in this forest
where no man shall find the and so shall thou dye an evil death. The Empress
answered mekely and said though thou wylt smite of mine heed and put me to death
with all manner turmentynge thou shall never have thy consent to such sin /
when he herd this he unclothed her all save her smock / and henge her up by
the here upon a tree and tied her stead beside her / and so rode forth to his
felawes / and told them that a great host of men mete him and took the
Empress away fro him. And when he had told them this / they made great
sorrow* It befelle on the third day / after that / that there came an earl to
hunte in that foreste / and as he rode betynge the brakes he sterte a fox
whom his hounds followed fast tylle they came nere the tree whereupon the
Empress was hanged / and when the dogs felt the sauoure of her they left
the fox / and ran toward the tree as fast as they could. The earl this
seeing wondered and smote the spores into his horse side / and followed them
tylle he came where as the body was henged / when the Earl saw her this
hangy^ge / he meruayled gretely / for so much she was right fair and gracyous
for to behold / wherefore he said unto her in this manner wise. O woman who art
thou and of what country / and wherefore hanged thou here in this manner wise /
ye Empress that was not yet fully deed / but in point ready for to dye answered
and said I am quod she a strange woman and am come out offerre country / but
how I came hyder god knows. Than answered the earl and said whose horse quod
he is this that stands here by the bound to this tree. Than answered yt lady
and said that it was hers when the Earl herd this / he kuewe well that she was
a gentle woman / and come of sum noble kynred / wherefore he was the rather
meued with pity and said unto her. O fair lady thou semeste gentle. And
therefore I purpose to deliver the from this pain if thou if thou will
promise to goo with me and norysshe my young daughter / and teache her at home
in my castle / for I have no child but only her / and if thou keep her well
/ thou shalt have a good reward / for thy labor. Than said she as ferforthe
as I can or may I shall fulfill thyn entente. And when she had promised him
thus / he took her down of ye oak and led her home to his castle and gave her
ye kepy^ge of his daughter yt he loved so much and she was cherysshed so well
that she lay every night in the Earls Chaumber and his daughter together And in
his Chamber every night there burnt a lamp the which henge even between the
Empress bed and the earls bed. This lady bare her so gentely that she was
beloved of every creature. There was that time in earls court a steward
which loved much this Empress above al thing / and oftentimes spoke to her
of his love / but she answered him ever again and said know ye dear friend
for certain I have made a solemn vow that I shall never love man in such
wise but only him whom I am gretely behold for to love him by gods
commandment. Than answer the steward and said thou will not than consent to
me. My lord quod she what needs the more for to ask me, The vow which I
have made truly shall I keep and hold be the grace of god. Than when the
steward herd this he went his way in great wrath and anger thy^kynge within
him self and / if I may I shall be wroken on the. It befell within short time
after upon a night that the earls chamber door was forgoten and left vnshytte
which the steward perceived anon. And when all the were a sleep he went and
espied by the light of the lamp where the Empress and y^ young maid lay
together and with that / drew out his knyfe / and cut the throat of the Earls
daughter and put the blody knyfe in the Empress hand she being a sleep and
not knowing nothing theof to this entente that the Earl when he wakened
should see the knyfe in her hand and that he should think that she had cut
his daughters shrote wherefore she should be put unto death for his defaute. And
when this damoysell was thus slain and the blody knyfe in ye Empress hand.
The Countess awaked of her sleep and saw by the light of the lamp the blody
knyfe in her hand wherefore she was almoost out of her mind and said to the
Earl thus. O my lord anon byholde in yonder ladies hand a wonderful thing.
The Earl awaked and byhelde on the Empress bed and saw the blody knyfe as the
Countess said wherefore he was gretely meued and cried unto her and said. A
wake woman of thy sleep what thing is this I se in thy hand. Anon the
Empress thrughe his cry awaked of her sleep / and in her waking the knyfe
fall out of her hand / and with that she looked by her and found the Earls
daughter deed by her side and all the bed full of blood / wherefore with an
huge cry and voice she cried. Alas alas and welaway my lords daughter is
slain she cried unto the Earl with a pyteous voice and said a my lord let
that devil be put to the most foul death that can bethought the which
has slain thus our only child. And when the countess had said thus to the
Earl / she said unto ye Empress in this wise. The high god knows that thou
myscheuous woman haste slain my daughter with thine own hand / for I saw
the blody knyfe in thine hand / and therefore thou shalt dye a foul death.
Then said the Earl in this manner of wise. O thou woman / were it not that the
dread of god is so great I should cleue thy boody with my sword in two
parties / For I delivered the from hanging and now thou haste slain my
daughter. Nevertheless for me thou shalt have no harm / therefore goo thy
way out of this cite without any delay / for if I find yt here this day
thou shalt dye an evil death. Then rose this woeful Empress and did on her
clothes and lept on her palfray / and rode toward the eest alone without any
saufconduyte. And as she rode thus mourning by the way she espied on yt left
side of the way a pair of galous and seven sergeauntes ledynge a man to the
galous for to be hanged / wherefore she was meued with great pity and smote her
horse with the spores and rode to them praynge them that she might bye that
mysdoer if that he might be saved from death for any mede. Than said they. Lady
it pleases us well that hou bye him. Anon the Empress accorded with them and
paid his rau^some and than he was delivered. Thus said she to him. Now dear
friend be true till thou dye sith I have delivered the from death. On my soul
quod he I you behore ever to be true. And when he had thus said he followed the
lady still till they came nyghe a cite / and than said yt Empress to him good
friend quod she go forth thy way before me to the cite / and take up for us an
honest lodging / for there I purpose to rest a while. This man went forth as
she commanded and took up for her a good lodging and a profitable where as
she abode long time after when ye men of y^ Cite had perceived her fayrenesser
they wondered gretely / wherefore many of them spoke to her of unlawful love /
but it might not prouayle them by no way. It fortuned after upon a day that
there came a ship full of marchaundyse and aryued in the haven of the cite /
when the lady herd this she said unto her servant Go quod she unto the ship
and se if there be any clothe for mine use. Her servant went forth to the ship
where as he found many precious clothes / wherefore he prayed the master of
the ship that he should come in ye cite and speak with his lady. The master
granted him / and so he went home unto his lady before and warned her of the
master of the ships coming. Anon after the master of the ship came and
saluted the lady worthily / and the lady him receyned according to his degree
praynge him that she might have for her money such clothe as might be
profitable for her werynge. Anon he granted that she should have. And soon
they were accorded / wherefore the servant went again with the master unto
the ship. And when they were both within the ship board / the master said
thus unto the ladies servant. My dear friend unto the I would open my
counceyll / if I might trust in the / and if the list to keep my counceyll
and help me thou shalt have of me a great reward. Then answered he and
said I shall quod he be sworn unto the on the holy golpell that I shall keep
thy counceyll and fulfill thine entente as ferforth as I can. Than said the
master of the ship I love quod he thy lady more than I can tell. For her
fayrenesse is so great that I would give for love of her all the good that I
have and if I may opteyne the love of her thrughe thine help I will give the
what soever thou will desire of me. Than said the ladies servant tell me
quod he by what mean I may best speed. Than said the master of ye ship goo
home to thy lady again and tell her that I will not deliver to the my clothe
but if she come her self but bring her not to the ship but if the wind be
good and able for than I purpose to lead her away. Thy cou^ceyle is good quod
the ladies servant. Therefore give me some reward and I shall fulfill thine
entente / when he had thus received his mede / he went again to his lady
and told her that by no means the master of the ship would not deliver
him the clothe but if she came her self. The lady byleued her servant and she
went to the ship. And when she was within the ship board her servant
abode without / when the master saw that she was within the ship and that the
wind was goo he drew up yt sail and sail led forth / wha^ y^ lady had this
perceived. Thus said she to yt master. O master quoth she what treason is this
y^ you haste done to me. The master answered and said Madame certainly it such
ye I must needs lie with ye and after wedde y^. Forsooth quod she I have made
auowe that I shall never do such sin but with him to whom I am behold by
right and by law. Sothely quod he if ye will not grant me with your good
will I shall cast you out in ye mids of the sea / and there shall ye dye an
evil death. If it be quod she yt I must needs consent or else dye. Than
pray I the array a preuy place in the end of the ship where as I may
fulfill thine entente or I dye / but first I pray ye that I may say my
orysons unto the fader of heaven that he may have mercy on me. The master
believed her wherefore he let ordeyne her a cabone in the ships end and in
she gooth and set her down on both her knees and made her prayers saying in
this wise. O thou my lord god which haste kept me from my youth in
clennesse keep me now that I be not defouled / so that I may serve the ever
with clean heart and mind / when her oryson was thus ended there rose suddenly a
great tempest in the sea that the ship all to braste and all that were within
perysshed save the lady that caught a capyll and saved her self. And the
master another of the ship. Nevertheless she knew not of him ne he of her
/ for they were driven to diverse costs. This lady la^ded in her own Empire
beside a nonery wherein she was worshyppely received / and she lived so holy a
life yt god gave her grace to heel seek folk of all manner of maladyes /
wherefore there came great people to her both crooked blind and lame / and
every man thrughe the grace of god and her holy prayer were heledc / wherefore
the name of her was all known thrughe diverse regyons Nevertheless she was not
known as Empress. In that same time the Emperors brother which had hanged
her before by y^ here was smyten with a foul lepre. The knight that slew the
earls daughter and put ye blody knyfe in her hand was blind defe and had the
palsye. The thief that betrayed her to the master of the ship was lame and
full of the crampe. And the master of the ship was dystraught out of his mind
/ wha^ the Emperor herd that so holy a woman was in such a nonry he said to
his brother thus. Goo we quod he dear brother unto this holy woman that is
dwelling in the nourye that she may hele the of thy lepre would god quod he
that I were heled. Anon the Emperor his own person went with his brother
toward the Nonery. And when that the Nones herd of his coming they
resceyued him worshypfully and with processyon. And than the Emperor inquired
of the pryoresse of any such holy woman were among them that could hele seek
folk of their maladyes. The pryoresse answered and said / that such one was
there. Than was the Empress called forth before the Emperor / but she muffled
her face as well as she could / that the Emperourt her husband should not
know her / and when she had so done. She salued him with great reverence as
perteyned unto his estate / and he again in like wise saying thus O go de lady
if the list of thy grace to hele my brother of his lepre Axe of me what thou
will and I shall grant it the for thy reward / when y^ Empress herd this
she looked about her and saw there the Emperors brother stood and was a foul
lepre. She saw also there ye knight yt slew ye Earls daughter blind and
defe. The thief yt she saved fro ye galowes lame and also the master of the
ship dystraught out of his mind and all were come to her for to be heled of
their sykenesse but they knew her not / for all ye they knew her not though
she knew them. Than said she unto the emperor thus my reverent lord though ye
would give me all your Empire I may not hele your brother nor none of these
other but if they knowelege openly what they have done / when yt Emperor herd
this he turned him toward his brother and said to him brother knowelege openly
thy sin before all these men that thou may be heled of sickness. Anon he
began to tell how he had lived his life / but he told not how he had hanged
the Empress in the foreste by the here / when that he had knoweledged all
that him list. The Empress said sothely my lord I would gladly lay unto him
my medycyne. But I wot right well it is in vain for he has not made a full
confession. The Emperor herynge this turned him toward his brother / and said
again in this wise what evil sorrow or unhappy wretchedness is in the feast
thou not that thou art a foul laser. Therefore knowelege truly thine sin
that thou may be hole / or else avoid my felawshyppe for ever. A lord quod
he I may not tell my life openly but if I be sure of thy grace / what have thou
trespaced against me quod the Emperor. His brother answered and said / mine
offense against the is grievous / and therefore I ask mercy. The Emperor
thought not of the Empress for as much as he supposed she had be deed many
years before / he bad his brother tell forth what he had offended him and he
should be forgyuen. And when the Emperor had thus forgyuen his brother he began
to tell openly how he had desired the Empres to sin with him / and how he
had hanged her by the here in the forest by cause she would not consent to
him. when the Emperor herd this almoost wretched creature ye vengeance of
god is fallen on yt and were not yt I have pardoned the thou sholdest dye the
foulest death that could be thought. Than said the knight that slew the earls
daughter. I wot not quod he of what lady ye meant / but well I wot yt my lord
found such a lady hangy^ge by y^ here in foreste and brought her home to his
castle and bytoke her his daughter in keeping / and I styrred her to syn^e
with me as much as I could but she would not consent / wherefore I slew the
earls daughter ye lay with her And when yt I had so done I put the blody knyfe
in the ladies hand yt ye earl should think she had slain his daughter with
her own hand / and than was she exyled thens but where she became wot I not.
Than said thief I wot never of what lady ye mean but well I wot y^ seven
sergeauntes were ledynge me to the galowes / and such a lady came riding by
and bought me of them / and than went I with her and afterward I betrayed her
unto a master of a ship Such a lady quod he received I. And when that we
were the mids of the sea I would have layne with her but she satte down to
her prayers / and anon there arose such a tempeste that the ship all to
braste and were all drowned save. I But what after yt befell on her wot I not.
Than ctyed the Empress with an high voice and said. Sothly dear friends ye
are now clean confessed / wherefore now will I lay to my medycyne / and anon
they received their health / when the lady had thus done she opened her face
unto the Emperor / and he knew her anon and ran to her and braced her in
his arms and kyssed her oftentimes / and for Joy wept bytterly saying thus.
Blyssed be god now have I found that I desired. And when he had thus said he
led her home unto his palyce with great Joy and after when god would be
pleased they ended their lives both in pease

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus christ The Empres betokens an holy
soul. The Emperors brother betokens yt flesh to whom our lord Ihesi:
christ has given charge of his Empire / but most pry^cipally to ye soul.
Netheles y^ wretched flesh often styreth ye soul to sin But the soul
which loves god above all thing withstandyth that temptacyon and calls to
her / her goostly power that is to say reason will understanding and
concyence and makes them to enpryson the flesh which is dysobedyent to the
soul in the prison of penance unto the time he obey unto reason in all
thing / and thus in hope of mercy he synneth again whom holy scripture say^ge
thus Maledictus homo qui peccat in spe. Cursed be that man yt synneth in hope.
And at the last the soul enclyneth to the flesh and lets him of the
prison of penance and wassheth him from the fylthe of sin and arayeth him
with good virtues and makes hymn lepe o^ the palfray of charity and so rydeth
he forth to mete our lord on Esterday. But alas for full often the sinner
trespaceth against the holy scripture wherefore the heart that is to say / the
lust of ye flesh and of sinners aryseth before him and after renneth great
hounds that is to say evil thoughts / and so long they chase till the body
and the soul be left alone / and than the flesh styreth that noble soul
the spouse of almighty god unto him. But the blyssed soul which is so
well-beloved with god will not forsake her lord and consent unto sin /
wherefore the wretched flesh full often dispoyleth her of all clothyne. This is
to say of all her virtues / and hangs her up by the here on an oak. That is
to say on lusts and delytes / and there she hangs unto the good e^le
comes. That is to say / a dyscrete confessoure come in the forest of this
world to preche and teache ye word of god and takes her down and ledeth her
forth to ye church to nourysshe his daughter. That is to say / to nouryce
concyence with works of mercy. The Earl had in his chamber a lamp Right so
every dyscryte confessoure or precher should have a fore him the lamp of holy
scripture where by he may see both the greuaunce and profit of the soul in
techynge of virtues and putting away of vices. The stuarde that styreth her to
sin / is not else but pride of life which is stuarde of this world / by
whom many me^ be deceived. But when the soul that is so well-beloved with christ
will not consent to the sin of pride / than takes this evil Stywarde the
knyfe of couetyse where with he sleeth the earls daughter / y^ is to say
concyence according to the scripture saying thus. Gold and silver has
blinded the eyes of Iuges and has overthrown wise men so that equity and
right wysnes might enter but stood a far and turned their backs. This lady
also boughte a man from hanging that is to faye from everlasting death
which had deserved by dedely sin. Therefore do we as did this lady / smite
we our horse that is to say our flesh with the spores of penance and soryde
we forth all have to save our neighbor from the gaious of deedly sin
helping them both bodily and goostly. as Salamon says woe to that man lyenge
in deedly sin that has no man to lift him out thereof. Therefore awake thy
neighbor and help him. For a brother that is helpen of an other there is
like a sure cite / and if he give no more but a cup of water unto him in way
of help he shall not lose his reward. But many now a days ben full unkind
as was this thief which deceived falsely his lady after that she had saved him
fro hanging. The master of the ship betokens the world by whom many men
ben beceyued. But nevertheless as often as a man takes on him wylfully the
charge of pouerte / and obeys unto the commandment of god and forsakes the
world. Than breketh the ship. For it is impossible to please both god and
man and the world at ones / when this lady had escaped the tempest of the sea
she went to a Nonery that is to say / to the soul after the troubles of this
world and went to the holy life. And the she heled all manner syke folk that
is to say every man yt is troubled in his soul y^ is to say Infecte with
diverse sekenesses which this lady heleth thrughe holy life. But ye soul
might not be seen of christ her husbo^de till she had knoweleged openly all
their.v. wits how she had spent them. But when she had made a pure confession
than y^ Emperor our lord god her husband knew her and took her in his arms
and led her home to ye palycs of paradyse. Unto ye which almighty Ihesu bry^ge
us al Amen.

IN Rome sometime there dwelled a mighty Emerour named Martyn which for love
kept with him his broders sone whom men called Fulgenctus with this Martyn
dwelled also a knight that was stuarde of his Empire and uncle unto the
Emperor which enuyed this fulgencius / and studied both day and night how he
might bry^ge ye Emperor and this child at debate wherefore the steward on a
day went unto yt Emperor and said. My lord quod he I which am your true
servant owe of duty to warn your highness if I here any thing yt touches
your honor wherefore I have herd such things yt I must need utter in
secret to your sordshyp between us.ii. Than said y^ Emperor. Good friend quod
he say what you list. My lord quoth the stuarde. Fulgencius your cosyn and your
nigh kynnesman has dyffamed you wonderly and shamefully thrughe all your Empire
saying yt your brethe stynketh ye it is death to him to serve you of your cup.
Than the Emperor waxed wroth and almoost out of hy^ self for very anger /
and said to him thus / I pray the good friend tell me the very troth if that
my breath so stynketh as he says. My lord quod the stuarde ye may believe me
for I perceived a sweter breath in my days. Tha said the Emperor I pray the
good friend tell me how I may bring this thing to preefe. The stuarde
answered and said. My lord ye shall right well understand y^ truth. For to
morrow next when he serves you of your cup ye shall se that he shall torn
away his face from you by cause of your brethe / and this is the most very
prefe that may be had of this thing. For soth^ said the Emperor a truer
proof can not be had of this thing / wherefore anon when the stuarde herd
this / he went to Fuigencius and took him a side saying thus. Dear friend thou
art my kynnesman / and neuewe to my lord the Emperor / therefore if thou
will conne me thank I will tell the of ye vice whereof my lord complayneth
often and thinks to put the fro him but if it be rather amended and that might
be great reprefe to the. Then said this Fulgencius. A good sir for his love
that dyed on the cross tell me why my lord is so meued with me / for I am
ready to amend my defaute in all that I may / and for to be ruled by your
cou^ceyll Thy brethe quod the stuarde stynketh sore that his drink does him
no good / so grievous unto him is the stynkynge of thy brethe. Than said
Fulgencius truly that perceived I never tylle now / but what thinks you of
my brethe. I pray you tell me yt truth. Sothely quod he it stynketh foul.
Nevertheless he byleued all that he said. This Fulgencius was right sorrowful
and prayed him of his council and help in this case. Than said the steward
if thou list for to do by my council I shall bring this matter to good
conclusyon. Therefore I counceyll for the best and also I warn the that when
thou seruest thy lord of his cup than torn away thy face from him that he
may not feel thy brethe till that time that thou haste provided the for sum
remedy. Fulgencius then was glad and swear that he would do by his
council. Not long after it befelle that the child served his lord as he was
wont to do. Suddenly he turned his face from the lord by the techynge of
the stuarde. And when ye Emperor perceived the broydy^ge of his head he smote
the child in ye breast with his foot saying thus. O thou rybaude now see I well
it is true that I have herd of the / and therefore go thou anon out of my
syghte that I se the no longer in my place / and with that the child wept
sore and voyded fro that place out of his sight / and when he had so done the
Emperor called unto him his stuarde / and said how may I put this rybaude fro
the world that has me thus me deffamed. My lord quod the steward right
well ye shall have your entente. For here beside within three leges ye have
break men which make the daily great fyres to brenne break. And also he make
lyme. Therefore my lord send to the^ this night and charge him upon pain of
death / that who so ever come to him first on the morrow saying to them thus
my lord commands you to fulfill his will that ye take hy^ and cast him in
the furneys with the stones / and this night command ye this Fulgence that
he goo erly in the morning to your werkemen and that he ask wheder that they
have fulfilled your will or none / and than shall they according to your
commandment cast him in the fire and thus he shall dye an evil death.
Sothely quod the Emperor thy counceyll is good. Therefore call to me that
Fulgencyus / and when this child was come the Emperor said to him thus. I
charge the upon death that thou rise erly in the morning and go to the brenners
of lyme and bryke and that thou be with them before sone rise three leges from
this house and charge them on my behalf yt they fulfill my commandment or
else they shall dye a myscheuous death (...) said this Fulgencius My lord / if
god send me life I shall fulfill your will though I should go unto the worlds
end / when Fulgencius had this charge he could not sleep for thought but yt he
must arise erly to fulfill the lords commandment. The Emperor about
mydnyght sent a messenger to his break makers on horsbacke co^mau^dy^ge them
upon pain of death y^ who so ever came to them first in the morning saying
to them the Emperors commandment which is before written yt they cast him in
ye fire and brenne hy^ in to yt bare bones. The brekemen said it should be
done. And than rode the messenger home again and told the Emperor that his
commandment should be done. Erly in ye morning following. Fulgencius arose
and arrayed him toward his way / he herd a bell ring wherefore he went to
that church for to here mass / and after the leuacyon he fell a sleep and
there he slepte a long while so that the priest ne none other man might awake
him. The steward desyryngs inwardly to here of his death and how he did and
about one of the clock he went unto the workmen and said thus. Syres quod
he have ye done my lords commandment or not / than said they nay sothely we
have not yet done his commandment but anon it shall be done and with that
they set hands on him. Than cried the steward and said good syres save my
life. For ye Emperor commanded that Fulgencius should be put to death / than
said they that told the messenger not us / for he badde who so ever come first
to us in the morning saying as it is written before that we should cast him in
ye furneyse / and brenne him to ashes and with that word they threw him in
to the fire and when he was burnt Fulgencius came and said good syres have ye
done my lords commandment / ye sothely said they / and therefore tell ye so
ye Emperor. Than said fulgencius. For cryste^ love tell me that commandment
/ we had in commandment said they on pain of death yt who so ever came to us
first in ye morning and said like as thou say that we should take and cast
him in to the fire. But before the came ye steward and therefore have we
fulfilled on him the Emperors commandment* and now he is burnt to the bare
bones / when Fulgencius herd this he thanked god that had saved him from death
and took his leave of the werkemen and went again unto the palace / when the
Emperor saw him he was almoost out of him self / and said / haste you ben
with the brekemakers and fulfilled my commandment. Sothely my gracyous lord
I have be^ there / but or I came your commandment was fulfilled. How said the
Emperor may that be true. Forsooth said Fulgencius the steward came unto them
as fore me and said that I should have said. And when they herd that they took
him and threw him in to the fire / and if I had come any rather so would
they have dove to me And therefore I thank god which has saved me fro death
Than said the Emperor / tell me quod he the troth of such things as I shall
ask the. As I believe quod Fulgencius yet found ye never in me no falshede.
And therefore I wondered why ye had ordained for me such a death. For well ye
know yt I am your broders sone. Than said the Emperor it is no wonder for yt
death thrughe cou^ceyll of the steward I ordained to the because you defamed me
through out all mine empire saying that my brethe stanke so bytterly that it was
death to the / and in token here of thou turn dest away thy face when thou
serve dest me of my cup and that saw I with mine eyes / and for this cause I
ordained for the such a death / and yet thou shalt deye but if I here a
better excuse. A my reverent lord quod Fulgencius if it might please you to
here me I shall tell you a subtle ymagynacyon. The stuarde yt now is deed came
to me and said yt ye told him yt my brethe stanke / and thereupon he counceyled
me yt when I served you of your cup yt I should turn away my face I take god
to wytnes I lie not. When yt emperor herd this he believed hy^ and said. O my
sone through the ryghtwyse Judgment of god y^ stuarde is burnt and his own
wyckednes and envy is fallen on himself / for he ordained this malice against
the / and therefore you art much bound to god that has saved the from death.

This Emperor betokens the prelates of the church And Fulgencius his neuew
betokens every good christian man which should duly and truly serve the
curate of his tythynges like as Fulgencius served the Emperor of his cup /
wherefore he shall begretly loved of god. This steward betokens every false
christian man too god as kayme / which often times turned the hertes of
ryghtwysse men from god / saying yt his breath stynketh. That is to say that
ye life of y^ prelate is not acceptable to god ne man against this scripture
saying saying thus. Nolite iudicare, etc. Deem ye not and be not demed. But
often times such malycyous people accuses ryghtwysse men / wherefore they shall
be cast in everlasting fire of hell where is waylynge wepy^ge and mesyry
without charity. And ryghtwysse men shall assende to everlasting life. Unto
the which bring us our lord Ihesu christ Amen.

THere dwelled in Rome amyghty Emperor named Delfynus which had no child
save a daughter a fair creature and greatly beloved of her fader. As this
Emperor walked on a day on hu^tynge in the forest suddenly he rode forth of
his way and lost his men / wherefore he was greatly dysconforted for he wyste
not whyther he rode ne in what place he was / till at ye last when had ryden
thus all the day alone / in the euynynge he saw an house and thither he rode a
great pace and knocked at the gate. Anon the good man of the house herd him
and asked ye cause of his knocking and what he would. Dear friend quod the
Emperor / lo it is night as ye may se therefore I pray you of lodging for the
love of god / when he had thus said the good man of the house unware y^ he was
the Emperor answered thus / and said. Good friend quod he I am ye emperors
foster and have plence of venyson and of other vytayles for you / when the
Emperor herd this he was right glad. Nevertheless he told him not y^ he
was Emperor / and than the foster opened the gate and received him as
worshypfully as he could and set him to his souper / and served hy^ honestly.
And when he had supped ye foster brought him to his chamber / and when time
was he went to bed. In that same time as it befelle the fosters wife was
traueylynge of child in another chamber by / and was delivered that same night
of a fair sone / and the Emperor lay in his bed slepy^ge he herd a voice
saying to him as hy^ seemed these words thryes / take / take / take / and with
that he a woke and meruayled what it might be. Saying thus to him self / a
voice byddeth me / take / take / take / what shall I take / and he fell a
sleep again / and the second time he hard a voice saying to him these words
/ yield / yield / yield / and with that he wokened and wondered gretely / saying
unto him self what may this be. First and formeste I herd a voice and that
said. Take / take / take / and no thing I received. And right now I did here
another voice and that said / yield / yield / yield / what should I yield I
wot never. And as he lay this thynkyngeto himself fell a sleep again and
than he herd the third voice say^ge these words thryes. Fle / fle / fle. For
this night is a child borne which after thy desease shall be Emperor / when
the Emperor herd this he wakened and wondered greatly what it might be. In the
morning erly following y^ Emperor arose and called to him the foster and said
/ dear friend I pray the y^ you wylt tell me if any child be borne this night
to thy knowelege. My wife quod the foster this night is delivered and has
borne a sone. I pray the said the Emperor show me thy sone / when the
Emperor had seen y^ child / he saw a token in ye childs vysage whereby he
myt know hy^ another time / and said to ye foster thus. Dear fren de know
you who am I. Nay sothly said the foster For I saw you never erste as I am
remembered. Nevertheless it seems ye ye should be gentle man. Than answered
ye Emperor and said I am quod he the Emperor your lord who me ye have lodged
this night wherefore I thank you much. This herynge ye foster fell down upon
his knees at his foot / and besought hy^ of mercy / and if he had offended his
highness in any thing prayed hy^ of forgyuenesse. Than answered the Emperor
and said dread the not for I thank ye hertely of thy good chere / and thy sone
which was borne to night I will have for to nourysshe and to morrow I shall
send for hy^ A lord quod the foster / it is not suffycient ye such a lord
should nourysshe the child of his servant. Nevertheless your will shall be
done. For when your messengers come I shall deliver them my sone / when this
was said ye Emperor took his leave and rode home toward his palace, And when
he was come home he called unto hy^ such servants as he trusted and said to
them thus. Do ye quod he unto my forstere with whom I was lodged this night
in the forest and receive of him his sone which his wife bare this night. And
upon a pain of death I command you ye ye slay him by the away / and cast his
flesh to the dogs but bring to me his heart with you. And but ye fulfill
my commandment ye shall dye the moest foulest dathe ye can bethought. Anon
his servants went to the foreste and received y^ fosters sone and brought
him with them. And wha^ they were come nere ye palace / one of them said. How
shall we do that we may fulfill our lords commandment in sleynge of this
child. Some answered and said that ye child should be slain / and some would
have saved his life And while they strofe thus among them self one of them ye
was most merciful said O good friends here my counceyll and ye shall not for
think it / if we murder this child Innocent we shall greatly offend our lord
god. Therefore here be young pigs slay we one of them and than we may here
with us his heart / and present ye Emperor therewith saying that it is the
heart of the child / and thus shall we not shede the chyldes blood. Than said
they thy counceyll is good. But what shall we do with the thylde. Good friends
quod he. Late us wrappe him in some clothes and lay him in some holowe tree /
for perauenture god would help him and save his life / when he had thus said
they did after his counceyll in all things and slew the pygge and went
their way and bare home with them the pigs heart to the Emperor / saying
thus to him. Loo gracyous lord we have slain the child / and with that they
showed him the pigs heart. The Emperor supposy^ge ye it had be the chyldes
heart and took it and kest it in to ye fire / dyspyteously say^ge. Lo ye is his
heart which should have been Emperor after me. Lo what it is to believe in
dremes and vysyons which be not else but fantasyes and vain things. The
second day after ye y^ child was put in the holowe tree / there came an Earl
to hu^te in ye forest / and as his hounds chased an heart / they came to the
holowe tree where the child lay / and when they felt the sauoure of the
child they would no ferder go. The Earl seeing this / meruayled gretely why
his hounds abode there / and smote horse we his spores and rode a great pase
till he came to them. And when he came unto ye tree where in the child was
closed and looked in at a hole / and found the child / and and than was he
right glad and took up the child in his arms full louyngely / and bare him
home unto his castle / saying to the countess his wife. Lo my dear wife this
day by fortune I have frunde a full fair child in an holowe tree as I hunted
in the forest whereof I am right glad. And by cause that I gate never sone ne
daughter on the / ne thou never yet conceived child therefore I exorte ye that
thou will feyne thy self trauaylynge of chyl and say ye thou have borne this
child The councesse fulfilled we gladness / and said my lord your will
shall be done. Not long after tidings went thorughe all that country that
ye Countess was delivered of a fair sone / wherefore they made great Joy. The
child began to wax / and was right well beloved of every man / and specially
of the earl and of the Countess. It befell after when the child was. xv. year
old the Emperor made a solemn feast to all his lords unto the which this
Earl was called / and at the day assygned came and brought ye child which
was that time a fair squyre and carved at the board before the Earl The
Emperor beheld him gretely and espied the token in forheede that he had
seen before in the Fosteres house / wherefore he was gretely meued within him
self / and said unto the Earl in this wise / whose sone is this quod the
Emperor. Sethely said the Earl he is my sone. Than said the Emperor, by the
faith and truth ye thou o west to me tell me the truth. The Earl seeing
that he might not excuse him by no wise but that he must needs tell / than
told he him all together how he found him in ye forest in an holowe tree. This
hery^ge ye Emperor almoost waxed out of him self and called to him his
servants which ye he had sent before to slay that child. And when they
came he made them to swear on a book that they should tell the troth what they
had done with ye child. Good lord said they we put us unto thy grace for
without doubt pity so meued us that we might not slay him wherefore we put
him in an holowe tree / but after ward what befelle on him sochly we know not
and in his stead we slew a pygge and brought you the heart thereof / when the
Emperor had herd the verey truth of this matter / he said unto the Earl.
This young man quod he shall abide here with me. The Earl y^ granted though
it were gretely against his will. And when ye feast was ended / every men took
his leave at the Emperor and went whyther than them list And that time as it
fortuned the Empress and her daughter solourned in a great country thens by
the commandment of the Emperor. It berelle not long after the Emperor
called unto him that young squire and said. The behooves quod to ride unto the
Empress my wife with my letters. All ready my lord said he I am fer to fulfill
your will. Anon the Emperor let write letters whereof the entente was this.
That the Empress should take the berer of these letters and let him be
drawn at an horses tail / and after that she should let him be hanged till
he were deed / and that upon pain of death / when the letters were all made and
sealed than the Emperor took them unto ye young squire co^maundynge him to
speed him her Journey. And anon the child received them gladly and put them
sure in a box / and rode forth upon his Journey / when he had ryden three days
or four on his Journey in the euentyde he came unto a castle where as a
knight dwelled and prayed him mekely of a nyghtes lodging. The knight seeing
and beholdynge the good favor of this young Squyr / he granted him lodging
and made him good chere and well to fare and afterward brought him unto his
chamber. And wha^ he was there he went to bed and anon was on sleep for he
was right weary of his Journey and forgate his box with the letters lyenge open
in his chamber / when the knight saw the box he opened it and found the
letters sealed with the Emperors sign manuell / and was gretely tempted for
to open them. And at the last he opened them subrylly and then he read how
the Empress upon pain of death should put the berer of them unto the death /
and than he was right sorrowful and said within him self. Alas quod he it is
great pyre for to slay such a fair young man / and therefore if I may it shall
not be so. And anon the knight scraped away that writing and wrote in the
same paper a letter saying these words. Upon pain of death I command the
that thou take the young squire berer of these letters and let medde him
without any delay unto my daughter and youres with all the honor and
solempnyte that ye can / and when that they be wedded / that ye take him in
honor and worship him as your own sone. And that he keep my place till I
come to you my self / when the knight had thus written he closed the letters
subtylly and put them in the box again. Erly in the morning the chyl de
arose and took his leave of ye knight and rode forth in his Journey / and came
the third day to the Empress and saluted her worshypfully in the Emperors
behalf / and t^ke her the letters / and when thempresse had read them / anon
she sent her messengers thrughe ye court co^mau^dynge the gentylmen to come
to her daughters wedding at a certain day assygned / when y^ day was come
theder came many great lords / and anon this child wedded the Emperors
daughter with great honor and worship accordy^ge to the tenoure of the letters
/ and was right well beloved and most honored among the people. Not long
after it befell that the Emperor came into that country / when the Empress
herd of her lords coming. She took with her her sone in law with much
other people / and went against the Emperor to welcome him when the Emperor
saw this child ledynge the Empress his wife he was gretely meued with him
self / and said. O thou cursed woman for thou haste not fulfilled my
commandment thou shalt dye an evil death. A lord quod she all yt ye
commanded to do I have fulfilled. Nay cursed woman it is not so for I wrote to
the yt thou sholdest put him to death and now I se hy^ alive. My lord quod she
safe your grace ye wrote to me ^ I should give him your daughter to wife / and
yt on pain of death. In witness whereof lo here is your seal and your letters
with your own seal. When the Emperor herd this he wondered greatly and said
is he wedded tha^ to my daughter ye sothly said ye empress long agone with
great solempnyte / and as I believe your daughter is with child. Than said the
Emperor. O you lord Ihesu it is great folly to strive against thine ordinance
/ therefore sith it is so thy will must ^e fulfilled / and with y^ he took his
sone in law in his arms and kyssed him which after his death was Emperor
and ended his life in rest and pease.

This Emperor may betoken herod or else every sinner which walks alone
without truth / tylle he come to the fosters house. That is to say ye
church which is ye house of god. This herod would have slain this child.
Ihesu / wherefore he sent messengers to seek him according to the scripture of
saint Mathewe telling how he commanded the three kings to seche him and
bring him tydy^ges again where he was ye he might come and worship him / but
this said he not for love but for dysceyte. The foster betokens Joseph our
ladies husbonde which kept him / but when the messengers came. That is to
say wha^ ye three kings came they slew him not but on their knees worshypped
him and left him in the holowe tree of his god head. The Earl that came and
found this child. Betokens the holy ghost which warned Joseph by the
angel in his sleep that he should take our lday and her sone and flee in to
the land of Egypt. This moralyte may be understand in other. This Emperor
may betoken a sinner that walks in the forest of this world sechy^ge vanytes
/ and not else unto the time he come unto ye house of god and there he is
receyned benyngnely of ye prelate of the church if he will obey ye
co^man^dementes of god. But many of us now a days slepeth in ye church wha^
they observe not ye works of mercy. And therefore they ought to dread ye voices
which I have ^^hersed by ye first take y^ may be understand y^ great benefyte
y^ he gave the wha^ he put in the a soul made at his own symylytude. The
second take is vn^stonde ye sone of the fader of heaven / which was borne of
ye blyssed and holy virgyn mary. By ye third take is vn^sto^de ye same sone of
god which dyed upon ye cross. By ye first yield is to vn^sto^de ye we ought
to yield our soul unto almighty god as clean / and as fair as he gave it unto
us after the washing of our baptyme. By the second yield is for to
understand that we ought daily to yield honor / and worship and love unto
god. The third yield is understand that we yield to him true confession /
contrycyon and satysfaccyon. The first Flee betokens sin which we should
flee. The second betokens the world that we should flee for the great
fallsehede and temptacyons that is therein. The third flee betokens
euerlasty^ge pain which we ought to flee through ^erytory works by ye which
we may come ye rather to everlasting Joy. Unto ye which bring us our lord
Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Sauracinus which
ordained for law that who so ever rauysshed a vyrgy^ should dye / and if she
were rescued / than he that rescued her should have her to wife if him list /
and he would not wedde her than should she gyded and be wedded by his
counceyll. It befelle upon a day that a tyrant named Poncianus had rauysshed
a vyrgyn and led her with him to a forest and defloured her of her maydenhode.
And wha^ he had so done he would have slain her / and as he was despoylynge
her clothes there came riding by that foreste a gentyl knight which herd y^
cryenge of a damoysel. Therefore he smote his horse with his spores and rode a
great pase into the foreste to wit what it might be. And then he saw a
woman standing naked save her smock / and than said the knight art thou now
she quod he that cried so. Than answered the maid and said ye sothely quod
she / and this man that stands here has rauysshed me and defoyled my
maydenhode and now he would slay me / and therefore he has dyspoyled me of my
clothes that he might smite of mine head / for the love of god gentle knight
help me now than said the tyrant. She lies quod he for she is my wife and I
have found here in auoutry with an other man and therefore I will slay her.
Than said the knight I byle ue better the woman than the / for lo the tokenes
of troth appears openly in her vysage that thou have rauysshed her and
therefore will I fight with the for her delyueraunce. And anon they sterte
together and fought egrely till they were both sore wounded. Nevertheless the
knight opteyned the vyctorye and put the tyrant to the flight. Than said the
knight unto the woman Loo I have suffered for thy love many sore wounds and
have saved the from the death will thou thou therefore be my wife. That I
desired quod she with all my heart and thereupon I take you my truth when she
was thus ensuered the knight than said / here beside is my castle / go ye
thither and abide there tylle I have besyted my friends and my kynnesmen to
provide for all thing nedeful for our wedding. For I purpose to make a great
feast for thyn honor and worship. My lord quod she I am ready to fulfill
thy will. Theme went she forth to the castle where as she was worshypfully
received. And the knight went unto his friends to make him ready against the
day of marriage. In the mean wyle came Poncianus the tyrant to ye knights
castle and prayed her that he might speak with her. Than came she down from
the castle to him. This tyrant subtylly flatered her and said. Gentle love
if it list you to consent to me I shall give you both gold and silver and
great richesse and I shall be your servant and ye my souereyne / when the
woman herd this / dysceyued she was thrughe his flaterynge and granted him to
be his wife and took him in with her in to ye castle. It was not long after
but that this knight came home and found the castle gate shyt and knocked
thereat / but long he was or he might have answer / and at the last the
woman came and demanded why he knocked so herd Than said he. O dear lady have
y^ changed so sone my love / let me come in. Nay sothly said she you shalt
not come here for I have here we me my love which I loved before. Remember y^
quod the knight yt you gave me thy truth to be my wife / and how I saved the
from death / and if you ponder not thy faith behold my wou^des which I have
suffered in my body for the love. And anon he unclothed him self naked save
his breche ye he might show his wounds openly / but she would not se them ne
speak more we hy^ but shyt fast the gate and went her way / wha^ the knight
saw this he went to the Justice and made his complaynte praynge hy^ to give
ryghtwys Judgment on this tyrant and this woman. The Judge called them before
him / and when they were come this said this knight. My lord quod he I ask
the benefytes of the law which is this / if a man rescue a woman from
rauysshynge the rescuer shall wedde her if him list. And this woman delivered I
fro the hands of ye tyrau^te. Therefore I ought to have her / and forthermore
she gave me her truth and faith to wedde me. And thereupon she went to my
castle / and I have done great cost against our weddy^ge / and therefore as it
seems me she is my wife as by ye law. Tha^ said the Judge unto ye tyrau^t. Thou
know well ye this knight delivered her from thy hands and for her love
suffered many smerte wou^des and therefore well you wotest ye she is his wife by
ye law y^ ye hy^ list. But after her delyuerau^ce we flater y^ge speech you
have dysceyued her / therefore this day I Judge ye to he hanged. Than said the
Judge to ye woman in like wise. O woman you know how this knight saved y^
from death and thereupon you tokest hy^ thy faith to be his wife / therefore by
two reasons you art his wife / first by the law / and after by thy faith. This
notwithstandy^ge y^ consented afterward to y^ tyrant and brought him in to
the knights castle and shyt the gate against the knight and would not se his
wounds which he suffered for thy love / and therefore I Iugeye to be hanged and
so it was done / both the rauyssher and she that was rauysshed were dampened
to the death / wherefore every man praised the Judge for his ryghtwys Judgment.

This Emperor betokens the fader of heaven which ordained for law that if
the ioul^ of man were rauysshed from god by sin / the sauer of the soul
should wedde hy^ if him list. The woman that was rauysshed betokens the
soul of man which was rauysshed by sin of our fore fader Adam and led out
of Paradyse and led in to the foreste of this wretched world by the tyrant
poncyanus which betokens the devil and he not only defloured her but by
lesynge of heritage of heaven / but also he would slay her with everlasting
pain. But the soul cries with an high voice / whose cry our lord Ihesu
cyrste herd. This cry was made wha^ Adam cried after oil of mercy. And
patriarchs and prophets cried for remedy saying O thou highness of the Eest
and so for the vysyte thou us. etc. The knight betokens our lord Ihesu
christ which came from heaven and faught with the tyrant / that is for to
sayethe devil / and both they were sore wounded. For our lord Ihesu Christ
was wounded in his flesh / and the devil in his lordshyppe / wherefore the
woman / that is to say the soul gave her truth unto almighty god when that
she became crystened saying that I forsake the devil and all his pride / and
believe in god the fader almighty. Than ordained our lord Ihesu a marriage
between him and her with the seven secramentes of ye church whereof may be made
a strong castle against the devil. Also our lord commanded ye soul to
keep her still in ye castle of virtue till he went unto his friends to provide
ye was nedeful / that is to lay our lord Ihesu on the assencyon day
assended to heaven to array for her a dwelling place of everlasting Joy where
as we should dwell after the day of dome with our lord god in honor and
glory. But alas in the mean time came the devil and begyled the wretched
soul by a deedly sin and so he entered in to the castle of our heart which
should be the castle of god. The knight Ihesu knocked at the gate of our heart
accordy^ge to this scripture. ^^cce sto ad hostium et pulso. Lo I stand at the
door and knock / if any man will open that I may enter in / but where the
devil is / god may not enter but if the sinner will receive him by penance /
which seeing the gentle Ihesu showed him self naked hanging on the cross
that we may se his blody wounds which he suffered for us that we sinners
should be the rather myndefull of his lone. For from the crown of his heed
unto the sole of his feet / was left none place hole place. Therefore says ye
prophet Ysaye. Attendite et videte si est dolor sicut dolor meus / etc. Byholde
and se if any sorrow be like my sorrow. Therefore is he a wretched man ye will
not be converted for all this unto his lord god but lies still in deedly
sin / wherefore when he is called before the high Inge he shall be dampened to
everlasting death. Therefore study we to open ye door of our hertes with
merytory works unto almighty god / and than without doubt we shall opteyne
everlasting life. Unto the which bry^ge us our lord Ihesu which have mercy
on us Amen.

Thus ends the book of Gesta Romanorum. Empry^ted at London in Fleet street.
By me Wynkyn de Word.:


