THE HONEST Lawyer.

ACTED BY The QVEENES Majesty's SERVANTS.

WRITTEN By S. S.

-- leuis esse videtur
Fabula, quae posci vult, and spectata reponi.
LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for Richard Woodroffe, and are to be sold
at his Shop near the great North-dore of Paul's, at the sign of the gilded
Key. 1616.

THE HONEST LAWYER.
Act. Prim.
Enter Vaster weapon'd. A Cuckold? why now it is a common name,
As the shee-Gossip^ are that give it us.
Why does it not derive, and spread it self.
To all the generations we produce?
Why should not every child of mine be called
Cuckold, as well as Vaster, Woman, woman
Thou sad vndoer of the fairest building,
That ever earth bragged to be pauement to.
Man, Man; the pride of heavens creation,
Abstract of Nature, that in his small volume
Contains the whole worlds Text, and heavens impression:
His Makers Image, Angels mate, Earths great wonder,
Made to guide all, by woman is brought under.
That harmony, fair Nature made to stand,
Is forced out of tune by woman's hand.
A woman has deformed me. See, I look
Like any beast has horns: an Ass may boast
Himself a horne-lesse Gentleman before me.
Yet let not clouds of passion choke my reason.
Why? what is a Cuckold? let us see: define him:
It is a man, whose wife plays the whore. Zilid, what is that to him? It is all
one, as if a proper Gentleman should ride on a halting Jade; or a good Musician
play on a broken fiddle. Oh but it will be said: Woman could not be so light a
ship, if her husband could well ballast her. It is his insufficiency. A pox
it is. Had she Hercules to her husband, she would enter the listes with some
crinkle-hamm'd tilting Courtier. Well then,

I see no reason, that a woman's evil,
Should thus transform man to a horned devil,
No: 'twas Acteons lusts, and not his wife,
That so bestagg'd him. Hence sprouts al my shame.
Fuller of truth then age, thi^ rule has been:
" Nothing deformes a man, but his own sin.
Enter Robert Vaster. Rob. Sir, my mother prays --


Vast. No more of her. Her prayers.
Are putrid sacrifices: like foul airs,
Too thick to mount up to yon glorious feeling.
" When black hands are reared up, heaven has no feeling.

Rob. She is your wife, my mother, Sir.


Vast. What then Sir?


Rob. Nothing, but that you wrong her, o my conscience.


Vast. Oh it is a brave Puritan-world, when boys talk of conscience! Conscience
must lie at the stake, when they play but at blow-point. Sirrah, as you love
your Conscience, hate a wife. Zlid, if I thought thou would marry, I would
vnblesse thee, as I have disinherited thee already: Get bastards, as I would
have got thee. A woman may serve to lie withal: none good enough to marry.


Rob. Oh were you not my father, I would let
This passion out of your impostum'd heart --
Why should not I forget, that your blood moves
In any veins of mine; when you forgo
The reason of a father, husband, man?
And stick degeneration on your name?
If I sail ill, know your example steered
My voyage and my vessel. Fathers are more
Then private men: their lives are the set copies.
Their children write by; and should there give
Their imitation patterns how to live.
Hell's a sad place, they say: -- Oh, I Will dare never
To follow my own father leading thither.
Exit Rob.
Vast. Sir, call your mother. This boy's a Puritan.
I that had nere loved my self to be thought good,
Am highly pleased to see it in my blood.
From whom deriues this sprigge such fruitful juice;
The father being bad, the mother worse.
Sure, he did suck this goodness from his Nurse.
Poor boy, my riot has undone thee: poor
You Are made by me, I by a wife turned whore.
My state is morgag'd to the vsurous hand
Of Gripe: my goods are wasted: all my hopes life
Breathes thus: having sold all, I Will sell my wife.
Enter Vasters wife and Robin. Y' are welcome, Looseness.


Rob. Looseness Sir? Oh hell!
She is my mother; pray you, use her well.

Vast. Be gone.


Rob. I cannot Sir.


Wife. Good son, a way.
A father gives command.

Rob. I must obey.

Exit. Rob.
Vast. Make much of you? I will, I will. Never man made more of his wife, when
he sold her to her smock. I Will sell thy flesh too Gypsey.


Wife. Dear husband, I am yet clear; Oh do not you
Force me to sin, I Will be for over true.

Vast. True? true to the brothell, to the spittle, to the grave.
Thou art deaths agent: a whore is one of his Beadles.

Wife. Heaven pardon your black slanders.


Vast. Come, I Am poor.


Wife. Who made you?


Vast. Thou, my content, turned whore.


Wife. I Will work, or beg for you.


Vast. No, thou have wrought
Too much already. Here, here is thy work.
points to her. Will thou do one thing?

Wife. Any thing.


Vast. Then swear.
And keep thy oath. I Will travel to the wars,
And turn thee up, as some Captains wont; and try,
If thou can live by thy old trade, or die.

Wife. Will you forsake me then?


Vast. Yes, and am just.
Since thou forsook'st me, and thine innocence,
Be thy reward proportioned I must hence.
Whiles thou wast good, to thee I had free desire.
Now thou art proved a whore receive thy hire.

Wife. Take place, thou tyrant will. Thick woes here houer.
My state is lower then fate can recover.
My obedience waits your pleasure.

Vast. Hoh, within there.
Enter Mistress Marre-maide, Bawd. Aunt Marre-maid I have brought you the
girl
I promisd. Is the money ready?

Marm. By that little honesty I have to swear by; a handsome wench. I must pay
fifty pound for her: but if she were as young, as fair, I would get five
hundred pound by her within this month.


Vast. Aunt, pray' use her well: she is my own sister.

Be petula^t you whore, sprightly frollick -- as a Dutch Tanikin. -- or -- This
woman is a Bawd, a very Bawd; you like her the better for that. Come, skippe
about, quick silver: Dance like a Curtesan, or I Will fiddle ye. You have more
tricks in private, then a Fencer can teach a Lord, or the devil a Fencer.
Life, do you pule? I must have fifty pound for you: Do y' hear? Let your
heels caper, and your tongue grow wanton, or by these horns I Will gore you --
Aunt, she is somewhat sick of that rare disease, called Modesty. But in private
she is more insatiate then a Puritan.


Marm. How old are you, fair sister?


Vast. Not sixteen.


Wife. About some six and forty.


Vast. Oh you Witch -- Aunt, she lies eight and twenty, at least

Hark ye sister, --
Please this old Hagge, make her believe y' are right,
And answerable to her Stygian spells:
Or I will bear thee to an Army, and there
Ha'thy sod flesh sold, lent; and prestituted,
And my self Cuckolded forty times a day.
Leave this forced so bernesse -- Aunt, will you hear her speak?

Wife. I can skippe lighter then the wanton Do,
And ierke it through the Dale,
I cannot hold, neither my tongue, nor heels,
(Nor nails from scratching out a Leachers eyes)
Sure, I am composd most of the nimbler elements:
But little water in me, far less earth, some air,
To keep me humid, mutable, and tender,
And apt for conuolution: but their mixture
Is scarce discernible, the are so dispersed.
For my predominant quality is all fire,
Pure, radiant, subtle fire.

Vast. I have often seen a couple of light heels
Carry a sober head: a woman's tongue
Read lectures of civility; her face
A printed book, each dimple a sweet line,
That does to good the Readers eye incline,
Never till now a body forced to do,
What the poor mind loathes to consent unto.
She danceth weeping, laughes and sighs in pain.
So I have seen (me thinks) Sunshine in rain.

Marm. Enough, I long to employ her. Cousin, here is the money. She Is mine. What Is
your name?


Vast. Florence.


Marm. Florence. I like the name well.

Its a good lucky name to make a whore on. You Will stay with me, Florence.


Wife. Till you are weary of me. I Will but take leave of my brother, and follow
you.

Exit Marmaid.
Vast. What with me?


Wife. Am I not worthy of one kiss?


Vast. There -- now be gone.


Wife. Be gone? Death could not speak a word more fatal.
Yet one more -- so now farewell --
Unjust -- unkind -- my woe-diuining heart.
By this we first embraced, by this we part.
Exit Wife.
Vast. I am a villain, but she makes me weep.
Why do I think she is false? I never saw't.
Tut, all bells ring that tune. It is too true.
I told her that this fifty pound should carry me to the wars;
But I have a battle to fight ere I go.
Old Gripe that has the morgage of my lands,
Lies sick of the Gout, and seldom stirs abroad.
Some of that race I Will kill, or leave my own life
In pawn I would have done 't. I have challenged
Benjamin Gripe the son, whom the world calls
The Honest Lawyer. He comes.
Enter Benjamin Gripe. You Are the son of a villain.


Ben. If I were, I could not help it.


Vast. Thy selfe's a villain.


Ben. Its a rank lie.


Vast. Lie? Thou exasperatst
One mad already, that would have hazard heaven
To make this earth drunk with thy blood.

Ben. Its dear, so bought. It Will not redeem your soul.
Say, with deep sluices, all these lively springs,
That run through the soft channels of my veins,
Should be exhaust by thee, or thine by me,
And burning malice should be quenched in blood:
He that speeds best, wins what he should abhor,
And glories to be cursed a conqueror.

Vast. Let Sophisters alone with these distinctions.
Our moderators are our swords: the question,
That calls us forth, as warlike disputants
Beyond decision of the gowne-furr'd peace.
Draw then thy argument, and let us talk indeed.
We cannot reason soundly, till we bleed.

Ben. Let Us think the terms, on which we venture blood.
Th'ffects are weighty, let the cause be good.

Vast. Thy father has undone me, and mine issue.
The law affords no succor: what remains,
But only to let him bleed through thy veins?

Ben. How have I wronged thee?


Vast. Ask no more. The State
Of our strife is, thou art his Son, I hate.

Ben. No help? let fury arbitrate the rest.
This passion must but center in one breast.
Yet let us embrace, and pardon; and even love
In hate. O suffer not the dying blood
To prejudice the sad suruiuours good.
They fight. Enter Curfew the Abbot.
Curf. What unexpected clangor frights the peace
Of my delighted solitary walks?
What sons of mischief in their fury tread
These unfrequented paths? -- stay -- hold.
My sons, hear age but speak; wisdom is old.

Vast. Peace, Dotard.


Curf. On my knees, which doubling age
Has scarce left able to support my corpse:
By the remaining tears of forty years
Spent in this penitential order: the last drops,
The drying hand of age has left to dew
This witherd garden: I implore -- beseech.

Vast. Father, you speak to rocks, or the surd waves.


Curf. Then on this innocent bosom turn your swords,
And ease a weak soul of her tedious portage,
Some hour before her time. O do not fly me.
Let the few drops of my slow-pacing blood,
That stands in my cold channels, expiate yours.
Oh let a falling trunk redeem two plants.
sight still. No remedy? let me exclaim for help.
(The devil part you:) if I should now ha'paid for my charity -- well: it was
this Church-coate that saved me.

Exit crying help.
Vast. Oh thou have slain me: hold thy conquering hand.
Heavens, you are too just pay-masters. Thy sword,
With a fate-sign'd direction, has cut short
My hoped fortunes in a longer breath.
But I forgive thee. Fly -- stay.
I have two Orphans in this hour deprived
Of a bad Parent. For their mother -- nothing.
She has a trade to live on. O let my dying breath
Beg this one mercy at thy bloud-staind hands:
Relieve them with now thine, once their own lands.

Ben. Forgive my deed, and by that mercy, I
Depend on for my sins; my mercy shall
Raise up the children for the fathers fall. Farewell.

Vast. He Is gone. Now up again. My wounds
Exit Ben. Are slight, yet through their windows, hear I breath
Out all my malice. Noble youth, I love thee.
How little of thy father have thou in thee!
Now for some strange disguise, till time I find,
To pleasure him that was to me thus kind.
Exit. Enter Valentine.
Valen. Well, I see there is no living in London, The four winds have conspirde
to blow all the villainy of the world thither. When I returned from my short
travel, I inquired, for the knot of my old companions. But like an old Lady,
that has much vsd painting, how suddenly are they broken! I heard of three or
four in Bedlam. Five or six in Bridewell. Half a score in the Counter. a whole
dozen at Tyburne. But Oh, numbers, numbers, under the hands of Barber-Surgions.
Some turned Squires to a Brothell. Others walk Newgate lane. Some cheating in
Ordinaries. Others prigging in crowds. And the rest, either swomme over sea, or
drowned upon a hill. Well, I do not like these proceedings; there be so many
rubbes. I could now beg in Dutch, but its no speeding language. Now my
villainy fails on the sea, I Will try what cheates the land has to work on. I
learned some scuruie medicines of our Surgion of the ship: and had no sooner set
up my bills in Bedford here; but a Goutie cure comes halting to me. Fifty
pounds I must have to heal him. Five and twenty I have in pawn: for the
rest, I Will leave it with the next Quacksaluer, that with more skill shall do
him as little good.

Enter Gripe halting, Nice and Thirsty.
Grip. Cousin Nice, and my man Thirsty.


Thirst. Shall I fetch you some drink, Sir?


Grip. No. Thy mind runs all oth' pot.


Thirst. So 't had need, for you keep me Thirsty, spite of my teeth.


Gripe. Go you two to the vnder-Sheriffe; and bid him by virtue of this
morgage, give you possession of Vasters lands. The beggarly slave has broken
with me, and I Will take the forfeit. Go quick, quick. I will not lose an hour.


Nic. I Will but go to the Church for a little holy water --


Grip. Be drowned in holy water.


Nic. No, but a little sprinkled Sir. We shall have the better success in our
business.


Grip. I pree thee good Nice, dispatch, dispatch.


Their. I, come, come master Nice. There Is good licour it h' house. You may
sprinkle your throat with that. Its better then holywater.


Nic. One thing Sir. I do not like going to day. Sure it is not a luckie time.
For the first Crow I heard this morning, cried twice. This Even, Sir, is no
good number.


Grip. Pox of Crows and numbers. If thou had given her a piece of carrion,
she would have cried again. Away.


Nic. I go, Sir -- stay, what if there be a Raven about the ground?
Shall we then take possession? Oh it is an unlucky bird.

Grip. Why, let her croke the downfall of his house.
What Is that to me? prithee good Nice make haste.

Nic. Nay, too much haste will make one stumble: and that's no good sign.


Grip. Now, Valentine, Have all things ready? how now -- again?


Nic. A toy comes in my head.


Valen. Pox of that head: more toys yet?


Ni. How if a Catte sits on the Buttry hatch? Thou we'st proceed no further. My
Grandam told me that a Cat sitting on the hatch, was an ill sign.


Grip. Mew. Beat her off, dash out her brains. Good Nice be not so curious.


Ni. Oh Sir, it is good doubting the worst.

Exeunt Nice. Their.
Grip. Are all things ready, Valentine? this fool troubles me worse then the
gowte.


Val. Sir, the remedy is very painful. I could give a tedious course of
physic, worse then any sickness. Keep you fasting sixteen days together,
save the diet I give you. Bind you to the post of patience every day ten
hours; and have one still pour scaulding water on you: purge your very heart
out: send your eyes out of their holes, to see how your feet do: make your
guts bark worse, then an hundred dogs at a beare-bayting. But my medicine
is sharp and short, but passing sure. Sir, there be four kinds of gowte.


Gripe. No more of kinds. There Is no gowte kind to any man, I think, but to
Physicians. Your remedy short-short.


Val. Sir, nothing: specially of no cost. Do y' see this ten-penny nail?


Gripe. Yes: What of that?


Val. This nail I must drive through your great toe.


Grip. What? through the bone?


Val. Yes, bone and flesh too.


Grip. Oh-oh-giue me my money. This medicine's worse then any gowte. Oh good
Valentine, your tent's too long -- too long.


Val. Then sit and rot: be racked still, I Will be gone.


Grip. Nay, good Valentine: would not a sixe-penny nail serve?


Val. You Will be Physician, will you? If you will sit down and be cured, so: if
not, farewell.


Grip. Nay, good Valentine: -- even do thy will.


Val. Endure it manfully. It Is but a brunt -- so. nails him. You shall sit but
a quarter of an hour, till I have been at the Apothecaries, and then I Will loose
you. Now farewell, gowty fool, Thou took'st no purge, yet have a most sharp
stool. Pray heavens, this kill him not. Well, let him sit. he takes away his
purse with his keis And this shall go with me. I pray Sr take your case. This
plot has took; try if some new may hit.

Exit Val.
Grip. Come-come-Valentine. Oh-neuer was man so far in my bonds, as I am in
this Physicians. H' has nayl'd me to him. That every whore in London, were but
in my case now. Why Valentine --

Enter Nice panting. Thirsty. Oh he is come. How now? are you returned? where is
my morgage? out Villains, where is my morgage? Oh my toe -- oh my morgage. I Am
undone.


Thirst. Me thinks you are too fast, Sir.


Ni. Plague of you and your morgage. Oh my heart-it beats so, that it has broke
my buttons. I would not be so frighted again to be made your heir. puff.


Grip. What Is the news Thirsty? what, what, good Thirsty?


Their. Let me undo you Master.


Grip. No, not till I hear of my morgage. What Is the matter? oh --


Ni. The matter? I would not have such another cross, for all the crosses in
your purse.


Grip. What? oh -- what? Is my morgage safe? Has the vnder-Sheriffe done a
miracle, and played the honest man? what good Thirsty?


Thirst. Nothing Sir, but a Hare crossed the way; and he, poor timorous
soul, durst go no further for fear of sprights.


Grip. Oh rogues, pernicious villains, you conspire to cousen me: get out the
nail, Thirsty. Hares, and Ravens, and Devils.

Enter Benjamin.
Ben. Who has abused you thus Sir? could you be so credulous, to think this a
receyte good for the Gout? Sir, give me leave to help you.


Grip. Do, good Ben. but not in this, Ben. not in this. Oh my morgage man, my
morgage -- run. I shall lose a days fruits of my morgage.


Ben. Come Sir, respect your health above your gain.
I would not for your wealth have half your pain.
loses him. Go in Sir, get some broth, look to your wound.
Your morgage leave to me, I Will keep that sound.

Grip. Take my cousin Nice with you. Come Thirsty, help Thirsty.


Ben. Now for some cleanly trick to shift my hands
Exit. Of this same shallow superstitious fool.
Now cousen, I Am sure you are not without an Erra Pater in your pocket. They
say this is like to be a very strange year.


Nice. Most strange, and full of preposterous, prodigious, turbulent, dismal,
fatal, amazing, terrifying --


Ben. Bless us. What?


Nic. Wonders. The effects whereof will appear in risings, partly biformed, and
partly circular, on men's forheads, and women's mountains.


Ben. Is there no sad mortality to ensue?


Ni. Yes, my Almanacke speaks of a most fearful pestilence, especially to
happen amongst Tailors and Gold-end-men.

There Is a statute-lace shall undo them ifayth. A Taylours Bill shall be no more
so deadly as the plagues.


Ben. Sirrah Nice, I had a dream to night.


Nic. Passion of my heart! a dream? what? I do not like these dreams.


Ben. I Will tell thee what. Me thought, my troubled fancy
Led me into a Garden proudly decked
With Natures glory, and the sweetest flowers,
That ere my breath sucked up: where the green grass
Tempted my sleepy spirits to soft repose.
There came, me thought, a friend (dead now long since)
And shook me by the hand, and questioned me
Of many sad events, whose conference
So vexed me that I woke. Why stand'st amazed?
Thou will not leave me Coz.

Nic. Yes, and you were ten Cousins. Dream of a garden, and green rushes, and
a dead friends salutation? Cousin, make your will, be ruled and make your will:
you cannot live.


Ben. Will thou be a fool of fate? who can
Prevent the destiny decreed for man? I Will on.

Nic. So will not I. Good Coz, I leave you to your destiny. The next news I
hear, the Lawyer's a dead man. Dreams quoth a! and he will not believe a
dream, he is an Infidel. One night I dreamed that I found gold at a play. Next
day I came thither, slatter'd with these hopes. Zlid, before the Prologue had
done, I had lost my purse.

Coz* if you ha'no faith in dreams, farewell.
I would not dream of heaven, lest I find hell.
Exit.
Ben. This charm has cast him off, now to my morgage.
Oh Vaster, thou art dead; thy hapless issue,
Exposed to the bleake air of these cold times.
I have no means to expiate the wrongs,
My cruel Father, and my self more bloody,
Have done thee, but by charity to thine,
All the poor pieces that remain of thee.
So with the plasters of our broken good,
We hide the wounds, first having shed the blood.
Within there Hoh.
Enter Robert, and Anne Vaster.
Rob. Thou come upon thy death, infectious issue of the worlds plague; if thy
blood stained foot enter these doors. Our parents are from home. Till their
return, I Will keep possession. Or lose it with my life.


Ben. Incensed Youth.
Thou fight'st against power with a sword of straw:
As good cope with the devil, as with the Law.

Anne. Me thinks, Sir, there should dwell some pity in your look.
Oh, cast an eye of mercy on the woes,
Of two most wretched Orphans; doubly lost,
First in their Parents miseries: but, oh! most
In their untimely deaths; for we doubt sore,
We never shall behold their faces more.

Ben. My grief requites you both.
No matter, had it so pleased the high powers,
If that my Father had excused yours.

Ann. Good Sir, forget your strength; and do not triumph over the prostrate
fortunes of two wretches,

Exposed to unresisted tyranny.
Behold a Maiden begging on her knee --

Ben. Rise: that is heavens due. These arms now thee intwine,
That wish for ever, to be called thine:
A strange new influence runs through my affections,
Into my panting heart; and there enthroned,
Commands my lower faculties to love
This poor distressed Virgin. I am flamed
With pity and affection; whether more!
Yet let my senses some cool reason gather:
What, love the daughter, and have slain the father?
(I must: heaven knows I must). See, my loved friends:
My coming to you is for other ends.
My Father sent me to invade your lands.
A while stand free redeemed with my hands.
There Is money to relieve you: that done, you shall have more.
Despair not: heaven will not forsake the poor.

Rob. Right noble son of so professed a foe,
Heaven be as kind to you, as you to our woe.

Ben. I burst, if I contain my passion. Fairest Virgin,
If thou dare credit me, I love thee.

Rob. Hold. Here take your kindness back: Though we are poor,
My sister was not bred to be a whore.
Forbear to touch her.

Ben. Fond Youth, thy rage is vain.
Thou Art young: thy error does thy virtue stain.
I love her as a wife.

Anne. Oh do not mock me.
How can I think, you to such fortunes borne.
Will look upon a Maid, so poor, forlorn?

Ben. Alas! that poverty should virtue smother.
Not in my breast. No, I Will still honest be:
Virtue in rags are gold's all one to me.
Censure me both, as you shall find me true,
I Will be your father, and your brother too.
Enter old Gripe brought in a chair, by Nice and Thirsty.
Grip. So, let me down, till I have seen my new morgage.
How now son Benjamin, have you taken possession?

Ben. Of that you cannot dispossess me, Sir.


Grip. No knave? what will thou take my lands before I Am dead?

You are a brave son indeed. But this is the world. If the father be poor, the
son would be rid of him, to save charges. If rich, he must have his lands
ere his bones be cold.


Their. They may be cold, for they have been rotten these dozen years.


Nic. I am very hungry.


Their. I am very thirsty.


Ni. But dare not eat, because I was dreamed to night of choking.


Ann. Now brother w' are, undone.
The damned father will pervert the son.

Rob. Gowt, dropsy, lamenesse, rotten legs can hasten
T'vndoe the poor. Usurers that sit
Bound to their chaires with charms, and cannot move
But by their porters, can to ill bestirre them.
He needs make haste, that is at hell before them.

Grip. Ha? for 3. Months?


Ben. Indeed Sir, by that power you put me in,
In charity to their miserable state,
Orphan'd of Parents, and of means to live,
I gave them 3. months profit of the lands.

Grip. Out Villain, Charitie's a beggar, as thou wut be. 3. months! three
weeks, 3. days, 3. hours had been more charity, then ever I showed, or will
show to such beggars. Come Nice, Thirsty, list me: I Will take possession my self.


Ben. I hope Sir, you will not nullify my deed.

Exit Thirst.
Grip. Deed me no deeds: I Will nullify thee from being mine heir. Come, help
me I say.


Nic. Indeed Sir, I dare not lift you against the poor.


Grip. Where Is my man Thirsty?


Nic. He Is gone in to drink Sir.


Grip. Oh he is a good knave: he has got possession ot'h house.


Their. Of nothing master but the Buttry, I.


Grip. As lame as I am, I Will in my self.


Rob. Sit still you lethargy: y' had better drop --


Ben. Contain your self, young friend. He is my father,
Let not the warm nest of my love to you,
Hatch up encouragement to my fathers wrongs.

Rob. You are my stern Sir, at your pleasure guide
This tempest-beaten vessel.

Ben. Good Sir confirm
This work of piety, which I presumed,
On faith of your good nature to afford.

Grip. Sirrah, your good nature will bring you to th'Almeshouse. Thou shall not
inherit a doyt of mine. And for you two Kitlins, I Will make you mew ith Iayle,
and there be any law in England. So this chasing fit has got me the use of my
legs agame. Oh excellent Surgion; would thou were here again, for the other
25. pounds.


Ben. Strange! that same Quack-saluer has done him good, against his will. How
fare you Sir?


Grip. The worse for thee Bastard. Thou Have too much charity in thee to be the
son of old Gripe.


Ann. Dear brother, yield possession: we 'l beg rather,
Then this our worthy friend should lose his father.

Rob. Sir, be not so incensed: resume your son
Into your former love, and I resign
All right, that his free promise has made mine.

Grip. Come then, Nice, Thirsty. Oh brave Surgion, I can go.
Oh brave morgage I can enter.
Exit.
Nic. M. Benjamin, a sober word in private. If this wench want harbor, I care
not if I give her a nights lodging.


Ben. I have invited her with her brother to supper this night.
Will you --

Ni. Oh it is Fry-day, and I know you have flesh.


Ben. Thou would take her any night. Is she not flesh?


Nic. Sweet Cousin, I would not eat her. If you please to commend me to her:
let me see, for what -- I leave that to you.

Exit.
Ben. Go in, let me alone. This petulant fool.
Shall be my scaffold to erect my plots.
Come, friends, unload your sorrows on my heart.
Griefs weight is eased; when each one bears his part.

Act. Secund.
Enter Curfew Abbot. Curf. THus am I stolen out from the Covent. Abbot,
Ly there, thou happy warranted case
Of any Villain. Thou Have been my stawking-horse,
Now these ten months. So long it is since the Abbot
Went on a solemn pilgrimage and left
My brother, a good honest Friar, his friend
Deputed for him. But my brother scarce
Warm in his new vice-honour, walking out
To visit me one morning, at my house
Fell dead of an impostume suddenly.
I buried him in private; but from's blood
Am purer then the Crystal. Studying now,
How to turn sorrow into policy,
I have assumed his shape. Who can deny,
But that a Dunce may rise to Dignity?
Blind Ignorance does not always strut in Satin.
It often walks a Clergy pace in black,
And deals the holy Rites with as bold hands,
As if it grasped Jove's thunder: and did judge it
Enough to stare, look big, and with a brow
More rugged then is Radamanths, denounce
Torrors against ill deeds: the whiles their own
Are not less monstrous, but less broadly shown.
Thus in my self, how easie't is, I prove,
To sweat out judgments against the sins we love.
As if a garment of world-couzning grace
Were impudently good, set out by place.
Well, I get nothing by this borrowed form,
But countnance to my thefts. This hollow tree
Keeps all my holiness: Lie there Abbot, till
My work is done, then do thou hide my ill.
Enter Valentine gallant. Mass here is comes one already.

Valent. Now have I, like a Parasite, couerd my back with brains. Out of my
usurers Gowtie toe, I have spun a fair suite. I would feign hear, whether the
devil be dead or no. Yet I need not be so inquisitiue, for I Am sure he has
given me nothing in'swill. Now am I in quest of some vaulting house. I would
feign spend these crowns, as I got them, in cony-catching. I ha'the game in
sent, and will follow it with full cry.


Curf. Stand -- Give the word.


Val. Word? what word? am I beleaguerd?


Curf. Few words are best among friends. Empty your pockets, and you may vault
the lighter. Quick.


Val. Thou Art an honest fellow, a very honest fellow. In good faith I had no
great need of money; but since thou have brought me some, I Will not refuse it.


Curf. Troth, I ha'but a little.


Val. Faith nor I. we'll even draw cuts, who shall ha'both.


Curf. Agreed. -- Shall we breathe?

fight.
Val. Good fortune grant, you be able to pay me for this pains. In sadness, I
deserve double fees.


Curf. I Will make you plead harder, ere you sit down to tell your money.


Val. Look that your case be good, I shall pick a hole in it else.


Curf. Well, let the law pass.


Val. Not altogether so: lest we be both hang. -- Stand your ground. Zlid, I
cannot abide these running Cocks.

fight.
Curf. I have seen a runner win the battle. -- Shall we draw stakes?


Val. Ha? a match -- Throw by weapons, and lets embrace.


Curf. I am a villain, but I fear your clutch worse then a Seriants


Val. As I Am true thief, thou may trust me. Ha sirrah! Robin Hood, and the
Pindar of Wakefield had not a stiffer bout. Shall we cling, like a couple of
Eeles, not to be dissolved but by Thunder?


Curf. Most liberally. Let Us set up shop together.

Enter Vaster disguisd.
Val. Done: and to begin our trade, behold a customer. Stand close.


Vast. This russet-shape of a plaine-dealing yeoman
Spirits my hopes with boldness. Sharp suspicion
Like to a winking Iusticer shall see me,
And yet not see me. Thus with griefe-swolne eyes,
I Will match my wife, and childrens miseries.
This fifty pound I Will husband like a Badger;
Buy and sell Barley: and so easily wind
Into the present passages of Bedford.
How good a schoolmaster is Poverty!
I could not live on hundreds, that came in
By annual rents; now I begin to thrive
On the small fragments. Thus like Prodigals,
That once did scorn the meat, now glad of pottage.
The manor gone, I Will try to live oth' cottage.
Bedford, ha'for you.

Curf. Stand. Give the word.


Vast. The word, y' are a thief.


Val. You might ha'shot twice, and not hit it righter.


Vast. What do you shoot at?


Curf. Oh Sir, like your Jesuit, all at the purse.


Val. Will you cast out the devil, and saue's a coniuring.


Vast. Are you so cunning at the black Art? I Will try your skill. What, both at
once? that is no fair play.


Curf. Fair play is for Fencers. Yet thou seemst a good fellow. Thou shall
have it. Stand aside, partner.


Vast. Say thou me so, boy? then there is money, win't and wear't.

Fight.
Val. Now could I get in and rob 'hem both -- Hercules! He lays about him
like Orlando Furioso, or a coward turned desperate. Brave boy in faith. We might
ha'robd two and twenty Taffata-clok'd rorers, before this freese-iacket. Oh,
your surly Bore is like a bloudy'd Mastiffe: when your spruce Pantaloun bawles
like a whelpe in a Tavern: yet at the sight of cold iron runs, as if he had
seen a Serieant.


Curf. Hold, hold: Keep your cash.


Vast. The mony's good money Sir, if it be not too heavy for you


Curf. Nay, for the weight I could make shift, but for the scuruy conditions
go with it.


Vast. Hau you any gall to it Sir?


Val. Not not so much as pigeon. Put up thy cash my brave quintessence of
Hobbniols. Give me thy hand. How many thousand cudgels have thou broken in thy
days about a May Pole?


Curf. I warrant, as many as would make all Bedford chimnies smoke a whole
winter.


Vast. Jest on. Have you any more to say to me.


Curf. Nothing my brave Clem of th Clough, but I would thou would deal with
us. Say, shall we put all our stocks together, and set out a ship of our own?


Vast. Ha? first tell me truly what you are.


Curf. Agreed. Let Us sit down to counsel. I am the Abbot of Newnham.


Vast. How? much?


Curf. I Will not bate you an Ace on it, till the old Abbot returns from
Pilgrimage. My chamber shall be our Rendeuous. The devil himself in the shape
of a blurting Constable will not look for us there.


Val. I am a soldier, and in this vacation time am forced to do like Lawyers;
when suites do not make them, they make suites: because the wars will not
maintain me, I maintain the wars. I set up my Bills in Bedford here, for a
Physician, and dealt with Gripe for the Gowt. I have a project to swell our
purses till they burst. Will you second me?


Vast. As inseparably, as a condition does an obligation.


Val. I have often heard the gripulous Dotard talk of Fairies: and how rich
the house proves that they haunt. I have ripened the blister of his imagination
to the full. Shall we lance it? I have keys that shall secure our conueyance.
Is It a match?


Vast. The safest stratagem we could devise,
By craft, more then by strength, all thieves do rise.
Of many politic knaves you cannot spy one.
The Fox will have his prey before the Lion.

Val. Two or three nights we will scatter some small pieces of silver, till
opportunity plumpe our project.


Curf. I take it rightly. Oh it is quick and sharp.
So with a Gudgeon lost, we'll catch a Carpe. A booty.
Enter Griffin, Sager, Bromley.
Griff. As I was saying, Master Bromley, why should you take the advantage of
your neighbor Sager here? Y' have got the reuersion of his Lease. There Is is
but one life to come in it. We are all mortal. It may come ere you look
for it. I love peace, I love peace.


Brom. I say, that life is forfeit: and I Will enter on all. The law is on my
side. I Will not be bound to the peace.


Griff. Nay Sir, I Will bind no man: but if I could persuade you -- to be fleeced
both, so I might be kept warm in your wool -- How say you neighbor Sager?


Sag. Alas Sir, I do but defend my own.
Nay could be wel-contented to sit down
With some (though unjust) loss. I judge it best.
Though with some prejudice to buy my rest.

Griff. Therein you wrong your self: the law is impartial, like a Bell, as
sound on one side, as on the other, if the clapper be right. Master Bromley a
word -- What will you judge me worthy of, If I persuade him to relinquish his
right? You know your case --.


Brom. Here Is twenty angels: work it good Master Griffin, work it; and you
shall be my everlasting Attorney. But if you fail, you must return.


Griff. Pish, never talk of that man -- Mr. Sager, a word -- I love peace,
though I cannot live by it. I respect my conscience above my purse -- when to
has no money in it. -- What will you give me to draw Bromley to a good handsome
composition?


Sag. Not a penny, till y' have done't.


Griff. You know twill go against you, but I love peace.


Sag. (I never knew't in any of your Tribe.
The event be what it will, I Will give no bribe.)
Sir, as I like your end -- God and my cause,
Are coat of steel, against the sharp fangs of laws.

Grif. Shall we walk on? our iourney's long.


Curf. Not so long as you take it. Stand, good Mr. Lawyer, shall I puta case to
you now?


Val. Come, untruss, we have have of business?


Curf. Quick sirrah, I shall serve an Execution of your throat else


Grif. Indeed Gentlemen, I am sorry that I Am not better stored for you. If you
had took me coming from term, I could have served your turns better.


Valen. Bind them, hamper the rogues. Serve a Habeas corpus on that fieri
facies.


Curf. How happy were this common wealth! how sound!
If every corrupt Lawyers fingers were thus bound.

Vast. Sager, I know thee poor: here take thy purse.
Though I rob these, no poor man shall me curse.

Val. Tarry till I lay the Lawyer in the midst of his clients.

Are your talons bound Harpy? Thou lie now like a Stallion new gelt, betwixt
two Mares. This is a Distring is, sirrah.

Farewell pettie-fogger.

Secedunt fures.
Grif. Oh neighbors, I Am undone, undone.


Brom. Then help to undo me. I Will have my action against the Rogues.


Sag. Stay till you catch them master Bromley.
Well, somewhat this my falling state releeues:
That honesty speeds well even amongst thieves

Brom. Help, help. Good master Griffin, your breath's strongest, yawle,
yawle. Your tongue could never stand your Clients in more stead.

Enter Vasters wife.
Wife. I heard this way some man's distressed voice,
Crying for help: some robbery. Oh it is no wonder!
A thief and bawdy house are never far asunder.

Grif. Oh good woman help, help to untie us.


Wif. I know 'hem all. Two knaves, one honest man.
They know not me in this translation.
Come Sir, I Will loose you first, help you the rest.
Do well to all, but to the good do best.

Grif. Oh that I had the villains upon an execution now.


Wife. Would you turn hangman, Sir?


Grif. I faith sweet wench, I would show 'hem the law.


Wife. Oh pity them: necessity has no law.
Perhaps want forced them; though it was not good.
What Horseleaches are they, that full, suck blood!
There is an Inn, enter, refresh your selves.
Exeunt. Their loss is money, yet I moan their state.
Who pities me most, most unfortunate!
Robbed of a husbands love, now of himself.
How far is this beyond all loss of pelf!
He sold me hither; may that sinful price
Of my deep sorrow never prejudice
His happiness, what climate ever holds him.
Be blessed, sweet husband; let my ruin buy
Thy wishd content, though I forsaken die.
This witch has tired me with her customers,
Whom I have all sent home with betterd minds.
Against her vicious will, I force her strive
By virtue rather, then by lust to thrive.
I know, I am expected.
Exit.
Curf. The Iackes be now vncag'd, and flutterd hence.


Vast. (The woman, that releasd them, I should know.
She frees them from this bondage to a worse.
There is no thief, like whore, to pick the purse.)

Val. Shall we not shift ground?


Curf. By no means. A theefes safest residence is in the same plat he did the
robbery. There, of all places, the Cuckoldly hue will never cry after him.


Vast. When shall we share the booties, and be proud,
How liberally our division mounts?

Curf. The days work done, we will cast up the accounts.


Val. Where Is the pettie-foggers Portmanteau?


Curf. Here.


Val. Lay't there. So, you shall see me catch a fat Pickerell, with this
Gudgeon presently. Stand close.

Enter old Gripe, Nice, Thirsty.
Nic. Uncle, uncle, I had a certain scuruy dream to night.


Grip. Dream? what of dreams? good cousin be not so nice.


Nic. I dreamt --


Grip. Be hanged.


Ni. Be you hanged, Uncle.


Thirst. Behang'd both, except I may have some drink.


Nic. Me thought I found a great deal of money.


Gripe. I would we had it, cousin, without dreaming.


Thirst. Whoop master -- no part of my finding.

takes up the Portmantean
Grip. No matter for a part: all is mine.


Nic. Nay, all is mine for dreaming.


Thirst. Nay, all is mine for finding: and I Will keep't.


Val. Soft, sirrah: it lies there for a wager.


Nic. What wager, Sir?


Val. Marry, that who ever finds it, shall loose all the money in's purse.


Nic. I Will not meddle with it.


Grip. I Will have no part in it.


Val. Judgment, Gentlemen: have they not lost the wager?


Curf. Vast. Lost, lost; as sure as Virginity; no sooner laid then lost.


Val. Come then to pay, to pay. (Sure this is Gripe, my Bedford-Gowtie-Vsurer.
Plague o* your stilts; what Carpenter set 'hem upright? not my wimble, I hope.


Nic. Oh I am spoyld, spoyld; this it is to dream of sinding money -- I knew,
what twould come to.


Thirst. Save your labor, good master Thief: for my breeches are in the
fashion, a great deal of pocket, but no lining.


Vast. This is the rock that split me. Oh good fate!
That thou had now about thee half my state.
Is It sin to rob the Thief? by usurious course,
He once robbed me, now I rob him by force.
No difference but this, twixt him and me.
I have not such protection, as had he.

Grip. Oh I am a poor man, a very poor man.


Vast. Thou art indeed; wealth without use does free
No soul from the bleake storms of poverty.
Who cannot natures requests satisfy
Out of his wealth, his coffer's rich, not he.

Val. Be they all bound to the good forberance?


Vast. Thus far quits my revenge. The Usurer lies,
As fast in mine, as I am in his ties.
Now let me kill him. No, blood shall not die
My other sins in purple. Lie there. Lo!
That the wise law would serve all usurers so.
How few in thy bonds did thou ere untie?
Now bound thy self, so without mercy lie.

Curf. Come, let us retire to our refuge.

Secedunt.
Nic. Uncle, uncle. I would this all were but a dream too.


Grip. Oh coz, I am damnd, damnd, my mony's gone.
Elstow morgage is lost. Wallow to me, Nice.

Nic. Oh uncle, its dangerous tumbling, snakes in the grass.


Grip. Wallow to me, Thirsty.


Thirst. Master, I Am so dry, I cannot stir my feet.


Grip. Help. --

Enter Vasters wife.
Wife. More robberies yet? it is strange, how villains swarm!
Mischiefs hold close to keep each other warm.
Three rank corruptions make their near abode.
An Abbey, Bawd'house, and a Theeuish rode.
Where be these men distressed? -- how? my Usurer?
Shall I unbind him, that has bound my husband
In merciless fetters? Yes, I Am bidden, still;
With good deeds to requite my enemies ill.
Come, devil, I Will unloose thee.

Grip. Oh how I Am crossed!
My money, and my morgage, all, all lost.

Nic. Mass, a pretty wench -- If she lay thus bound before me, I would not
loose her, but upon some conditions.


Wife. Will you go in Sir, and refresh your self?


Grip. I Will follow thee, sweet girl. Would I could cope This morgage, though
my other be past hope.


Thirst. Do they brew wine here?

Exeunt
Vast. See how this woman still me quits, and crosses.
I rob and bind, and she releeues their losses.
Why does she thus? Its but a trick of hers:
By charity to draw in customers.
I am now patient, but more Cuckold still.
I help her to supply, against my own will.

Curf. Shall we retire to my chamber, and share?

Enter Benjamin.
Val. Tarry. Here comes another Iack-daw: let us pluck him, and take his
feathers with us -- stand.


Ben. Thou durst not say so, were we on just terms.


Valen. You should be some Lawyer, you stand so on your terms

Faith, we must change professions with you, you must giue's our fees.


Ben. You Will earne them first?


Val. Brave Sir, so do not Lawyers always.
But when you are paid your self, you will giue's our due.

Vast. Hold, Gentlemen, this is my friend.


Curf. Thine, noble Valoys? thou shall beg hisransome then.


Vast. He stands secure. Haste to your chamber. There I Will meet you presently,
and then we will share.

Exeunt.
Ben. Are thy ends good in this given liberty?
Or do it here alone to murder me?

Vast. Not with my sword, but with a tale shall wound thy amazed heart -- come,
let us sit down.


Ben. What tale? good friend, be plain and short.
Woe to a heart, by expectation centuples the smart.

Vast. I have commendations to you from one Vaster: For by's description you
should be the man.


Ben. Lives Vaster then?


Vast. Alas Sir, you know he is dead.
And by your bloody hand was murdered.

Ben. By me?


Vast. Is not your name Sir Benjamin Gripe!


Ben. What then?


Vast. You killed him, Sir. Poor man he died
With penitence to heaven, to you remission.
Said, that you did it like a man, prouok'd
By his intemperate rage. Fate gave that I
Keeping his walk, came to close up his eye.

Ben. Heaven pardon me. What said the dying Vaster?


Vast. He charged me seek you out, and gave me gold,
To bury him in secret; lest his death
Should hazard yours, and charmed my silent breath.

Ben. His love gives fire to my green pile of sorrows.
May his bones rest in peace: in grief I live;
Less he and heaven do my black fault forgive.

Vaster. He has forgiven you, only this he begges;
That to the scattered pieces of himself,
Left to survive his miseries vncomplete,
His Widow and his Orphans, you would yield
Some pity for your own, heavens, and his sake:
And teach that hand, (from which he hoped some good)
To succor theirs, that took away his blood.
He bad me tell you, now all means were gone,
To expiate that sin, save only one:
To hold those up, that on the worlds sea swim:
Since he had them undone, you undone him.
That you would be to them, as he should be:
This he bequeathed you as a Legacy.

Ben. I Will be a just Executor of his will.
Good friend, great thanks: my purse thou have spared to ceaz
But what is worse, have robbed me of my peace.
Vaster, thou art dead: if thy transformed soul,
Could from the battlements of you high Tower,
Behold the vowed endeavors of my heart,
To satisfy thy will and my huge debt,
In thee, to thine, thou would my merit set
Amongst thy best friends: yet narrow are my bounds;
To give them plasters, that first gave them wounds.
Exit.
Vast. Farewell Sir, think on Vaster.

Ben. Friend adieu. To Vaster and my vow I will be true.
How thick the sharp pulse of my conscience bears!
How strangely my distracted Phantsie threats!
Oh unappeased murder, that still keeps
The sensitive committer from fast sleeps:
And murmurs in the ears a fatal knell
Of restless thoughts on earth, of worse in hell,
How deep thou strik'st me with a silent blow!
Be patient heart, to thy fate humbly bow.
Fetch him again I cannot; oh his sown
Is too too mortal. Why then hurled I down
My sinking spirits? Let me slye to mirth,
And burden cares with wine, to make them sink.
The worlds rule is, Who feels the lode of conscience let him drink.
But oh importunate grief! too hard it is,
To counterfeit a false and forged bliss!
Yet once I Will force a trial; I have here an Inn,
I hear and wonder, is turned house of sin.
I Will see, if the loose sprawles, with their sharp wit,
Can give my mind a medicine for this fit.
Whores I abhor, as Gardiners Iayes: no matter;
Once for experiment, I Will hear them chatter.
Enter Vasters Wife. Prevention! I think here is one of the iourney-women come,
to proffer me her service. Black prostitution! that any such face should ever
wait upon thee. Sister, what seek you?


Wife. What is hard to find:
An honest man, or else my eyes are blind.

Ben. Fut, if I say I Am one, I then fall short,
Of the occasion I intend for sport.
I Am such a fool in this Priapus-rode.
Me thinks, sweetheart, your honest-man should be one, that should please
your appetite, stir your veins, tickle your blood, and make you laugh
delight into your panting spleen.


Wife. An honest devil.
They Are friends to hell, that tempt weak souls to evil.

Ben. Come, let me kiss thee -- so: this was with ease;
Words are ayry shades, they are deeds that please.

Wife. Sir, do not think to enter my chaste fort,
Encouraged by this parle. You presume --

Ben. Not to unlock thy treasures with such keys.
Gold only can surprise such holds as these.
And I have that will do 't.

Wife. Then use it well.
How Is wealth abused, when it conducts to hell!
Sir, I will set no price on your desires.

Bon. I Will be the franker Play Master.


Wife. You must: Then pay me for my virtue: so I Will* take it.
What starues lust, is well bought; not what it feeds.
It Is follies dregs, with coin to buy ill deeds.

Ben. Come, come; why should you be so quaint, and nice,
That know what belongs to 't? 'Dsso, a Virgin
At thirteen, or perhaps a little under,
Could not with whuling nay's be so perverse,
In her beworded Mayden-head.

Wif. I must.


Ben. Thou do not rightly of my merits deem.
I would not know you such, as you now seem.

Ben. The golden footed law, that goes or runs,
Stays, and turns back, as we give motion to it,
Shall step the pase, which thou would have it. Nay,
Speak as thy tongue instructs it. I will change
Thy poverty to gold, rich robes, a Coach,
And prauncing Coursers, that shall whirle thee through
The popular streets; and when thou sitst in pride,
The tamed law shall lacquay by thy side.

Wife. These are some incitations to a heart
Tainted with malice, or that thinks a heaven
In glorious ostentation; or would stand
Affected with the bane of prurient lust.
I Am of another temper. Pray you leave me.

Ben. Thou shall Nectar drink:
Make ebrious waste of the sweet Gnossian wines;
Fesants shall be course diet: refined marow,
Small pounded nuts, and losseng'd Amylum,
Scraped pearl and date-stones sprinkled on each slice,
And strewn with sugar, like white frost on ice.
Grant me but love, I Will rain a shower of Gold
Into thy lap, out-shining Jove, when he
Wrapped in his glory courted Danae.

Wife. Thy language does affright me. Oh my stars!


Ben. O let not tears spoil such a beauty. Tell me; Why spill you water like
a Crockodile, to captive me; that might have don't with mirth, nimbler then
air?


Wife. Sir, I have no desire,

To take your lust, but pity. Some what prompts my credulous heart, there is
some goodness in you.


Ben. My truth shall quite thy faith, Impart thy mind.


Wife. I Will trust you, Sir. I am a wretched woman,

The widow or the wife, I know not whether, of the distressed or dead Vaster.


Ben. How? I faint to tell thee; thou art then a widow:
The wars have ended his unfortunate days.
Nay, let not grief oppress thy spirits. Oh,
I have killed the wife and husband with one blow.
Lift up thy sowning eyes.

Wife. Oh let me dye. Rather short death, then lingering misery.


Ben. Revive thy heart: Vaster yet lives in me:
I am his son, that has thy husbands lands.

Wife. And can I look for mercy at your hands?


Ben. Receive this earnest; all my state is thine.


Wife. You cannot with these spells charm me to sin.


Ben. I do not: when I taint thy chaster ears
With motions of black lust, pronounce me Villain.
Tell me, who brought you to this Brothell-Inne?

Wife. He, to whom heaven (I trust) has cleared all sin.
My Vaster sold me hither. I was content.
Thus to relieve his state, when all was spent.

Ben. But could thou live infectlesse in this air?


Wife. I have, and will.


Ben. Will? This gives strange suspicion.


Wife. I made a promise, that without consent
Of her that bought me, I would not depart.
Enter Mar-mayde. See where the Inchantresse comes.

Marm. Now minion, you must be gadding. Cry you mercy, Landlord: if you will
have any sport, walk in, walk in. You shall take out your rent here,
Landlord. She shall be your own Vacation and Term too, Landlord.


Ben. So, you pernicious Damme of lusts foul littour,
You that buy beauty and do sell 't again;
And live by th'occupation. Hear you? Free
This woman from your brothell slavery.
Or I shall bring you to the cart and lash.

Marm. Oh I am cast away; she cost me fifty pounds, I never got four grotes by
her yet.


Ben. Thou shall lose more by keeping her. Go cleanse the house from this
disorder, or I here discharge thee.


Marm. Good Landlord, bestow her where you will. I am content to be rid of
her, so I may hold your fouour --

Fox pull your honesty. Is this the dancing maid?
One more such purchase will undo my trade.
Enter Gripe.
Grip. Hostice, Ostice, where is your kinswoman?


Marm. Yonder Sir, talking with my Landlord, your Worships son.


Gripe. Son Benlamin? yea faith, are you so close with a wench? Come hither --
she is a whore, Take heed on her.

Exit Mar. If she want men's, bring her home: she shall keep my house.
Faith, I grow old, and cannot now long live:
Oh such a Wench would be restoratiue
Persuade her Ben.
Exit Gripe.
Ben. I Will do my best, Sir* See,
The pleased fates consent to succor thee.
My fathers house shall shelter thee unknown.
Please the old man with words, but hold your own.
If my plot takes, as I can hope no less,
This lust of his shall thy good fortunes bless.

Act. Tertius.
Enter Robert Vaster, and Anne. Rob. COme, sister to my sorrows, and my self.
They say, society in woes does lighten
Our pressures; but I find the contrary.
My woes are heavier by thy company
My grief for thy distress, doubles mine own.
I should be far less wretched, if alone.

Ann. Sweet brother. since we must both suffer, think it some comfort, that we
share an equal fortune.

Grief has less power to work on our sad hearts;
Where mutual loves contend to bear their parts.

Rob. Little once thought thy mother, that thy fate
Should stoop to service to relieve thy state:
We are not tried, but in our misery.
He is a cunning Coachman that can turn
Well in a narrow room. To manage plenty
In a right form, commends the state, not person.
He Is blessed, that to be rich can give consent
With honesty, or rest poor with content.
I wonder, Benjamin does not visit us.
His last relief is done, if that spring dry,
We faint for succor, and must fainting dye.
Enter Bromley. See, here comes Bromloy, once our fathers Steward: Sure, he will
support us. Sister, cry his kindness: thy speech is more pathetical.


Brom. Thieves, Lawyers, Rogues, Harlots, and Inne-keepers, are men's
purgations. Griffin has cheated me: took twenty angels from me; thieves took
'hem from him. He promised to draw Sager to compound; now the day's gone
against me.

Oh I could wish my nails turned Vulturos tallons,
That I might tear their flesh in mammocks, raise
My losses from their carcases turned Mummy.

Ann. Good Sir, a word --


Brom. Now Kitlin, what would you have?


Ann. Sir, remember we are the miserable children of lost Vaster; whom once you
served.


Brom. What Is that to me?


Ann. I hope, Sir, you can spare somewat to us distressed.


Brom. This is plain begging. Minion, fall to work,
And earne supply to wants with diligent labor.
For Vasters sake I will not urge the Statute.

Rob. The Statute, Judas? w' are no Beggars, though
We tried thy courtesy. Cursed be thy fate,
Thou from our father gott'st thy whole estate.
Yet grudgest us some fragments. Hence, out Dog: If thou stay'st miscreant --


Brom. Boy, I Will smoke you for it.


Rob. Do thy worst, devil. An insatiate worm strike deep into thy
conscience, sile thy heart strings with rubbing flets: And turn thy derogated
name,

On foggy blastings of eternal shame.
Exit. Enter Gripe. Ingratitude is gone; and in his room,
Extortion and a fiend is hith or come.

Grip. I Am going to see my morgage --


Ann. Good Sir, show mercy on two wretched Orphans.


Grip. Out beggars, mercy? what do talk to me of mercy? I Am going to let my
grounds. I have no leisure for mercy.


Rob. Go thou accursed Cain: in misery,
When thou begg'st mercy, be it as far from thee.

Ann. Sir, y' have undone our Parents; pity us.


Grip. I cannot stay to hear you, I have business.

Exit.
Rob. Heaven be as deaf to thee, when thy soul breath
Shall beg some respite at thy violent death.
Enter Nice. This fellow sure will succor us.

Nic. June, July, August, September -- the first day --


Ann. Sir, raise our prostrate fortunes with some help: Some little help, you
know us.


N^c. Yes, yes, I remember I have seen you. Let Us see -- The fourteenth day --
bad. I must do no deed of charity to day; I have president for it. 't is lost.


Rob. Now I remember, when I went to school,
I read of one Vespasian a good Emperor,
That told his Courtiers if a day out-slipt him,
Wherein he did nor good, that day was lost.
The next he would redeem't with double cost.
Ill colored sin, how shameful do thou look,
In them that plead thy warrant from their book!

Nic. Fourteenth day. A good turn forgotten. Oh here is learning from the
stars.

Though I do little good ere I am rotten,
Like citizens, I would not have it forgotten.
Yet let me study on it: though a man may not give, he
May buy, I hope without danger. Fair sister,
What shall I give you for your maidenhead?

Rob. Thus much: a broken head.


Ni. Oh -- Oh -- Forgive me, good Calender -- I perceive now, thy counsel's
true. It Is an evil day indeed: I should neither have bought nor sold on it.

Exi.
Rob. Hence, skie-consulting Gypsy: men commit
Sins dark as night, and blame the stars for it.
Enter Sager. Another passenger -- Oh this is Sager.
His wife was once a servant to our mother.
Alas, when these built from our ruinous woe
Relieve us not, what should this poor man do.

Sag. I long to hear from London; how my suite
Ends, or depends: if lost, I Am lost with it.
Who would trust any bars this tottring world
Can plot to fortisie our wheeling states!
When the strong doors of Justice may be broke,
Or lifted from the hinges by the force
Of politic engines: or the safest lock
Be picked with a false key.

An. Sir, dwells there any mercy in your heart?


Sag. Yes: or of mercy, I must hope no part.

I know you, and your wants. My wife was once your Parents servant.


An. True, but that time is past,
And in her service now I would be placed.

Sag. That were too lavish yielding to your woe.
I am but poor, troubles have made me so,
Yet of that small lifeblood, which my drencht state
H'as left it by the Laws sharp surgerie,
Embrace a portion, as your needs require;
Enter Benjamin. And I may give. Here comes your enemies Son.

Ben. I have been seeking all you three with nowes.
Good news; friend Sager, the day's yours.

Sag. It Is welcome. I have the better means to succor these.


Ben. You have prevented my request: I purposed
To beg that kindness of you. Robin, I would
Entreat you to accept my service, but
I mean the name of it: for in deed I Will use thee
As my most equal and respected friend.
Nan, in thine arms I throw and lock my self;
My fortunes be all thine: the key's thy love;
Let this kiss be the seal. Ye sacred powers
Make indissoluble this knot of ours.
Now, master Sager, give her that respect,
You would my wife: all charges are my debt.
Robin, you know the house; conduct your sister thither; that done, conucy
these letters to the widow Sorrow; (that is her borrowed name) she lies at my
fathers.


Rob. With just hands.
I Am prouder of thy love, then of thy lands.

Ann. Oh pure quintessence of thy profession.
How many have thou robbed, thus to make up
Thy perfect godnesse! as if wiser nature
Had made an extract of ten thousand Lawyers,
And thrice refined it with immortal fires:
Then set it like a sanctified Lamp
On the Altar of thy soul; to give exemplar light,
In the dull darkness of this sinne-borne night.
Exeunt.
Ben. Bromley's grown mad with rage: I Am jealous of him. You know the hopes of
your posterity dwell on your present fortunes: all which burn with the short
Taper of your singular life, Say he should quench it.


Sag. How Sir? murder me?


Ben. I cannot tell, it is but my iclaousie.
It Is not amiss, to keep preuentions eye
Open and wary. Instruments of death
Stand ready pressed to a malicious arm.
And policy, like a cunning Jesuit,
Watches behind that Arras for a call.
The deed once done, help it who can, or shall.

Sag. What ground for this suspicion find your thoughts?


Ben. The fury of his madness, Enuies some,
That surges from the poisoned avarice
Of his swollen heart: his broken resolutions,
Wherein his traitor-tongue can scarce forbear
The protestation. Give me leave to fear.

Sag. What will you counsel me?


Ben. That must be studied. Thus -- Listen -- We'll try what mischeefes he can
warpe: With wooden wasters learn to play at sharp.

Exit Sager. Enter Gripe, Nice, Thirsty.
Grip. Oh my back, my back --


Ben. How do you, Sir?


Grip. Oh son, son, worse then ever. The Gowt was but a stitch to this. Oh
the Collicke, the Collicke and stone.


Thirst. There be two of them master, ask the widow else.


Grip. Sure it will rend my bowels out.


Ben. It Is just: The stone in the bladder now should make him smart That has so
long been sick of stone in the heart.


Grip. Oh that I knew where my old Physician lived.

Enter Vaster and Curfew.
Vast. Keep on your habit. Our walke's turned Pouls, I think.


Curf. Zlid, if our third party were here, we would venture on 'hem all. They Are
but welsh freeze; they would shrink at the sense of iron.


Vast. Let Us muffle up our villains with the shadow
Of some great conference: if a cheat be offered,
We'll not refuse: but now to compass it,
Must not be done by force of arms, but wit.

Grip. Son Benjamin, you must to Goldington,
To view young Brusters lands: they are offered me
This morn in morgage. Hark you --

Nic. Thirsty, come hither.


Thirst. Ha'you any drink there?


Nic. No; but come drink thy self drunk with Poetry.


Thirst. Faith, Poetry now a days will scarce make a man drink. I had as
liefe be a pot as a Poet: then I should sometimes be full of good liquour.


Nic. Oh, your Poet is too full of that, it makes him thread bare. Sirrah, I
ha'made a Sonnet here to my Mistress; she n'ere wrought such a one on her
Samplar. Lay thine ear close to my musical tongue, I shall ravish her.


Thirst. You shall be hanged for it then.


Ni. Open thine ears, like an Oyster a sunning
Even as the bird, which we Camelion call, does live on air for aye:
So my kind heart, ever like a stocke-Doue shall feed on thy love all day.

Thirst. I, and all night too.


Nic. I, and all night too: but that night would make the verse too long. Now I
talk of night, let me see what time of day it is. I have business, must not
be rim'd away.


Curf. Pray y' Sir, how speaks your watch? One? mine lies inclining to two You
have a pretty interpreter of the time there. Who made it, French or Dutch? You
need not doubt me, Sir, I am the new Parson of Saint Peter's in Bedford.


Nic. Sir, then as I may say, have joy in your new Benefice, for belly-peece
you must ha'none. Pray' lets peruse your watch, see you mine.


Vast. Fezz 'Sir, y' have a brave wash there. Chill warrant the Kings
wash-maker made it. Beseech you mozter Nice, let me see master Parson wash.
Master Pason will you zell your wash, chill give you good cash for it.


Curf. No, my honest friend, I will not sell it.


Vast. Will you run with me for it?


Grif. Run? no.


Vast. Cheuore ye run for it, you shall nere have it else.

Excurrit.
Curf. Oh my watch -- Nic. Oh my watch.


Curf. Stop the thief, stop the thief.

Vaster runs away with Curfews watch: Curfew with Nices.
Nic. Stop the Priest, stop the Priest.


Thirst. Let him go, he runs for a wager.


Ben. How now? is my cousin Nice playing at Bace?
I know one of them well, by his sad tale
Of Vasters death: for that I Will not pursue him.

Grip. Son, I did rest me, hoping to go forward.
But so increase my pains, I am not able.
Survey you Brusters lands, and speed return.
All Is for your good, for I am now out-worne.

Ben. I go Sir -- All Is for me; yet whileshe lives,
And his hydroppicke spirits can look through
His bodies loope-holes, and convey the pleasure
Of his contemplate gold, his lusts sole God,
Through those windows to the admiring heart:
Nothing comes from him; not the superfluities
Of basers things, not being first improu'd.
I am his only issue, and on me
I think he means to settle all his state.
It Is the only way to give me cursed and poor,
To build my nest on such extorted store.
Those fathers, that distressed men's ruins use,
" As scaffolds to build up their racked wealth,
" Prove in the end, like citie-houses, that
" On small foundations carry spacious roofes:
" When the incensed heavens in tempests frown,
" Their own top-heauy weight tumbles them down.
" The first or second generation spils
" By riot, what by wrong the father fills.
In this I Will be a mirror to these times:
And by the hand of charity return
To every man, what by his covetous rape
Their states are ravished of: so work my rest.
The Will gotten gone, that which remains is blessed.
Exit.
Grip. Oh Thirsty, honest Thirsty. Thy old master is but a dead man. I cannot
piss man: my vrine's stopped.


Thirst. You should drink, hard, master: all this comes with pinching your
self of your liquour. This is the reason, that so few Dutchmen are troubled
with the stone. Your miserable Churl dribbles like the pissing Conduit: but
his iouiall son with a stream like Ware-water-spout. This is the cause, the
Usurer falling sick, so seldom rises by the staff of Physic: for he has no
water for the Physician to cast.

Enter Nice blowing.
Nic. Now the Gowt, Dropsy, Lethargy take possession of their legs. I ha'lost
my wind, and my watch, and I fear, my wench too.


Thirst. You have watched fair: sure that Parson was some Irishman.


Nice. Some hangman uncase him. I ha'bene at the Parsons, and he is no such
manner of man.

Enter Marre-maide, Constable, with Valentine.
Grip. What crew's this?


Mar. Bless your worship: I am your Worships sons Tenant. I ha'brought a
rogue to your worship, to be examined.


Grip. What fault has has he committed? Clarke, to your office: take his
examination. Now neigbour Sleepy, are you Constable?


Thirst. A good harmless Constable, a thief may take him napping.


Marm. An't please your worship, the rude Raggamussin comes into my house, calls
for drink; and when the Tapster came with a reckoning, he broke the pot
about's head; because he had not a clean Apron on.


Val. No, because he misreckoned me.


Mar. Whose fault was it, to wipe out the score?


Val. Not mine. Indeed I anointed the score with butter, and the Tapsters own
dog lick't it out.


Nic. Uncle, uncle, as sure as my watch is lost, this is master Valentine the
Physician.


Grip. Oh Coz, that it were true. Pray' Sir, let me move a question.


Val. You may command my answer Sir, y' are a Justice.


Grip. Were not you the man, that heald me of the Gowt?


Val. Troth Sir, I have done so many cures, that I forget a number of my
patients. The Other day I cured a lunaticke Cobbler, pitifully run out at soul,
when he was given ore by the Physicians. I let him blood, took three
Hen-egges, sucked 'hem out, into the shells I put his blood, set them under a
brood-Goose. When she had hatched the rest, I gave these three putrified eggs
to a Dog: the Dog grew mad, the Cobbler sober. And now my memory runs
back, I call to mind one of Bedford, sick of the Gowt, whom I cured.


Grip. I am the man, my renowned Paracelsian: thou shall have the other 25.
pound. Constable, I discharge you. Ostice, I Will see you paid: set your
recknoning on my score: trouble me no further: leave us, leave us. Now my deep
diuer into the secrets of nature, I have a cure for thee, more desperate then
the former.

Exeunt.
Val. What is it Sir, that my Art cannot extend to?


Grip. The stone, the stone: I am pitifully gripped with the stone, I ha'lost
my pissing.


Val. Sir, the disease is somewhat dangerous.
Yet if that your expulsive faculty
Retain true force, I Will warrant to make you piss.
I must awhile withdraw to study Sir. --
Now am I puzzled: blood, what medicine
Should I devise to do it? It must be violent.
Give him some Aquafortis; that would speed him.
Let Us see. Me thinks -- a little Gunpowder
Should have some strange relation to this fit.
I have seen Gunpowder often drive out stones
From Forts and Castle-walls, huger then he
Has any in his reins or bladder, sure.
Faith,' cause I am a soldier, i will make trial
Of that same black and vaporous Mineral.
I Will shoot into his belly: if the gunne hold,
I*le give him charge enough: some Aquavitae
First brewd together would allay it well.
I Will swear to try it, if I do not miss,
By a strange trick I Will make my Usurer piss.
Sir, I Will go in and prepare for aou.

Grip. Do so. Here, Thirsty, there be the Keys of the Buttry: attend upon him
good Thirsty: let him lack nothing, as thou love me.


Thirst. I love you Master, but here is a good key I love better. Sweet
instrument of my joy, let me kiss thee. Alas, that thou and I should be such
strangers. We have but one barrel: now if that should be in my masters
disease, troubled with the strangullion, and could not run -- well, if it be
not empty, I Will giu't a scowring.

Exit.
Grip. Now if this rare wonder of leaches can cure me of this griping, that I
may have some forty or threescore years more to gather in, by that time I
shall gather enough to keep me all the rest of my life. When a man grows up
to to six or seven score, it is high time to think of mortality, and to take
some ease. These three or four nights I have been haunted with Fairies: they
dance about my bedside, poppe in a piece of gold between the sheets, scatter
here and there fragments of silver, in every corner. I keep my chamber swept,
clean linen, fire to warm them every night. I was at first a fraide, they
had been spirits; now I see, they are good harmless Fairies. If I can please
them, I shall grow rich, rich.

Son I have stayed for you.

Enter Benjamin.
Ben. You have done your health the more wrong, Sir.


Grip. How do like my morgage?


Ben. It Is a fair living, Sir; but I would not have you meddle with it.


Grip. Why, my wise son?


Ben. Oh Sir, good deeds are scant,
When we advantage take of poor men's want.
Bruster's an honest man; lend him some money without such sharp security.


Grip. Not a doyt. If he come to me, and convey the morgage I have it ready;
else I have no money.

Son come and sup with me.


Ben. I follow, Sir. Preposterous transuersion of our selves!
Th'erection of our faces should instruct
Our groueling thoughts to ascend. How do men thwart
The teaching hand of Nature, and our birth!
Our heads cut air, and yet our hearts plow earth:
I look for Sager here. He Is come.
Enter Sager.
Sag. Here Is my own case and counterfeit; by this dangerlesse plummet, we may
sound the depth of his more close and intricate stratagems.


Ben. So wiser masters lay some easy baits,
At once to tempt and try their servants truth.
The subject for quack-saluing Empirickes
To exercise their inexperience on,
Should not be men, but malkins.

Sag. Do you think, that he would do me violence asleep? would he not wake
me to some conference?


Ben. No, he is a most rank Coward; and I know,
Dares not come near thee, though thou were asleep.
If he does ought, he will do it by that long Engine.
Conceal your self awhile. How fares my name?
How does she brook my slow-paced coming to her?

Sag. Faith, in your constancy lightens all grief.
She never hears you mentioned, but she startles:
As if your name like some celestial fire
Quickened her slow-paced spirits with new life.
I never knew virtue and beauty meet
In a more happy mixture. I remove.
Exit.
Ben. I love her freely: she is to me as the air.
Her beauty is best and blessed, whose soul is fair.
The Wolf is come.
Enter Bromley with a fowling piece.
Brom. Good evening to you Sir.


Ben. My wish requite you.
You walk to have a shoot, Sir: I depart.
I would be loath to prejudice your sport.

Brom. Saw you not Mr Sager, Sir, of late? This is his walk: I would feign
speak with him.


Ben. Why would you speak with him?


Brom. Sir, for no harm.


Ben. I do not think you mean it; but you know, he is valiant like a Lion: if
cross words should stir your bloods to quarrel -- Sir, take heed. He Will be
too hard for you, and your long weapon. This meadow is his evening walk.
Farewell to you Sir.

Exit Ben.
Brom. Good night M. Benjamin; you need not doubt me.
If I could meet him at the advantage now,
He is the Foul I Would shoot at. His life done,
The Farm is mine. Oh ye, whose hopes depend,
Like Imgring shadows, on another end,
What need you wait with patience natures leisure,
When such an engine can soon work your pleasure?
Tarry: yonder is a man -- now by his habit
It should be Sager. What? and fast asleep?
Wished opportunity to my revenge.
I Will kill him ere he wakes. Stay, grant he should
In this unbeaten meadow lately act
Some horrid sin, please his adulterous lust:
I should then with his body strike his soul,
And sink them both together. Reason no further
Thou chiding conscience. See, the Fates have placed
Him sit for vengeance: enemy, sleep thy last.
He Is Planet-strucke, fallen down: now to my Farm.
He that would rise, must thank his wit or arm.
Oh but my murder! pish, who ever stood
Exit. In fortunes height, without some touch of blood?
Enter Benjamin and Sager at several ways.
Ben. This I diuin'd.


Sag. Happy prevention!


Ben. Go, thou despairing wretch, and for thy will,
Ten thousan swords shall thy vexed conscience kill.
'T was a vain blow to us, and no blood spilt,
Not less in thy intention is thy guilt.
This Clergy-habite which you have assumed,
Make good a while for your supposed death;
Allow his tyranny free scope: live close:
Till time shall ripen those events, we strive
To build on this vile ground. Hold, there is my key:
Into my chamber; I sup at my fathers.
Exit Sager. What, come again?
Enter Bromley.
Brom. I cannot be at rest: I must needs see,
If this late murdered corpse removed be.
Some gold I have put up in this Portmantua:
If I should be pursued, this may relieve me.
Ay me! the bodi's gone: sure it is revealed:
Murder from heavens eye cannot be concealed.
What shall I do? sit down: lie there, my gold.
Enter Nice, and Thirsty, on either side, crying So ho.
Nic. Holla, Cousin Benjamin. So ho ho.


Their. Oh ho ho.

excurrit.
Brom. Oh me, the Countrie's up, what shall I do?


Ben. This fool has frayd him.
Oh guilt! how have thou made
Cowherd of man to fly at his own shade!
Now Cousin Nice, what holla you for?

Nic. You had need of a bell to ring you in. Your father has stayed supper for
you this hour.


Ben. Come then, let us walk on -- what is here a Portmantua?


Nic. Oh, oh, do not touch it: it is venom.


Ben. Why my wise Cousin? why are you so timorous?


Nic. Oh it lies there for a wager: there be thieves about it. Take heed
Cousin; I found a Portmantua once, and lost all the money in my purse. Fly, fly
--

Exit.
Ben. Are you gone? Well, I see now, he that will be wise by Calender, shall
be a fool by destiny.

Sure, this is Bromleys budget, and has gold
Put up for his escape: it is so by th'weight.
It falls into my hands most luckily:
For I have need of cash in these occasions.
Yet I Will repay't again: my honesty
Shall be his friend, whose fear was friend to me.
Oh, in this glass my represented soul
Stands manifest to my impartial eye.
Ye heavens rain showers of mercy on my sins:
Lest where my pleasure ends my woe begins.

Act. Quart.
Enter Vasters Wife. Wife. RVnne faster, ye dull legs of motion,
That time may follow with a swifter pase.
Let wanton Epicures wish you creeple-limbes,
Insatiate with the riot of their joys;
And chide the hasty forwardness of day,
That will not dance attendance on their play.
My spirits wrought upon with tedious woes,
Think that each hour lingering and lazy goes.
Impartial fates, how you delude our thoughts!
Guiding events to their determined ends,
Whether our strength with or against contends.
Whether the passenger wake, or sleep his fill,
The wave and wind-mov'd vessel goes on still.
Patience then heart! they do not valor know,
That weary faint, but who can suffer woe.
Who Is this?
Enter Rob. Vaster with the Letter.
Rob. By your leave, Mistress Sorrow.


Wife. Right, thou have hit my name.
Yet clear of sin, my sorrow has no shame.

Rob. I have letters from Mr. Ben. Gripe.


Wife. They Are welcome. (poor boy how am I undone!
It Is hard, a mother must not own her son.

Rob. Sure I should know that face and language too.
A chill disquiet troubles my soft peace,
And runs like a cold fever through my blood.
I Am very sick of somewhat. Oh it is then
Error, the sickness in all minds of men.
But that I know her absence gives her dead.
IN would swear it was my mother. alas vain thoughts,
How you would flatter me!

Wife. -- Your provident friend, Benjamin Gripe.
Leave out that Gripe: it is an improper name;
Cannot denominate thee for such a creature.
A name can never constitute a nature.
If blessed mankind have a Phaenix left;
And vice of that good has not time bereft;
In this degenerate worlds apostacy;
The plural number's lost: that one is he, -- Son

Rob. Zlid she calls me Son.


Wife. That word's oreslipt.
How easily love is in her language trip't.
Son -- of compelling nature not forbeares:
Passion must vent it self in speech or tears.
Do thou not know me?

Rob. Yes: this testify.
I beg your blessing on my humbled knee.

Wife. Rise with heauen's benediction.


Rob. Lives my Father?


Wife. Guess by my grief and silence.


Rob. Vm'h my doubts
Wrappe me in further maze. My father dead?
My mother living in his enemies house?
Let Us study. Often I have heard my father moan,
That this same woman's lust had him undone.
This gives strong faith. Why should she else live here,
But to some such vile end? By heaven it is clear.
Oh that this sap, which my life feeds upon,
Did not confess a deriuation
From that corrupted trunk! Well, I will force
Nature run back with a preposterous course.
I Will fashion a forgetful lunacie,
That ere I was her soon. But on my soul,
Not touch her with least hurt. -- Woman come hither.

Wife. Woman! Dear Robin, not thy mother? bless me.
Why do thou gripe me thus? Oh some black storm
Is rising on thy brow.

Rob. Storm? No, it is thunder. Can you read this?


Wife. Yes, I can spell't too well. It speaks my death, dear son --


Rob. Come, come, forget
These filial rights, and Natures attributes.
Prepare your self to --

Wife. What? Oh desperate child.
Often have thy bended knees with a just duty
Kissed the cold earth, to beg my prayers to heaven,
For thy prosperity: often desired forgiveness
Of thy wild infant-errors. Often have these
Borne thee with soft indulgence: but now, see,
A woeful mother bends her humble knee
To her incensed son; not to conserve
This flesh from death, but thy black soul from hell:
The vnscaped dungeon, where all Parricides dwell.
Think: if thy spirits be not grown mad and wild,
Pity a mother kneeling to her child.

Rob. I Am deafer then an Usurer to your mones.
I must, like Nero, see the place I bred in.
Be brief in answer: did you never wrong my fathers nuptial bed.

Wife. Never.


Rob. Take heed.
Clogge not that breast with more sin, that must bleed.
Speak truth and save your soul.
Lie you not here to satiate his lust,
That robbed my father? speak, or y' are but dust.

Wife. No on my soul.


Rob. Now on thy soul thou lie.
Confess, be plain, or without pawse thou dyest.

Wife. Help, heavens or men.

Within, break open door. Enter Benia. Valentine, Gripe, Nice, Thirsty.
Ben. What prodigie's this?


Wife. Nothing Sir, alas nothing: 'twas but my fear.


Ben. It is my servant Sir; he meant no ill.


Grip. Son, son, howsoever he serves you, I Am sure he does not serve God.
Without question, he would have ravished her.


Their. He would have refreshed her, Sir.


Grip. Speak widow, is 't not true? -- away with him.
Cousin Nice, make his mittimus.

Wife. It Is not amiss to let him feel some smart.
His life they cannot touch: what his offense
Deserves in heavens, strict justice, mercy pardon.
Parents learn this in tendering Childrens state:
Too much indulgence is not love but hate.

Nic. Sure his complexion does not give it: let me see your hand, Sir.


Rob. Will you feel it, Sir?

strikes him. Exeunt.
Ben. (Son offer violence to the mother?) strange!
Till I can sound this mystery of ill,
I Will to the prison and relieve him still.
Exit.
Gripe. You will be gone Mr. Valentine; but I hope you will visit me shortly
again.


Val. Before you look for me, Sir, -- if all fall right,
I vow to visit you again this night.
Exit.
Grip. Ha widow! I am clear of the stone now.


Wife. The less able to do a widow pleasure, Sir.


Grip. Tut, wench, I mean the disease, the disease.


Wife. (No Sir: you have a worse disease behind:)
The body has no sickness like the mind.

Gripe. Try me, sweet. I Am like a leeke, though I have a gray head, I have a
green -- wut? wut be my medicine for the stone? when? when?


Wife. When you have married me I will be your wife.


Gripe. Pish: first make trial how thou likest me: there is no wit, to marry
before experience.


Wife. Your house Sir, is too public.


Grip. Hold, there is the key of my closset. Be thine own pandar for conuayance.
I must receive a little money: profit is above pleasure: about ten --


Wif. Good luck direct my hands unto the morgage.
That found, if or my wit or strength hold tacke,
I have a medicine Sir, to cool your back.
Exit.
Grip. Alas poor wench: now she is got into my Closset, she hugges her hopes,
as a Politician his ayery plotte, and cries a prize, a prize. She shall be
double cony-catch'd. Well, it grows Fairy-time. Oh the fine dapper laddes, how
they friske about my chamber: when at every step here drops a grote, there a
teston. Many drops make a flood. Sure, I Am some wonderful honest man, that
they love me thus. I must to bed. Tarry, how then shall I keep touch with the
widow? Tha't, I Will sit down in my chair, and feign my self in a slumber. Oh
'twill be a golden waking dream.

Enter Vaster, Valentine, Cursew, like Fairies, dancing antickes: pinching
Gripe, as they pass by him. Oh-oh-th' are angry. Would I were rid of 'hem. Oh
-- sweet spirit -- oh -- do not terrify me thus. What have I done to provoke
you?


Vast. Confess thy sins. The have some wench in a corner.


Grip. I have, I have -- oh -- but I Will not meddle with her.


Vast. Whiles thy house was cleanly swept,
And thy conscience chastely kept:
Neat linen, fire and water ready;
And thy purpose good and steady:
Whiles thou never sentst the poor
Unrewarded from thy door.
Whiles thou wakendst with the chimes,
Because thou wentst to bed betimes,
We brought thee wealth; but *it was in vain:
For now we'll fetch it back again.
Come deliver the keys of your trunkes.

Grip. Oh theenes, you will rob me, you will undo me.


Curf. No, Gowtie blister, well bind thee, undo thee, who will --.


Val Open thy jaws thou yawning sepulcher:
Here is a morsel for an Usurer.
Gagge him,
Vast. A piece of Cheese of the Low Country Dairies.
This is the usual diet of the Fairies.

Curf. Now we will rip the lining of thy trunkes.
Better the Fairies have it then thy punkes.

Val. Luck more, then we can carry, has assigned us.


Curf. Each horse his lode: we'll leave the rest behind us. Thou greedy Panther.


Val. Savage Wolf.


Vast. Man-eater. Thou fettting Canker.


Val. Commons horsleech.


Cur. Cheater


Vast. Whose belly has just cause to sue an action
Of trespass, against thy covetous lusts exaction:
For detinie of many hundred meals,
Which it from others, and thy self too; steals.
The Gowt.

Val. The Dropsy.


Curf. Collicke, Lunacie,
Like Sprites and Fairies haunt thy company.
And as thou gap'st now, let some Batte or Owl
Spet backewards in thy mouth.

Vast. No more. If thou do not
Repent, restore, turn good, sit till thou rot.

Val. What does Usury stick in thy teeth? spet out, Dog, spet out. Now thou
gap'st for a morgage. Do?


Vast. Fare-ill. To those that ask how came this evil, Give answer thus: The
Fairies robbed the Devil.


Grip. Oh -- Oh -- Oh.

Exeunt. Enter Bromley, Nice, Vasters wife.
Bro. Ho master Gripe? what, your chamber door open thus carely? how now,
bound? gagged? what rogues have been here?


Nic. Speak to me uncle, speak: the gagge's out.


Grip. Save the gagge. I will hang the whole shire, but I Will find 'hem.
Iugglers, Fairies, incarnall sprites! My money, my heart, my guts, my soul --
Let me curse my self into the ground, and save a Dirge. Run, cry, ride, charge
the Constables with 'hem.


Brom. Where be they, Sir?


Grip. Gone to the Devil. Run to a Coniurer, cast me a figure.


Nic. Oh, Sir, all the Coniurers are of their own trade. A mischief on it, I
thought there was some scuruy luck toward; the Crickets did so cry in the Oven
yesterday. And this very hour, as we came in, there was an Owl whoo-whooping
in the top of the chimney: and just at the threshold, master Bromley here
stumbled Signs, signs.


Grip. Pluck down the signs. I Will undo all the Innes in the town: they
harbor the thieves.


Brom. You said they were Fairies.


Nic. Now in sincerity, I heard a great rattling of chains.


Wife. (This makes me wonder! such a robbery, and I not hear it?


Brom. Come bridle up this fury. What will you say, if I can produce you the
plotter, abbettor, or at least accessory to this villainy? What if the
pick-locke can open the chest of all this stratagem?


Grip. Alas, poor widow, she was fast, I warrant you.


Brom. No, she was loose I warrant you: how could we have got in, if she had
not opened the door? Your cousin Nice and I came from a hurly-burly in the Iaile.
Your sons man has broke from his keeper. And as we were coming, we met this
woman very supitiously stealing out.


Wife. My heart misgaue me thus: this devils tongue
Would work my misdeem'd innocence some wrong.

Grip. No more words. Cousin, neighbor, take her to the next Justice. I must
not deal in my own business. Let her be examined soundly, soundly: sent to
the Iayle, roundly, roundly.


Wife. Sir, I beseech you.


Grip. No more. Do not you know, I know you for a whore!
Away with her, I will not hear her speak.
My gold, my silver -- Oh my heart will break.
Exit.
Brom. Come, will you walk? I Will lead, widow, come you next. Master Nice,
you will follow.


Nic. As close, as beggary follows drunkenness.
Let me see your hand, widow -- Oh the case is clear.
A yellow spot does on your hand appear.
Gather up your heels, widow: Justice Surly dwells hard by.
Enter Robert Vaster.
Rob. How now? my mother guarded? with two rogues?

Sword, thou did feign to kill her -- but -- Sirrah -- you -- deliver me this
woman, or I Will make thy yellow starched face serve me for a cut-worke band.


Brom. Oh Sir, y' are well met; you broke from the Iayle last night. Apprehend
him master Nice.


Nic. I Am somewhat dainty and shy on him, Sir. He looks vile sharp on it.


Brom. Let him look as sharp, as an Apparitors nails, we'll blunt him I
warrant ye. Sirrah, I charge you stand.


Rob. Sirrah, you see I stand charged already. Will you have me run?


Brom. Oh help, help --

Exit.
Nic. Hold, hold, I have not made my will.


Rob. No matter for thy prayers; dispatch it quickly then.


Nic. You Will give me leave, Sir, to make my will.


Rob. Yes.


Nic. Then my will is -- to run away.

Exit.
Wif. Thanks, son; but now do you not, like the Lion,
Save the distressed Lamb from the Wolfes paws,
For sacrifice to his own bloody laws?

Rob. Dear mother, pardon; be secure --

Enter Bromley, Nice, Benjamin, Sager disguised, Anne Vaster.
Brom. This way, this way: here -- Oh have we found you?


Ben. How do these mischiefs flutter in thick heaps!
And cloud my understanding from the light,
I looked the Sun should shine, find it dark night
I cannot stand to examine circumstances.
Now master Bromley, whither are you bound?

Brom. Your father gave us charge to have the widow
To master Justice Surly's; he suspects her
To have some hand in the robbery to night.
Sir it concerns you; he has lost 300. pound.

Ben. Vmh. My father robbed? the widow charged with it?
Her son vniayld himself? these are harsh turns.
Well, go you two before, prepare the Justice.
You have my word for their appearance. Go.
Exeunt. Br. Nic. Widow, and Robin, now here is none but friends:
You Will give me leave to wonder at these ends.
Of that anon.
Mean time I here present you with a gift,
Dearer to me, then is the Sun to earth.
So; narrow up your passions for a space:
H'you the morgage-deeds? give them my hands.
Yet the success on my innention stands.
Mother, and brother, (so I hope your titles)
My self, and friend here, whom you do not know,
Will bail you both. That done, I have an Inn,
Now void of Tennant; there dwell all together.
My friendship to the power shall pledge your faith.
Measure good deeds by what man would, not has.
Exeunt Enter Griffin.
Griff. What Damned fortune's this, that I cannot smell out these thieves? I
would sweat them to the Gallous, as well as they swore me out of my money. An
oath like a strong charm, should conjure their necks into the circle of a
rope.

Enter Bromley, Benjamin. Oh, here comes my fellow-Patient; we both took
Physic together; purged, purged: but I have a cordial for him. Save you,
brother Gripe. Mr. Bromley, news, good news. It Is reported, that Sager's dead.


Brom. Dead? I Will go take possession presently.


Ben. Do not with too strict rigor exercise your power on his distressed
family.


Brom. My time is come, I will not lose an hour.


Grif. It Is just, that every man should take his own.


Ben. Sir, you speak law, not charity. He that will
Be nothing more then just, is unjust still.
Woe to that quited soul, to whom from heaven
All justice, and no mercy shall be given.
Your mercy to the widow, to the Orphans.

Brom. As much as a Puritan has upon a good feast.


Ben. Well -- let me tell you this -- Sager is dead.
So flies report, borne on presumptions wings.
But how he died, that aerie bird not sings.
Killed -- but by whom -- weight deeply -- I must hence.
The muttring's strong -- look to your conscience.
Secedit
Grif. How Is this? killed? -- muttering? and conscience? Look, his ghastly
melancholy points him out for the murderer. As sure, as a hatte-brinkes pulled
down declares a cuckold, this darkness discouers him.


Brom. I am a villain.


Grif. Tell him, that knows it not.


Brom. My narrow heart cannot be capable
Of this huge bulk of sorrow. It must out.
Now, to whose bosom better then my friends?
This hand killed Sager.

Grif. How?


Brom. Nay, do your worst.
It Was but chance medley, accidental slaughter.
Intending with my Piece to strike a foul,
Against my will the cock went down, and he
Stood in deaths way. It was his destiny.
But Griffin, hark you -- let not your tongue stir.
Do not I know you for a forgerer?
And more -- you wot -- let not your tongue be loose.

Ben. Thus are two Foxes caught in one poor noose.

Exit Ben,
Griff. Our guilt shall bind our secrecy; who lives
An unsuspected villain, winks at others
Unlawful deeds, to teach their eyelids how
To wink at his -- Shall we go to our new Hostice?

Brom. Where? who?


Griff. For your where, at the Maidenhead, a good likely place. For your who:
the wid dow that old Gripe suspects for the robbery; but young Gripe has
tenanted to his Inn. Mass, she preuents us. Widow, we were coming.

Enter Wife
Wife. Pray' Gentlemen walk in; you shall have attendance.


Brom. Your company, sweet widow.


Wife. I Will not be long from you, Sir.
Exeunt. Oh, some retiring from this house of sin.
Fate! I was never bred to keep an Inn.
Enter Curfew, Valentine as themselves, Vaster disguised. More customers? that
which all Innes would see;
Great store of guests: this is a plague to me.

Vast. Yonder Is mine Hostice. Now the water's up, that we cannot get over to
the Abbey, it is our securest course to commit the money to her custody. If
any search should be made, and these tokens found about us, we are all dead
men: there is not so much mercy in Gripe, as in the Plague.


Curf. Agreed. Widow, we have some money to pay to a Londoner in Bedford here;
and he is not yet come to receive it. Will you lock it up safe for us?


Val. But hear you? Deliver it not to any one of us. Except all three demand
it to gether, keep it still.


Vast. Help her to bear it in, and see it laid up.
Exeunt Zlid, my wife takes degrees; she rises fairly.
I sold her hither whore some tricks to do.
Now she is turned whore, and Bawd, and Hostice too.
Stand close dear wits, and shadow me disguise.
She cast me down, and by her fall I Will rise.
Husbands that love your honor as your life;
Learn now to be revenged, on a false wife.
Enter wife.
Wif. Your friends expect you Sir.


Vast. Sweet, I would go.
But here is a charming beauty, that says no.
Will you walk off a little -- to the meddow?
I have a tiny business with you, widow?

Wife. What is your will, Sir? I Am in haste: be short.


Vast. The thing thou wotst on, half a minutes sport.


Wif. Forbear, libidinous Groom.


Vast. Groom? I Am a man.
And can do, Hostice, what another can.
Come, shall I speak in gold, and action?

Wif. Be damned, inchanter, with thy golden spelss.
Thou think, gold can buy lust, when nothing else.
Yet I do love thy soul. Think, ethinke, how dear,
A moments joy is bought with endless fear.
How ill the flesh steals his unjust delight,
When the soul suffers an eternal night.
Flatter thy glowing hopes with heat no more.
Be not deceived; thy Hostice is no whore.

Vast. So: spoke my outside brave; did my rich husk
Allow me impudent; and my vndown'd chinne
Promise my blood vnsuck'd out by this sin,
You would run mad on me.

Wif. Sooth, thou much errest.
I never saw that person (except one,
Who justly claimed my love, now dead and gone)
In whose embracements I would sooner lock the treasures of my heart.

Vast. Now, now, she is coming.


Wif. If you had moved my ears with a chaste suite, I should have listn'd.


Vast. Brave! she is mine already.


Wif. I cannot love theenow.


Vast. No?


Wif. No, I cannot conceive a good thought of thee.


Vast. No?


Wif. I hate thee.


Vast. Heigh? handy, dandy, fast and loose, brave devil.
I Will conjure you for this. Come, will you love me?
Or no matter for your love, will you lie with me?
Do, or lie alone in the meddow here. I shall leave your tempting eyes for the
Crows to pick out.

Wif. Defend me goodness.


Vast. Whistle not so loud, lest I cut your pipe, Come on.


Wif. Honor or life, how shall I save you both?
Sir, I shall spoil you. I ha'bene long a sinner.
A common sinner, Sir, and am not sound.
You cannot escape infection, if you touch me.

Vast. Humh! the pox, say you? well, you will not reveal me.

Exit
Wife. You need not, Sir, distrust my silence. Wrongs
That escape heavens hand, need not fear mortal tongs.
This world's turned Bedlam, rauing, desperate-badde.
It staggered drunk before, now it runs mad.
More customers?
Enter old Gripe and Benjamin.
Ben. But, Sir, respect your life, your conscience.


Grip. Thou say well, for my life. But for my conscience* It Is like a
Surgions, that takes money for letting out blood. Think of my morgage.


Ben. Upon my life, he will kill her. O presumption,
How do thou dare heavens justice? I must study
To interpose prevention. Sir, I Am your son:
This breast you gave me, and I Will still conserve it,
A faithful closet to lock up your secrets.
How will you strike? Pistol her?

Grip. No: that speaks
Like an obstreperous Advocate, too loud,
In th'cares of justice. Murder, like your Jesuit,
Should whisper death in silence -- sleeping silence.

Ben. I apprehend it, poison. Sir, I Will buy you
A speedy potion.

Grip. Not too dear, good son.
I would not have it too dear: my mony's gone.
Two peny-woorth of Rats-bane, w' have experience,
W'll do it; do it thoroughly.

Ben. I Will provide it, Sir.
I Will be your Apothecarie; but by no means
Minister it my self. You must do that, Sir:
I cannot do you better service. Rare!
Then bring my father to the Galhouse.
Be petulant, and let your wanton mirth,
Give you forgetful of all wrong.
Enter.
Gripe. Come widow, I forgive thee now: I hope thou't forgive me too. I Am come
to drink down all malice.


Wife. Pray' Sir, lead the way. I Will follow.
Look up, dear friend: what thus deiects you?
Exit Grip.
Ben. Wonders, miracles -- I must needs poison thee.
Be not dismayed, my poison shall not hurt thee:
I Will tell thee all*
Enter Vaster in haste.
Vast. Hostice, Pray 'helpe me to the money quickly. I must pay't instantly.


Wife. You shall Sir.

Exeunt.
Vast. So, if my newborn plots hold constant life*
I Will cheat my thieves, but above all, my wife.
Enter Wife and Rob. with money. Thank you, good Widow. Youth, tell the
Gentlemen I Am gone to tender the money. Bid
Exit Rob. 'hem be merry and continue their healths. I Will take my round, when I
come again. Farewell Ostice.

Exit.
Wife. You Are welcome Sir,

Enter Curfew, Valentine, Robin.
Val. Gone, say thou? and with the money? fire and gunpowder! how are we
blown up?


Curf. Pretty handsome!


Val. Ostice --


Rob. Good leach, stand further off: your breath's too violent*


Curf. Did we not charge you not to deliver the money, but to us all three
together?


Rob. Mass, it is true. How forgetfully are we cheated?


Val. You are a coozening woman.


Rob. You do lie!


Curf. Keep the peace. Ostice, you will make it good to us, three hundred pound,
a pretty competent sum.


Val. Furies and Fiends! wits, you do fairly strive.


Curf. I thought this faiery money would nere thrive.

Exeu^t
Ben. I have heard all this roguerie.
Enter Ben. Cheer, Widow: let not sorrow make thee sick.
Perhaps, I Will catch the knaves at their own trick.
Ent. Their.
Their. So ho-my master's turned Reueller. I never lost my name since I came
into his staruice, till now. Vck! a miracle, I am not Thirsty.

Enter Nice.
Ben. Now my wise kindred, why look you so pale?


Nic. O, I Will put off my wedding. I will not for all Bedford marry to morrow.


Ben. No? why?


Nic. O, my Uncle reaching for a Cup, overthrew the salt toward me -- toward
me. O it is ominous.


Ben. The falling of a salt keep thee from marriage! well, I have a strange
medicine, of quick cure to this conceited sickness. Robin, fetch me some wine.
Coz, how do feel thy self?


Their. He shakes as if he had the gurning agew.


Nic. Perplexed Cousin, perplexed. I had rather a good Lordship had fallen
toward me.


Ben. Tut man, salt seasons all things; fish or flesh.
And troth, thou need'st it: for thy witte's but fresh.
Here blood, I drink to thee.

Their. Now could I dance like a Dutch Froe: my heels are as light as my head.


Nic. Oh I recant. Cousin, I will marry.


Ben. What meant you Sir, to spill the wine upon him?


Rob. 'Twas a mischance Sir.


Nice. No: it was good hap.
It Is a good sign, to have wine spilt in ones lap:
This makes amends for the salt, Sir.

Ben. I thought this docke would fetch your nettle out.
I see. small wind turns a fools mill about. Let Us go.
Exeu^t.
Wife. Yonder comes my Physician and his potion.

Enter Gripe.
Grip. I have here two papers: one of sugar, and that is for my self: another
of poison, and that is for my Ostice. Let me be right-right. I should make fair
work, if I were mistaken now. Ha widow! the art a Churle-a very churl, that
would not keep company with thy guests. I have brought thee a cup of wine
here: health and blood to thee, sweet Widow.


Rob. A miracle: An Usurer drunk at's own cost.


Gripe. There Is a whole cup for thee: pledge me chucke. Nay tarry, tarry: thou
must have sugar to 't; women love sweet things, I know. So, off with it bottom
and all: the deeper the sweeter. Ha Ostice, my son shall give thee a lease of
thine Inn.


Wife. I would he could grant me a lease of my life: for I grow sick sir.
Robin, look in.

Exit Rob.
Gripe. (Excellent rattes-bane) it works already. Widow, do remember since
thou wast in my study? and y faith what foundst there?


Wife. Nothing, but what I left behind me, Sir. I Am very sick.


Gripe. (I Will nere trust poison else.) This cottons well yet. No sooner dead, but
my son shall ceaze on all the goods. Search the coffers for my morgage. If it
be lost, yet now she I keep counsel.


Wife. This wine has made me thirsty: I Am not well.


Gripe. Hye thee to bed and sweat. A little posset with two-penny worth of
horse-spice. O it is excellent to put one into a sweat. Farewell widow.

Exit.
Wife. So I Am recouerd now: thy absence cures me.
O earth! thou center of the world and sin;
Tsty Paradise is lost t'th'art only now
A larger stable, where all vices dwell.
Did not the Sun shine, I should think thee hell.
Enter Vaster. Lucky! here comes the cheater. Sir, the money is asked for by the
Gentlemen, your friends: They threaten to arrest me, but I hope sir, you will be
my quittance.


Vast. Yes: on this condition.
Let me enjoy thy love on this soft ground:
I Will pay it back, were it three hundred pound.
Stir not: this charge you: are you not content?
Come, with a silent kiss seal your consent.

Wife. Sir, you know my disease. I Am dangerous.


Vast. The pox? O I have known London too long to be afraid of the pox.
Come, will you unlock? I have the golden key. If not, I Will to Virginia, like
some cheating Bankrout, and leave my Creditour in the suddes. You know the Iayle.
Ha you never bin hired to yawle for the whole prison? and whule to the
passengers?


Wife. Sorcerer, thy circle cannot hold me.


Vast. No, I would have yours hold me. Come, will you fadge?


Wife. Not, if thou killst me: not if thy murderous hand
Could put me to a death* (like Jesuits poison)
Ten years a dying.

Vast. No? you will repent.


Wife. So will thou never: take my carcass, slave:
Whiles there is a soul within; no lustful hand
Did or shall ever touch it.

Vast. Politic whore!
What do you ken me now?

Wife. My husband? o,
Into your arms I fly.

Vast. Infection, no.
Y are dangerous by your own confession.
discouers himself.
Wife. Alas! I forged that answer, to avoid
Sinful embracings. Brothels sick indeed
Of that contagion, sooth and smother't up,
To tempt distrustful comers on, at once
To their own profit, and the others ruin.
They speak false, to do false the safer. I
To save my conscience did my flesh belly.

Vast. You cannot tempt me Siren; I am resolute.
Thou art a cunning Bitch, and I am proud
Of such expected means to my revenge.
Hark, how I Will quittance thy abhorred lusts.
First, thou shall be arrested for the money,
Whereof I cheated thee: so be restrained
From thy old straggling, mewed up like a haggard;
Till the Assise comes, then thou shall be hanged.
I hear thou standst bound over for suspicion
Of robbing Gripe. I did the villainy.
I Will have it proved thine: so thou shall hang for me.

Wife. Dear husband, do so.


Vast. Husband me no more:
That name was cancelled when you first played whore.
Now garden-pot, you water your sad fears,
But I am no loue-foole, won with woman's tears.

Wife. O prosecute your will. Thus on my knees,
And with a heart more humbled, I entreat,
And I must have it granted ere I rise;
Be pleased to make this life a sacrifice,
To expiate your wrath. I freely yield it,
For your redemption. For your hate I dye;
That might not live in your loves company.
If I confess not guilty, to save you,
Imagine then all your suspicions true.
But when for your debts I have paid this life,
Believe but then, you had a faithful wife.

Vast. O, thou would melt a rock. My heart's too dead,
To sprout at this wet April. Fare you well.
Exit.
Wife. Peace and content attend you: and let still
Mercy forgive, and rectify your ill.
Enter Ben.
Ben. What? not dead yet? but weeping? come, come dry
Up all thy tears: go hye thee in, and dye.
Much villainy is now together pack't.
The Scene grows full. Your patience this last act.
Exeunt.
Act. Quint.
Enter old Brace, the true Abbot. Abbot. TO man, how sweet is breath! yet
sweetest of all,
That breath, which from his native air does fall.
How many weary pases have I measured!
How many known and unknown dangers past,
Since I commenced my tedious Pilgrimage,
The last great work of my death-yeelding age!
Yet am I blessed, that my returning bones
Shall be raked up in Englands peaceful earth.
Oh happy Englishmen, if your sore eyes
Did not look squint on your felicities!
How other Countries envy, what you loath,
And surfeit on: and would make that their pride,
Which is by your contempt still vilefied!
This sickness fullness breeds in most men's blood;
None less, then the possessors, know what is good.
Now to my deputy: here his glories end.
But stay: he comes to meet me. I Will attend.
Enter Curfew. Curf. Confound this damned fox: he has cheated me of the best
prey, I ever shark'd for. Would I could light on him; I have a Constable here
should make him stand.


Brac. What Is this? sharking, foxing, and a pistol?
Th'embleme of thief, cheater, murderer?
Sure, this vile Elderne was not of my planting.
I know him: It Is his brother, to whose trust I did infeoffe my place.
Enter Messenger.
Mess. I was directed this way to the Abbot.

My lord -- the Judge detained by sickness from to morrow's Session, desires
your lordships aid to the supply of his own place. The assistant Justices
rest their determining sentence on your lips.


Curf. I Will give my old attendance.


Mess. Your lordships leave.

Exeunt Mess. and Curf.
Bra. I leave your lordship too.
I must about this mischief to prevent:
I Will force you both your offices repent.
Exit. Enter Iaylour, Gripe, Bromley, Griffin.
Iay. So, so, so. My customers drop in roundly. Welcome, Mr. Gripe, and the
rest of my good friends, welcome! I am very glad to see you here. My house was
not graced with an Usurer, and vnder-Sheriffe, many a day before; though I have
been pestered with abundance of honester fellows. Speak, shal'^ be merry?
what will you have to dinner?


Gripe. A rope. What do thou tell me of dinner?


Iay. No Sir, that shall be kept for your supper.


Brom. Give me so me Sack and Aqua vitae. I will be drunk presently.


Grif. It Is clear. I have twenty cases for it.

The concealing of murder is but manslaughter. I must have my book.


Brom. Give 's some Sack, I say: mun tut, etc.

Enter Nice.
Nice. My Uncle committed? Justice it self sent to the Iayle?


Gripe. Cousin, sweet Cousin, run, scudde, fly -- to Sir Bare
Notwithstanding: he lies but three miles off; he is in my debt: bid him release
me, and I Will release him.


Griff. Stay Sir. He Is in my debt too: I have solicited for Sir Bare these seven
years, and have nothing but bare thanks.


Brom. Nay then, take me with you. Thus --

Enter Benjamin, Robin, Thirsty; Thirsty climbing up into a tree. Rob. into a
bush.
Ben. Ha you your lesson perfect?


Thirst. Yes, yes: as a Midwife her errand to a Citizens wife. There Is not an
Owl in an Iuy-bush, nor a Parrat at a Drugsters door, has whoo whoop, or walk
Knave, more perfect.


Ben. Robin, do it cunningly. My Dad shall be
Only to me beholding for his life.
By that advantage I recall his love.

Grip. Cousin, fly every step. Remember, like a Iury-man, you go upon life and
death.

Exit Nice.
Brom. Happiness grant, that no Hare cross him in the way: his superstitious
legs will retire, though we hang for it. Come, shall we keep the rule of the
place, and drink drunk now?

Exeunt. Enter Nice.
Ben. Now kindred, whither trot you so fast?


Nic. Oh Cousin, about a deed of charity; to save your father, and two or
three knaves more from hanging. I am going to Sir Bare Notwithstanding; to save
them out of prison: they have saved him often.


Ben. Sir Bare Notwithstanding, he is a great man, Cousin.


Nic. He had three Lordships fell to him at a clappe; the worst worth 400. a
year.


Ben. Yet he is bare notwithstanding.


Nic. He has sold his Caroch with four Flanders mares, because he would
retire himself and live in the Country.


Ben. Yet he is Bare Notwithstanding. But to himself Cousin, farewell.

Exit Ben.
Nic. To him, quoth he? I will to him, were the devil in my way.


Thirst. Porke, porke.


Nic. The devil porke you. What dismal bird crokes disaster to my journey!


Their. Porke.


Nic. Nay, if the destinies have set the Raven against me, I Will rerurne sure --
yet let me see. So my Uncle may be hanged, I Will on, come what will.


Their. Porke.


Nic. O this black bird tolles like a passing bell,
My own sad mischief and my Uncles knell.
Yet why am I so timorous; when charity
Bids me go on, shall a Raven hinder me?
I Will keep aloose and pass -- oh a spirit, a spirit.
Rob. flashes powder. The Widows Ghost. Bromley, Lawyer, Uncle, hang.
Take all your fortunes, I Will no further gang.
It Is an vnhallow'd place, a dismal day.
Betide what will, I Will back again some way.
Exit.
Rob. Come down, Raven.


Thirst. Come out, Spirit.


Rob. Blind, credulous fool! He that shall trust at need
Such nice and tottring cockscombes, shall thus speed.
Should his sick father send him for some drugges,
He would turn back at such imagined bugges.
Enter Benjamin, Sager, Wife, Anne.
Ben. Come, mother, friend, and wife; take these back places,
Where you may hear unseen: that when time serves,
I may produce you. Works and hours are spent
Then well, when we do good, or ill prevent.

Wif. I cannot judge, what is this days success.
All-ruling powers the doubtful sequel bless.
Enter Curfew with other assistants, Vaster in a Priests habit, Valentine like
a Physician, the Iaylor with Gripe, Bromley, Griffin, etc.
Curf. My Lord, whose place I personate, being sick,
Has thus designed me, both to hear and censure
The criminal causes, which offend the peace
Of our dread Sovereign, and his subjects weal.
Whiles we lance Ulcers, we the body heal.
The charge I give in short, you of the Jury,
Look to your Oath and conscience: let not favor
Shut up your eyes, nor malice open them
Too wide. You understand, our laws are good.
It Is pity that they should be writ in blood.
But since conniuence at unlawful deeds
Gives but encouragement, and we cannot strike
With sword of Justice the deserving faults,
Except you give the persons to our hands:
All on your vigilant information stands.
Proceed to the Inditements.

Grip. We are all cast away. Sir Bare is not come.

Enter Abbot with guide.
Ab. Pull down that counterfeit, proud, arrogant, puff:
Could your intrusion not content it self
T'vsurpe my office, but you must abuse
The Kings deputed Judge?

All. Down with him, down with him.


Abb. Iaylor, receive him to your custody,
Till our just censure give him punishment.
Fox, I shall hunt you out.

Curf. Do It with a pox.
The goose sometimes must sit and judge the Fox.

Abb. Proceed; the day hastens.


Clark. Marian Sorrow widow, yield thy body, and save thy bail.


Ben. Sir, she is dead: her felony is answered Before a higher Court.


Clarke. That is the woman that Gripe is suspected to have poisoned. Godfrey
Gripe stand to the Bar. You are indicted for the murder of Marian Sorrow
widow: guilty or not?


Grip. Not guilty, my Lord: let all the world testify of my honest carriage. I
have lived all my days in good name and fame.


Abb. Stand not upon your credit and good deeds.
Your harvest would be small, if like your seeds.
If all that know thee stood about this place,
And had free liberty to speak their thoughts,
Round ecchoing curses would amaze thy soul,
And with hells damned crew thy name enroule.
But when the Widow, Orphane call for plagues
On thy black life, thou hy'st unto thy bags;
There do applaud and hug thy wretched self:
As solace against all woes lay in thy pelf.
Thou have no god but gold: that Deity
Thou should adore, and would still succor thee,
Is quite rejected. And that Idol, money,
Which bears away thy confidence and heart,
When thou art plagued, aggrauates thy smart.
Thou art the Devils Executioner.
His rankest plague on earth's an Usurer.
Spirits in hell whip souls: extorting slaves
Torment poor bodies so before their graves.
Thou art a gulf, poor men's estates to drink.
A quagmire; none pass ore thee, but they sink.
Unless Strepsiades-like, men could devise
To pluck the Moon by Sorcerie from the skies;
Thy month and gain will come. Like some at sea,
(Yet dangerlesse of shipwreck more then they)
Thou slumbrest in a base lethargicke swoone.
Let others toil, thy iournye's done as soon.

Ben. Will not this move him?


Abb. Nature in all inferior things has set
A pitch or term, when they no more shall get
Increase and offspring. Vnrepayred houses
Fall to decay: old Cattle cease to breed.
And sappelesse trees deny more fruit or seed.
The earth would hart-lesse and infertile be,
If it should never have a Iubile.
Only the Usurers money genders still:
The longer, lustier: Age this does not kill.
He lives to see his moneys moneys money,
Even to a hundred generations reach.
He, whiles his interest money in does troule,
Cares not to lose the principal, his Soul.
He like a cleanly Alchymist can soke
And draw much silver, yet waste none in smoke.
Thou lendst, like water powered on sea-cole fire,
Or on a lode of Lime a shower of rain.
It seems to cool heat, but does more inflame.


Ben. His conscience has deaf ears.


Abb. When all is done,
And thou have swelled thy heaps; to say no more,
Thy coffer's only rich, and thou art poor.
This common plague is on all Usurers shown:
Th'haue much, yet are not masters of their own.
One day thy stintlesse mind shall have enough;
When the divided pieces of thy self
Shall in their several doomed mansions dwell:
Enough of mould in grave, of fire in hell.
But I spend breath in vain; come, let us proceed.

Gripe. No further. You have made my conscience bleed.
I here confess my self guilty of all,
Even of this murder too.

Abbot. Let mercy fall on thy distressed soul. Now to the rest.


Clark. Nicholas Bromley, you are indicted for the murder of William Sager,
etc. Guilty or not?


Brom. Not guilty? Who testifies against me!


Ab. In case of Murder should we never judge
By circumstanciall likelihoods and presumptions,
No life could be secure.
Enter Nice.
Nic. Puff! shift for your selves; Sir Bare Notwithstanding dares not be seen.


Brom. O, I am lost.
My Lord, I Am guilty: so is Griffin too:
He did conceal the fact, that I did do,
We shared the Lands together.

Abbot. Powerful truth!
Murder will out, though by the Actors mouth.

Gripe. O Benjamin, I have undone
My life, my state, my credit, and my Son.
But I Am resolved to dye, so Monarchs must:
Rich men as well as poor, must turn to dust.

Ben. Me thinks I could prevent all this.


Gripe. Alas, thou love me; but it is not possible.


Ben. Sir, I have here a book already drawn,
Seal to it freely, and I Will save your life.
You shall confirm me your undoubted heir,
And then surrender Vasters morgag'd lands.

Grip. It Is done.

seals.
Ben. My Lord and all this bench be witness to it.
Then thus I quit you, widow, appear in Court.
In earnest, see, she lives, that died in sport.

Wife. Sir, thank your Drugster, else I had died by you.
And you for me received a murderers due.

Grip. So, I am cousen'd finely, finely --


Val. My Lord, I challenge this widow for cheating me of 300. pounds. This is
one of her old tricks.


Abb. How Is this?


Val. My Lord, my self and two entrusted friends
Came hither to pay money on a bond,
Whiles the receiver did defer his coming;
We gave this coozening woman, being Hostice,
The whole sum to lay up: and straightly charged her,
Not to deliuer't, but to us all together.
She says one of us three demanded it
Of her in haste, and ran away: and thus
We lost our money, and the bond lies forfeit.

Ben. Your Lordships leave. It Is true, she not denies,
But they so charged her, and she was so coozend.
Therefore she yields to payment. Let 'hem come
All three together, they shall have the money.

Grif. Upon my faith, a pretty quillet.


Abb. Witty and just. How say you? here produce
The other two, your satisfaction's ready.

Ben. The widdow's cleard: but master Valentine --
Nay, man, come nearer, you would have present pay.

Val. No, Sir, let it even go.


Ben. So must not you.
You gave 300. pound to her: it is true.
Which like a subtle Quacksaluer, you robbed
My father of; Sprites, Fairies --

Val. I am cob'd.


Grip. It Is true, my lord: this is one of the Fairies. Justice, Justice.


Val. Well, if there be no remedy, I hope,
I shall not dance alone upon the rope.
My lord, here is the other Fairie.

Abb. O Sir, have I found you?
Pull off that borrowd habit from his back.
O that such foul deeds should be hid in black.

Gripe. My Lord, this Widow's accessory too:
She plotted, she received. Justice, justice.

Ab. But late thy song was mercy, now all justice?
Here Is all the goodness of an Usurer.
She saved his life, he would now hang her.

Gripe. She has robbed me, undone me.


Val. It is most true, my lord, she plotted all.


Curf. (Your villainy, Ostice, we shall now retort.
You cheated us, and we will hang you for it.

Ben. How do these mischiefs grow, like Hidra's heads, faster by cutting off!


Vast. Prodigious villains! will they thus cast away an innocent woman?
Yet I most vile of all, that thus stand by,
And for my fault behold my poor wife dye.

Ben. My lord, upon my soul this woman's clear:
And only malice thus accuses her.

Ab. Speak, woman, art thou guilty?


Wife. My lord, I beg a word with my Confessor,
Then I shall answer. Sir, a word in private.
To Vaster. Now Vaster, open thy unbelieving eyes:
Lo, thy devoted wife for thy sin dies.
Yield but this kindness to my latest breath,
Thou hate'st me living, love me yet in death.
Farewell -- My lord, I will not say, I Am guilty;
Do as your evidence and wisdom leads you.

Ab. This knot is hard to undo.


Vast. My lord, I Will help you.
Lo, I am that third Fairy, that pronounce
This woman clear, and those two perjured knaves.
We three are guilty: let your sentence come.
I have deserved, will not despair my doom.

Wife. My lord, he says not true: he is innocent: I guilty.


Ab. Speak on your souls, which of these tongues speak truth.


Val. Curf. My lord, the woman's clear.


Ab. Pernicious Villains, hopeless to be good:
That thus have strove to spill the guiltless blood.
Widow, y' are quitted. Sir, wait you your doom.

Vast. With patience. Benjamin Gripe, I here accuse you for murdering Richard
Vaster.


Ab. How?


Vast. My lord, I found that Vaster dying, buried him,
Saw him receiving death by this man's sword.
Theft's a great sin, but murder most abhorred.

Ab. Speak; is this possible?


Ben. We met in single combat in the field:
It seems his life unto my sword did yield.

Ann. Ay me, my father slain?


Rob. And by his friend?
Fate, whither will thy proiects tend!

Ann. My husbands hand my fathers life undoes:
For this fact he must dye: thus both I lose.

Ben. Forgive me all, by me you all have lost,
The wife a Husband, children a dear Parent:
Thus I return you all some recompense.
Nan thou shall lose a husband.

An. Heavens defend.


Ben. Mother, you lose a son, brother a friend.


Wife. Can nature so degenerate, that a man should live, stand by, and see
another suffer for murdering him?


Vast. Once again off disguise.
My lord, thus I prevent this feared disaster
My second case pulled off, I am plain Vaster.

Rob. My father?


Wife. My dear husband.


Vast. Most, most dear friend.
My love to you does beyond bounds extend.
My Lord, first to this honorable Bench,
I'here present the Kings most gtacious pardon
For us three here: heaven no less pardon us.
Now to my wife: see wench, I am newborn;
Renc'd from the plague of a suspected horn.
Black Iaundeys of the mind, thou fained spirit,
That haunts men's quiet thoughts with troubling shades.
Pernicious Jealousy, that like needless Physic
Diuertest health to voluntary sickness,
I brush thee off like dust. See, I am now
New married to my love and to my life.
Never could man boast a more constant wife.
Dear Benjamin, now Son, what I have left
Of all my shipwrack'd fortbnes, shall be thine.

Ben. Resume your former state, my father yields it.


Vast. Thanks to your honesty, not his; yet thus,
Some means of satisfaction I have found;
I Will pay him back his lost three hundred pound:
The fairie money, which was just the price
Of my redeemed lands.

Ben. Now master Bromley,
That universal mercy to our guilt,
May be affoorded, and no blood be spilt:
Surrender up your lease for the three lives
To Sagers wife and children, and I Will quit you.

Brom. I do most freely yield it.


Sag. Sager lives,
And hearty thanks for your forced kindness gives.

Abb. Happy delusions! in such ways of ill,
I wish men may be thus mistaken still.

Nic. Ravens, and Sprites, and Fairies, and Hares and diuels-Thus have I lost
my wench, lost my money, lost my watch, lost my wits. I do here renounce the
faith of all Almanackes, Physiogmoners, Palmists, Fortune Tellers. Erra Pater
was an Ass, and so are Prognosticators, his children, from generation to
generation.


Grip. I have drunk powerful physic, and the Dropsy
Of my (till now) nere quenched avarice,
Dries up like dew at the ascending Sun.
Vaster, take back your lands; and for the money,
Give it my son in portion with your daughter.
Henceforth I Will study to requite the wrongs,
Which I have done poor men by usury,
And vomit up th'extortions, that do lie
As undigested crudities on my conscience.
My future life shall be in mercy spent.
I Am Gripe no more; that name I do repent.

Abb. All Chronicles be filled with this; and let it
Beas a wonder to all ears imparted.
England had once an Usurer converted.

EPILOGVE.
Ben. THe Session now dissolues: each Justice rises:
No hurt is done; this is the mild Assizes.
We have escaped fair thus far: yet there remains
A stronger judgment to pass on our pains.
Too much to hope or doubt we must not dare.
We humbly then stand at your censures bar.
If the worst comes that may be, yet I look
For this grace, to be saved by my book.
But if with your applause our merit stands:
Faith then be friends with us, and giue's your hands.

FINIS.

