TOM of All Trades. OR THE PLAIN PATH-VVAY TO PREFERMENT. BEING A Discovery of
a passage to Promotion in all Professions, Trades, Arts, and Mysteries. Found
out by an old Travailer in the sea of Experience, amongst the enchanted Islands
of ill Fortune.Now published for Common good. By THOMAS POVVELL. Summum hominis
bonum bonus ex hac vita exitus.

LONDON. Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet, for Benjamen Fisher, and are to be
sold at his shop at the sign of the Talbot in Aldersgate Street. 1631.

The Epistle Dedicatorie.
Poor TOM was set on shore in Kent,
And to the next good Town he went;
At whose approach the Bosseldir
Kept a most lamentable stir
That TOM would offer to return
Through the good Town of Syttingborne
He asked him; If he had a Pass?
And told him what the Statute was;
And like a Reverend Vestry wit,
Swore, he would not allow of it.
But did advise him to resort
To fetch his Pass at Tonstall Court.
Our TOM of all Trades hereupon
Asked what was his condition
Who was the Owner of that place
So far in all the Countries grace?
For whom (as he walked on the way
He heard) the poor so much to pray
The Rich to praise. And both contend,
To whom he was the greater friend.
Did never meet his name there spread,
Where thou thy self did use to tread?
No? not Sir EDWARD HALES? Quoth he,
What TOM of Odcombe may thou be?
He is a man scarce spends a minute,
But has his Countries service in it.
Spends more to make them all accord
Then other Knights do at their board.
He called him Knight and Barronet.
Both wise and Just; And what more yet?
He swore that if he were but mist
The Country could not so subsist.
With that our TOM repaired thither,
Conferred Report and Proof together;
And found Report had wronged him much
In giving but an outside touch,
A tincture of a Painters trade;
Where all was substance and in-layd.
Then TOM resolved to walk no farther
To find a Father or a Mother.
No other Patron would he seek,
But tender all at this Knights feet:
If he accept what is well intended,
Our TOM of all Trades travaile's ended.
Signa virtutum tuarum long lateque ferens. THO: PO^VVELL.

TOM of all Trades: OR THE PLAIN PATHWAY TO PREFERMENT.
TRINITY Term was now ended; For by description of the time it could be no
other parcel of the year. In that the Scriveners at Temple-barre, had no
employment, but writing of blanke Bonds, and texting of Bills, for letting of
Chambers in Chancery Lane. The Vintners of Fleetstreet discharged their
Iourneymen; A general humility more then usual possessed the Cookery of
Ram-Alley. The Ostlers of Holborne had more than ordinary care to lay up their
Ghuests boots, rather for fear of their slipping out of Town, than for any
good observance toward them. And your Country Attorneys would no longer by
any means endure the unwholesome air of an Eight penny Ordinary. Every one
that had wherewith to discharge his Horse out of the stable, strove who should
first be gone. And amongst the rest, my self made shift for so much money as
wherewith to abate the fury of Mistrisse Overcount mine hostess, and so I
departed likewise.

At the top of Highgate hill I overtooke a Gentleman of Northamptonshire,
riding homeward, whom I well knew; Him I saluted cheerfully, and he received
me lovingly. But in travayling together (Me thought) he was not (Master of that
mirthfull disposition which he was wont to carry along with him to shorten the
way betwixt his house and London, I gave him to understand, how strange, and
notable this alteration appeared in him; And withal desired to know so much of
the occasion thereof as might be impartible to a friend of so small growth. To
which he answered thus; Sir, I come from London, (It is true) from the Term
(It is certain true) from London and Term. True and certain in nothing but
expenses in all things, yet I would have you know, that it is neither the
Thunderclap of dissolving an Iniunction, nor the Doomesday of a Decree, nor
Counsaylors Fees, nor Attorneys Bylls in a language able to fright a man out of
his wits, can proscribe me my wonted mirth. It is something nearer and dearer
(my dear friend) that robs me of that cheer which used to lift me up into the
very Sphere, where love himself sits to bid all his guests welcome right
heartily:

I remember me of Children, six Soones, and three daughters, of whom I am the
unhappy Father. In that, besides the scars which my unthriftiness has dinted
upon their fortunes, the wounds of unequal times, and a tempestuous age
approaching are like to take away from them all hope of outliuing the low water
ebb of the evil day all means of thriving by honest pains, study or
industry are bereft them. The common upon which industry should depasture is
overlayd Numerousnes spoils all, And poverty sells all at an under value.

In this case (Sir) what can be aduisd Whereunto I thus replied.

Sir, I have heedfully atte^ded you in the delivery of your perplexed thoughts,
concerning the care which you have of your children, taking the true, and even
level of the declention of arts, the distent of trades, and trading, the
poverty of all professions, and the destemper, not of ours only, but of all
Christian clymates at this present, tending rather to a more contagion in the
general air, then a calmer temparament (for ought that yet appears) as for
the stormynesse of the sea of state foreign or domestic, let us leave the
greater, and lesser vessels that be exposed to it, unto the proper Pylates,
Masters, and Marryners, who have the charge to attend the line, or plye at the
tackle, we are but poor passengers and may assure our selves to partake in
their boon voyage, if they suceed well, as they may be certain to suffer in
the same Shipwreck with us, if we miscarry. I address me to give you the
best advise, I can touching the preferment of every of your six sons and
three daughters, in manner following

It is true in most Gentlemen, and very likely in you, as in others, living
only upon the revenew of lands. That the height of their Husbandry amounts to
no more than to clear the last half years booking, and borrowing at the rent
day. That their credit may hold up and keep reputation till the next ensuing
that again.

When you dye, the eldest Son claims the inheritance of what you leave,
thank God, and nature for it, your self least of all, and your fatherly
providence never a whit.

If you take some course in your life time to make the rest of your Children
some small portions or estates out of the whole of your lands. It is ten to
one but you destroy both him, and them by that means.

For the heir commonly striving to uphold the reputation of his Ancestors. He
abates nothing of his fathers accustomed expenses toward the raising of those
portions or estates so deducted. And they on the other side, presume so much
upon the hope thereof, that no profession will fit them. To be a Minister
(with them) is to be but a Pedant. A Lawyer, a mercenarie fellow. A
Shopkeeper, a man most subject to the most wonderful Crack, and a creature
whose welfare depends much upon his Wives well bearing, and fair carriage.
What is then to be done.

Surely, it would be wished, seeing God and nature has provided for the
eldest, your younger sons, and your daughters; especially, being worstable to
shift, should be by you provided for in the first place, while your Land is of
virgin reputation, while it is chaste, and vndishonested by committing of single
fornication with Country Creditors, that trade without sheets (that is) by
Pole deed, only for saving of costs; or at least, before it have defiled the
bed of its reputation by prostituting to the adulterous imbracings of a City
Scrivener: But especially, before it grow so impudent, as to lie down in the
Market place, and to suffer every petty Clarke to bring its good name upon
Record, and charge it that it was taken in the very fact between other men's
sheets. As in this Statute, or in that Judgment: Take heed of that by any
means. And be sure to match your eldest son, when your credit is cried up
to the highest, while your heir is yet in your power to dispose, and will bend
to your will, before his blood begin to feel the heat of any affections
kindling about him, or before he can tell what difference is betwixt a black
wrought Wastcoate, with a white apron and a loose bodied gown without an
apron. Put him of in his best clothes (I mean) in the assurance of your lands,
fell him at ye highest rate. Then dicotomize the whole portion of his wife into
several shares betwixt your other children. Not share and share like, but to
every each one the more according to their defects: Let impotencie, decreptnes,
ilfavourdnes and incapacitie, rob the other of so much money as they have done
them of comeliness, activitie, beauty, and wit.

Put them not into any course of living according to any prescript order, or
method of your own election. But according to their inclination and addition,
seeing that every one by instinct of nature, delights in that wherein he is
like to be most excellent. And delight, and pride in any thing undertaken,
makes all obstacles in the way of attaining to perfection of no difficulty.

Now in the next place take heed that you put off those your sons whom you
find fit and addicted to be bred in the Ministry, or made up to the law, or
to be apprentized betimes, and before they take the taynt of too much liberty
at home.

And when they be put forth, call them not home speedily to revisit their
fathers house, no not so much as Hospitably by any means.

In the first place take your direction for the SCHOLAR.
His Education. His Maintenance. His Advancement.
FOr his Education. The Free-Schooles generally afford the best breeding in
good letters.

So many of them also afford some reasonable means in aid of young Scholars,
for their diet, lodging, and teaching, given to them by the Founders or
Benefactors of such Schools.

Some of them be of the foundation of some Kings and Queens of this Land, and
they are commonly in the gift of the King, or his Provost, or Substitute in
that behalf. Others be of the foundation of some Bodies or Societies
incorporate. And they are commonly in the gift of such Masters, Wardens,
Presidents, and their Senior fellows, such chief officers of any other title,
or such Master Wardens, and Assistants, or such Opposers, Visitants, or
Committees of such bodies respectively as be appointed thereunto. Others be of
the foundation of some private persons: And they are for the most part in the
gift of the Executor, Heir, or Feoffees of such Donor, according to the
purport of his Will, or Grant, or both.

Of every of which several kinds respectively are:

Eaton. Westminster. Winchester. The Merchantaylors School London. The
Skynners at Tunbridge. Sutton's Hospital. St. Bartholomews.
And very many other the like.

Briefly, few or no Counties of this Kingdom are unfurnisht of such Schools.
And some have so many, that it is disputable whether the Universities with the
Innes of Court, and Chancerie have where to receive them or no.

Some of such free-Schooles again, have Schollerships appendant unto them, in
the one of the Universities or both.

To which upon Election yearly, they are removeable, As.

From Eaton, to Kings College Cambridge. From Westminster, to Trinity College
Cambridge, or Christchurch Oxon: From Winchester, to New College Oxon. From
the Merchantaylors, to St. John's Oxon. And the like, from many the like.
Some other Free-Schooles have pensions for preferment of their Scholars, and
for their maintenance in the University.

Some Companies Incorporate (especially of London, having no such pensions in
certain, do usually out of the Stock of their Hall allow maintenance in this
kind.

Besides that, there be many other private persons (upon my knowledge) who do
voluntarily allow yearly exhibition of this nature.

Now if you would know how to find what is given to any such Free-Schooles,
and in whose disposing they now be.
Search.
In the Tower of London, till the end of Rich. the 3. For Grants and for
License of Mortmaine, inde. And in the Chapel of the Rolls. From thence till
the present. And for the like, In the Register of the Prerogative Court, for
such things devised by Will, by King, Queen, or Subject. For such Grants given
by Will.


And sometimes you shall find such things both in the Tower, and the
Prerogative, and in the Rolls, and Prerogative respectively.

For the time since our reformed Church of England began here.

Search.
Doctor Willets Synopsis. For all from the King, or from any other.
Search.
In diverse of our Chronicles. For the like.


Next add certain helps for discovery and attayning thereof.
FIrst (if it may be) procure a sight of the Liedger Books, of such as in whom
the disposition of such things rests, which they keep for their own use.

Next be acquainted with some of the Disposers themselves.

Next take the directions of the Master or Teacher of such Free-Schooles.

Especially, to be interessed in the Clerks or Registers of such Societies as
have the disposing of any such things.

Also to use means by Letters of persons powerful, and useful to such
disposers.

For (indeed) it is not the sound of a great man's name to a Letter in these
days, wherein they are grown so common, and familiar to our Societies (of
London especially) can prevail so soon as the Letter subscribed by the Lord
Mayor, or other eminent Officer of the City, to whose commandment they be
immediately subjugate.

Lastly, if you use the means least seen, most used, and best allowed,
together with these: For discovery and attaining of any such thing, it will
not be besides the purpose as I take it.

Now suppose your son is brought to the University by Election or as
Pensioner.
THe first thing you must take to your care is. In case he come not by
election, but as a Pensioner, to live for the present upon your own charge,
how to procure him a Schollership in the College where you bestow him.

Or in case he come elected into one, how to procure a farther addition of
maintenance to him.

To bring him into a Schollership, place him with a Senior fellow of the house
(as Tutor) though you allow to some Junior fellow somewhat yearly for reading
unto him.

This Senior fellow if the number of places void will bear it may nominate
your son for one in his own right, if it will not bear it, he may call to
his aid some and so many suffrages of the rest as with the speaking merit of
your son may work your desire.

Then how to procure a pension for addytament of means.

The chief skill is to find it out, being either in the gift of some body
Incorporate. Or of some private person. Wherein the discovery is to be made
(as aforesaid.)

If you sue to a Company consisting of many persons Tradesmen, you must enquire
who be the most potent Patritians, and best reputed Vestrie wits amongst them,
such as carry their gloves in their hands, not on their hands.

Amongst an Assistance of many, only two or three strike the stroke, and hold
the rest in a wonderful admiration of their extraordinary endowments. And how
to speak sensibly to these two or three is no Mystery. You know they are
faithful fiduciaries in the election. And therefore, you must not presume to
offer any thing by any means. Only you may desire them to accept this poor
piece of plate, with your name and Arms upon it, and bind you unto their
love, in keeping the memory of you hereafter. Do but try them in this kind,
and attend the success. I tell you, this with a Bucke at the Renter Wardens
feast, may come somewhat near to the matter.

But for the pension to be obtained of a private person, the way is not the
same. It proceeds of the givers mere charity, and must be taken by the hand
of a desertfull receiver. Though withal it may sometimes fall out, that merit
is made by mediation, especially of some such reverend Divine, as he does most
respect and frequent. For other, letters can little prevail with such persons.

The best note to discover a man inclinable to allow such a pension, is to
examine how wealth and charity are equally and temporately mingled in him. And
be sure withal that he be a man of some reasonable understanding in what he
does in this kind. For a Fools pension is like a new fashion eagerly pursued
at the beginning, but as scurvily left off in the proceeding.

Your next care is, in his due time to put on a fellowship, when he shall put
off his Schollership, seeing the Schollership keeps him company no farther
than to the degree of Master of Arts, and a quarter of a year after, in those
Colleges, where Schollerships are longest lived. And in some not so long.

In some Colleges, The Fellowship follows the Schollership of course, and as
the one leaves him, the other entertaines him. But in the most it is not so,
but comes by Election. Which Election passes by the Master and Senior
Fellows, whereof every one does name one, if the number to be Elected will
bear it: or if not, then they pass by most voices.

Where note, that the Master has a double voice, and in some places he has
the nomination of one, if there be two places void, yea if there be but one at
sometimes.

In Colleges the letters of great persons, especiof the Lords grace of
Canterbury, and the University Chancellor have been of great prevailance.
But it is not so now in these days.

There be beneficial gradations of preferment likewise, for Fellows in their
Colleges; as Lecturer, Deane, Bowser, Vice-master, and Master. But for my
part, I better like and commend those who when they find themselves fit to put
forth into the world, take the first preferment that is offered unto them,
rather than such who live cloystered like Votaries: who have Sacraments to fill
up their places be it but to keep out others, such as use no exercise, but
wiping the dust off their books, and have an excellent activity in handling
the fox tail, such as hold no honor like to Supplicat reverentijs vestris.
And to be head Bowsier of the College, as good as to be Chief Butler of
England.

These preferments of the College all but that of the Master comes of course
by order, and antiquity. Therefore no means but patient abiding needs for the
acquiring of them in their due time.

I hasten to send your son out of the Cloister into the Commonwealth, and to
show you how many ways of Advancement are open unto him abroad, with the
means to discover, and attain.

And first for the Ministry.
First for his ease let him look no farther then next to hand, and enquire
what benefices belong to their own College, and are in the gift of their
Master and Senior fellows (as most Colleges have diverse such) and amongst
them which are void at the present, or whose Incumbent is not like to live
long. And if he find out any such; than if he know not after so long cotinuance
among them to speak in his Seniors own Dilect, let him never travail beyond
Trumpington for me.

More indigitly, For attaining of such a Benefice, let him enquire where the
Mattens are read with Spectacles, or where the good old man is lifted up into
the pulpit, or the like, and make a way for Succession accordingly.

Where note, that many times a fellow of the house may hold such a Benefice
together with his fellowship, or a Pension for increment of livelihood. And
such ties, as these are commonly the bond of matrimony whereby they are so
wedded to the College.

Next, he must clime up to the maine top of Speculation, and there look about
him to discover what Benefices are empty abroad where the Incumbent lives only
upon the Alms of Confectio Alchermis: Or where one is ready to take his rise
out of Sierge into Satin, out of Parsonage and a Prebendarie, into a Deanarie
and a Donative, let him not be slow of footmanship in that case by any means.

For Benefices abroad.
Benefices a broad are in the gift of

The King imediately; Or the Lord Keeper for the King. Some Lord Bishop, Some
Deane and Chapter: Some Body incorporate: Some Parish: Some Private Patron:
You shall find in the Tower (a collection of the Patent Rolls gathered, of all
Presentations made by the King in those days to any Church Prebendarie or
Chapel. In right of the Crown or otherwise from 1. of Edward the first,
till the midst of Edward the third.

The King himself only and immediately presents in his own right, to such
Benefices as belong to him and are above twenty pounds value in the first
Fruits Books.

For attayning of any which, I can advice you of no better course, than to
learn the way to the back stayres.

The Lord Keeper presents for the King to all such benefices as belong to his
Majesty, and are under twenty pounds value in the books.

Now to know which of these are full, and who are Incumbents in any of these.

Search,
The first Fruits Office. The Clarke, who has the writing of the
Presentations. The Lord Keepers Secretary being.
Where note that the King has used very seldom to grant any such living in
Reversion.

And the Lord Keeper now being. His care is so great in this, as in all cases
of common good to provide for man's merit, and cherish industry in the growing
plants, that no one can offer unto him a repuest of this kind, without
trespass to his good disposition.

In the next place concerning Benefices in the Presentation of any of the Lords
Bishops.

Note that most Bishoprics in England, have presentation to diverse Benefices
belonging to their Seas For the number and present estate of these. Search.
Their own Leidgers. Their Registers.
Enquire of
Their Auditors. Their Stewards of their Courts.
And sometimes you shall light upon some of their books of this kind, in the
hands of the heirs or Executors of such as have borne such offices under them.

He that is Chaplain to such a Lord Bishop, has for the most part the best
means, access, and opportunity, to ataine to such a Benefice.

The commendations of such a great personage as to whom this Patron owes
greatest respect, especially for his affairing in Court, may do some good in
the matter.

The like ways of discovery, and the like means of attaining any Benefice in
the Presentation of any Deane, and Chapter, are to be used with them
respectively, as with the Bishops.

With every Deane and Chapter, are likewise diverse Prebendaries to be obtained
of their gift after the same manner, and by the same means also.

The other bodies Incorporate, besides those of Colleges, and Deanes and
Chapters have many of them (especially of London, and some subordinate
Societies thereof) right of the presentation to diverse Benefices.

Also some Parishes by prescription do present to their own perochiall
Benefices. And many Patrons are content to present, according to the
approbation of the Parishioners upon their hearing, and allowing, and due
exclamation of the integrity of the life of such suitors, and no otherwise,
diverse governors, and gradations of the lands of diverse Hospitals, and Mesons
de dien have like right of presentation to Benefices, as have other bodies
Incorporate. And the means of discovery and attaining are likewise the like.

In Parishes, and Companies of Tradesmen Incorporate, some very few rule the
roast.

Your Alderman of the Ward his Deputy, your Common Councell-man. Yea sometime
that petty Epitomie of Wardemote Enquerst, that little busy morsel of Justice
(the Beadle of the Ward) will make a strong party in the election, if he be
put to it. The Probotory Sermon, that must be made upon such trial before such
an Auditorie, would be according to the capacity in general. But more
esespecially, according to the humor and addiction of those whose wits the rest
have in singular reverence. As Mr. Francis Fiat, a good understanding
Fishmonger (I assure you) you may give the style of right worshipful to them,
though the best man of the company be but a Wine Cooper, and his judgment
better in Claret, then in Contioclerum a great deal.

If your son upon his trial can but fit their pallats smoothly which is hard
to do; In regard that they are so hallow mouthed, let him be sure though he
miss the Benefice for want of preperation, yet ten to one but they will
strain themselves to bring him in as a Lecturer, which is a thing they
reverence far beyond the Parson of the Parish by many degrees.

Lastly, for private Patrons, and the Benefices in their gifts;

Search,
The Bishops Register: for Iustitution, and Presentation. The Archdeacons
Register: for the Induction. The Archbishops Register: if it be a Peculiar.
It was my chance lately to see a book of all the Benefices within the
Diocese of Canterbury, with the manner of their tything in every each one
respectively. In which I find, that there are, or should be with the Register
of every Lord Bishop, seven Books kept for Entry of the matters, and business
of their Diocese, of which this of Benefices is the chief.

The like I saw formerly of the Diocese of St. David's which confirms me in
the institution, and custom of keeping the said books also in other Diocese.

And seeing that several privare Patrons are of several dispositions, some
more Lucrative and Covetous: Others more charitable, and religious, I can give
you no other rule of attaining the Benefice than this, viz.

That your son bring with him ability of learning. Integrity of life, and
conformity of behavior, according to the order of the Church established
amongst us and these shall make his way, with the good and generous Patron. But
for the other patron it makes no matter at all for learning and a very little
for manners, or whether he be a man conformable or no. Truly he is
indifferent, for his part very indifferent.

To such a patron your son must present himself: thus (if he mean to be
presented) according to present necessity. He must both speak and prove
himself a man endued with good gifts. For he shall have to deal with a Patron
of a quick Capacity, more dexterous in apprehension than your son or you
can be in deliverie.

Be this Patron what he will, your comfortis, the Benefice must be filld, and
that within a limited time, howsoever it is dangerous to attend the ending of
the day in this case, (For seldom does the Clarke of the market get any thing
by their standing too long and above their accostomed hour.)

Lapse by reason of Simony and Lapse for not presenting, in due time; Both
offer advancement to learning But the first is at hand to discover as a witch:
And the second as rare to find out as a faithful fiduciarie or a fast Friend.

The degrees of rising in the Ministry are not easier known then practiced by
the industrious man.

Briefly if all Church livings in England were equally distributed, There is
noe one of the Ministry if he want not learning, or good manners needs want
maintenance, or good Livelihood.

Here I could wish to God; That it might please the right reverend Fathers of
the Church the Lord Bishops; That they would once in every of their times cause
a true Catalogue of all the Benefices within their several Diocese with the
names of the Patrons thereof according to the last presentation to be sent into
the office of the first fruits for the better information of all such as
deserve, and would gladly attain to some means of maintenance, which they may
the better do by having recourse thither, there to take notice of all things
of this nature. For I know that many fit down in their wants, having good
means to many private Patrons, only for lack of knowledge of the same.

Note that it is an usual thing in private Parons to grant reversion, and
Advowson of such livings,

My self intended heretofore to collect all such Benefices with their Patrons,
into a certain Callender for such direction (as aforesaid) and made some
passage into it. But the farther I went, the more impossible I found it. And I
am now resolved that without the Bishops assistance it cannot be done.

And so much for the Ministry.
The Laws promotions follow. By Civil Law, and Common Law.
FOr breeding of your youth in the Civil Law, there are two Colleges of
especial note in our Universities: the one is Trinitie-hall in Cambridge; the
other is, New-Colledge in Oxford.

I remember me not of any Free-Schoole in England, that have any place
appendant in Trinitie-hall in Cambridge. But in new College of Oxford, the
Free-Schoole of Winchester, has claim both of Schollerships, and Fellowships
(the whole College consisting of none other, as I take it.

It is to be confessed, the charge of breeding a man to the Civil Law, is more
expensive, and the way more painful, and the books of greater number, and
price than the Common Law requires. But after that the Civil Lawyer is once
grown to Maturity. His way of Advancement is more beneficial, more certain,
and more easy to attain, than is the Common Lawyers, and all because their
number is less, their learning more intricate. And they admit few or no
Sollicitors to trample between them and the Clyent. So that the Fee comes to
them immediately, and with the more advantage.

The Preferments at which they may arrive, are these:
Chancellor to the Bishop. Archdeacon. Commissarie, where they have Commissarie
Official. Judge, and Surrogate. Advocate for the King. Mr. of the Chancerie.
The Kings Proctor. Advocate, and Proctor at large.
In these Courts, viz.
The High Commission. The Delegates. The Prerogative. The Consistory. The
Arches. The Bishops Courts. The Archdeacons Courts. Chancellors, Commissaries
and Officials Cou. The Admiraltie Courts. The Court of the Kings Requests,
In times past.

The countenance of some Bishop, especially of the Lord Archbishop upon a
Civilian, will much advance his practice as an Advocate, and give him promotion
as a Judge.

There are under the greater officers aforenamed, diverse other inferior
Officers: as Register. Arctuarie. Examiner.


The number of the Doctors (though I find them never to have been limited.)
Yet it is certain that the time was within memory of man, when the house of
their Commons did commonly give them all sufficient lodging, and diet. And as
for the number of Proctors, they were of late times limited. How it is now I
know not.

For the Common Law.
FOr breeding of Students at the Common Law, take directions for their method
of study out of that Tractate which Mr. Justice Dodridge did in his time pen
for the purpose. Only (for my part) I do much commend the ancient custom of
breeding of the younger Students. First, in the Innes of Chancery; there to be
the better prepared for the Innes of Court. And this must needs be the better
way, seeing too much liberty at the first prooves very fatal, to many of the
younger sort. I have observed, and much commend also the breeding of some
Common Lawyers in this kind, viz.

That when they have been admitted first into an Inn of the Chancerie, they
have been withal entered as Clerks in the office of some Prothonotarie of the
Common Pleas to add the skill of the Practicke to their speculation. And if a
Student be thus bred, by his foundation in the one; and his experience in the
other, he shall with more facility than others, who step into the Inn of
Court at first, attain to an ability of practice.

Besides other ordinary requisite parts and Arts in a Common Lawyer. Skill in
the Records of all Courts of Record, and in other antiquities of President.
With some Reading in the Civil Law, also will much enable him.

The Common Lawyer is to be bred only upon the purse. The charge most at the
first. For after he has spent some few years effectually. He may attain to
the employment of some private friends, for advising with, and instructing of
greater Counsel, whereby he shall add both to his means, and knowledge.

It is true, that I have known some Attorneyes and Sollicitors, put on a
Counsailors gown, without treading the same usual path to the bar (as
aforesaid.) But indeed, I never look upon them, but I think of the Tailor,
who in one of his Customers cast suites had thrust himself in amongst the
Nobility at a Court Mask, where pulling out his Handkercher, he let fall his
Thimble, and was so discovered, and handled, and dandled from hand to foot,
till the Guard delivered him at the great Chamber door, and cried, farewell
good feeble.

If the Common Lawyer be sufficiently able in his profession, he shall want no
practice, if no practice no profit.

The time was that the younger Counsel had some such help, as

To be a Favorite. A Kindred. To marry a Niece, Cousin, or a Chambermaide.
But those days be past, and better supply their rooms.

As fellows of Colleges in the Universities get pensions, or Benefices, to
add to their livelihood. So Barresters and Counsailors of the Innes of Court,
advance their means by keeping of

Courts of Manors. Leets, and Barrons: Swanimootes of Forests. Stannaries.
Cinque Ports, etc.
By places of
Judges of Inferior Courts. As London, and other like Corporations. The
Virdge. The Tower of London. St. Katherines near the Tower. Borough of
Southwarke. The Clinke. Wentworth and like Liberties.
By office of
Recorder of some Corporate Town. Feoda rye of some Counties: The Kings
Council in the Marches of Wales, or at York, or Judge, or Counsel of some
County Pallatine:
The greater places of preferment for Common Lawyers are.

The Judges at Westminster, and elsewhere: The next, are all the several
Officers of the Courts of Westminster and elsewhere:
All which you shall find set forth briefly in Smiths Commonwealth of
England, and part in mine own Search of Records. And all these, together
afford sufficent maintenance for thousands of persons who may be here well
provided for.

Here I should and here I could for better direction of younger brothers show
what meniall Clarkeships of large exhibition, are under the great Officers of
the Land, the Judges, the Kings Council, and other Officers which are not
elsewhere published. And I know it would open a door to many a proper man's
preferment, especially; under the Lord Keeper: as Secretaries for Chancerie
business, and Spiritual promotions, the Commission of the Peace, Injunctions,
the Dockquets. And other the like under the Lord Treasurer, as Secretaries for
the business of the Realm, and the Custom House besides the Inlets to so
many preferments about the Customs, and Escheators: places, under the Lord
Treasurer, under the Chauncellor of the Exchequer Duchy, and Principality of
Wales, and Duchy of Cornwall, as Seal keeper, Secretary, etc.

Under the Master of the Court of Wards, as Secretary; under the Judges, as
Marshall. Clarke of the Bailes, etc. Under the Barrons of the Exchequer, as
Examiner; Clarke of the Bailes and other Clerks.

Under the Kings Attorney General, as Clarke of the Pattens, Clarke of the
Confessions and entries, Clarke of the References, Book bearer. Under the
Solicitor General, Clarke of the Patents, Book bearer. Besides many other
Clerks under the white staves of the Court, and in the Counting house, and
many several offiices. All which with hundreds more that I could name, with a
plainer and more large deduction, were it not for fear that what I well intend
for general good would be taken in offense for private prejudice. But for the
Clarkeships of the Kings household examine farther the Black book in the
Exchequer,

The Physician follows.
ANd here I remember me of an old tale following, viz.

At the beginning of the happy reign of our late good Queen Elizabeth, diverse
Commissioners of great place being authorized to enquire of, and to displace
all such of the Clergy as would not conform to the reformed Church, one
amongst others was Conuented before them, who being asked whehter he would
subscribe or no, deniedit, and so consequently was adjudged to lose his
benefice, and to be deprived his function, whereupon in his impatience he said;

That if they (meaning the Commissioners) held this course it would cost many a
man's life. For which the Commissioners called him back again, and charged him
that he had spoke treasonable, and seditious words tending to the raising of a
rebellion, or some tumult in the Land, for which he should receive the reward
of a Traitor. And being asked whether he spoke those words or no, he
acknowledged it, and took upon him the Justification thereof; for said he, ye
have taken from me my living, and profession of the Ministry, Schollership is
all my portion; and I have no other means now left for my maintenance but to
turn Physician, and before I shall be absolute Master of that Mystery (God he
knows) how many men's lives it will cost. For few Physicians use to try
experiments upon their own bodies.

With us it is a Profession can maintain but a few. And diverse of those more
indebted to opinion, than learning, and (for the most part) better qualified in
discoursing their travailes than in discerning their patients maladies. For it
is grown to be a very huswiues trade, where fortune prevails more then skill.
Their best benefactor the Neapolitan Their grand Seignieur. The Sorpego, their
Gonfollinere. The Sciaticke, Their great Marshall that calls the Muster Roll
of them all together at every Spring and fall, are all as familier to her as
the Cuckoo at Canck-wood in May. And the cure of them is the skill of every
good old Ladies cast Gentlewoman, when she gives over painting, she falls to
plastering and shall have, as good practice as the best of them, for those kind
of diseases.

Marry for Women's griefs amongst Physicians, the Masculine is more worthy then
the Feminine.

Secrecy is the chief skill, and virilitie the best learning that is required
in a Woman's Physician. But I never read of many of those to be long lived, or
honestly wiued hitherto in all my reading.

Hitherto I speak nothing in disrepute of the more reverend, and learned sort
of Physicians who are to be had in singular reverence, and be useful to
mankind next to the Divine. Indeed, I rather pity them, and pitying smile to
see how pretily these young gamesters Male and Female lay about them, and
engrosse the greater part of Patientrie in all places wheresoever.

And here I may more fitly say (God knows) how many men's lives this abused
opinion had of such Gamesters costs. Because they be not Masters of that
Mystery, and that science which requires the Greek tongue, exactly, all the
learning, and skill of Philosophy, History of all sorts (especially natural)
knowledge of all vegetatives and Minerals, and whatsoever dwells within the
four elements. Also Skill in Astronomy, Astrology. And so much of the
Iudicialls upon all manner of Calculations as may be well warranted with much
other kind of learning, art and skill, whereof my young travailing Physician,
and trading waiting woman never heard.

Their means of Advancement are in these ways. viz.
To be Physician of some College in one of the Universities, (as diverse
Colleges have such places) Physician to the King or Queens person. Physician
to either of their households. Or to some Hospital, (as most have such.) Or to
some great persons, who may prefer them hereafter, and be somewhat helpefull
in the mean time. To a good old Usurer, or one that has got his great estate
together unconscionably: For they fear nothing but death, and will buy life at
any rate: There is no coward to an ill Conscience.
It is not amiss, to make way of acquaintance with Gallants given to deep
drinking, and surfeyting: For they are patients at all times of the year.

Or, a Gentlewoman that would feign use the means to be pregnant.

Or, your Lascivious Lady, and your man in the Perriwigge will help to furnish
with a footcloth.

A Citizens wife of a weak stomach, will supply the fringe to it.

And if all fail. And the Bathe will afford no room: Let them find out some
strange water, some unheard of Spring. It is an easy matter to discolor or
alter the taste of it in some measure, (it makes no matter how little.) Report
strange cures that it has done. Beget a Superstitious opinion in it.
Goodfellowship shall uphold it. And the neighboring Towns shall all swear
for it.

The Apprentice follows.
THe first question is, to what Trade you will put your Son, and which is most
worthy of choice. For the Merchant it requires great stock, great experience
in Foreign estates. And great hazard, and adventure at the best.

And this is not all. For it depends upon the Peace of our State with foreign
Princes, especially those with whom we hold mutual traffic. Or, who lie in
our way to intercept, or impediment our Trade abroad. Besides that, in time of
War they can hold no certainty of dealing, or supplying their Factorie in
parts beyond the Seas. Shipping is subject ever at the let go, to be stayed.
Mariners to be pressed, and many other inconveniences attend them in such times.
Besides the burden of Custom and Imposition which all States impose more or
less. So that unless we have peace with such Neighbors, there is little
hope in that profession in the ordinary and lawful way of trading.

Happily you will allege that some Merchants thrive well enough, when the
wars most rage, and when the stream of State is most troubled. Some then
hold it to be the best fishing; they that gain then (Sir) if they gain
justifiably: gain not as Merchants, but as men of War, which occupation a
man may learn without serving seven years Apprentiship unto it.

And if they gain justifiably as Merchants, it must be in some general stock
of a Society incorporated, who have purse to pass to and fro with sufficient
power, in the most dangerous times. And if such Societies are tolerable at any
time, it is at such times. How they be otherwise allowable. I leave to
consideration.

For the Shopkeeper, his welfare for the most part, depends upon the prosperity
of the Merchant. For if the Merchant sit still, the most of them may shut up
their Shop windows. Little Skill, Art, or Mystery, shall a man learn in
Shopkeeping. A man shall never in foreign parts, being put to his shifts out
of his own Meridian, live by the skill of weighing and measuring. The most use
of advantage, he can make of it, is to benefit between the Mart and the
Market, than which nothing is more uncertain, seeing there is no true
judicial of the falling, and rising of commodities, And the casualties that
they are subject unto, (especially) in time of War.

Take this for a general rule, that those Trades which ask most with an
Apprentice, are incertainest of thriving, and require greatest stocks of
setting up. Amongst Trades, give me those that have in them some Art, Craft, or
Science, by which a man may live, and be a welcome ghuest to all Countries
abroad, and have employment in the most stormy times at home, when Merchants
and Shopkeepers are out of use: (as.)

An Apothecarie. A Druggist. A Surgeon. A Lapidarie. A Ieweller. A Printer.
An Ingraver in Stones and Metal. One that has skill in seasoning of
Shipwood. A Carpenter of all sorts, especially of Shipping. A Smith of all
sorts, especially of Clockes, Watches, Guns, etc. A Planter, and Gardner of all
sorts. An Enginere for making of Patars, and the like Engines of War. And Hot
Presses for Cloth, etc. And Engines to weigh any Ship, or Guns that are
drowned, etc. Skrues, etc. A maker of all sorts of Instruments, for Navigation,
Compasses, Globes, Astrolabes. A Drainer of grounds Surmounded. A Sale-maker,
and A maker of Cordage, Tackle, etc. A Lymner. A Clothier, a Clothworker, and a
Dyer. A Tailor, Shoemaker, Glover, Perfumer, and Trimmer of Gloves. An
Imbroiderer. A Feltmaker, a Glasier, and one that can paint in Glass. Briefly,
any Manufacture or trade, wherein is any Science, or Craft.
Only those Trades are of least use and benefit, which are called Huswives
Trades (as Brewer, Baker, Cook, and the like.) Because they be the skill of
Women as well as of men, and common to both.

I would have you know, that the Maker was before the Retaylor, and most
Shopkeepers are but of a sublimated Trade and retayle, but as Attorneyes to the
maker. But if the Maker (without dispute of Freedom in any Corporation, might
set up Shop and sell his commodity immediately) it would be a great deal
better for the Commonwealth, than now it is.

Besides, it is no matter of difficulty, burden, or disgrace, for a
Shopkeeper, yea a Merchant, or a Gentleman, to have the skill of some one of
these Manufactures, besides his Revenew, or profession, to accompany him, what
fortune soever may carry him into Countries unknown.

To my knowledge, a great Earl lately of this Land, did think it no scorn to
endeavor the attaining of the Craft, and trade of a Farrior, wherein he grew
excellent.

And when our acquaintance took first life with those of the Low Countries,
upon a Treaty wherein our Ambassador strove to set forth the worthiness of
our King and Kingdom, with the Native commodities thereof. The Dutch
(ignorantly conceiving that no man could attain to wealth, without some good
occupation, or manufacture) asked him, what handicraft our King was brought up
unto, or what trade he had used to get so much wealth withal.

I admit the Merchant Royal, that comes to his Profession by travail and
Factory, full fraught, and free adventure to be a profession worthy the
seeking. But not the hedge-creeper, that goes to seek custom from shop to
shop, with a Cryll under his arm, That leapes from his Shop-boord to the
Exchange, and after he is fame-falne and credit cracked, in two or three other
professions, shall wrigle into this and that, when he comes upon the Exchange,
in stead of enquiring after such a good ship, spends the whole hour in
disputing, whether is the more profitable housekeeping, either with powder
Beef and brewes, or with fresh Beef and Porridge: though (God wot) the black
Pot at home be guilty of neither. And so he departs when the Bell rings, and
his guts rumble, both to one tune, and the same purpose.

The Merchant Royal might grow prosperous, were it not for such poor patching
interloping Lapwings, that have an adventure of two Chaldron of Coals at
New Castle; As much oil in the Greeneland fishing, as will serve two Cobblers
for the whole year ensuing. And an other at Rowsie, for as many Fox-skins, as
will furre his Long-lane gown, when he is called to the Livorie.

The Shopkeeper is a cleanly Trade; especially, your Linnen-Draper, which
company has the greatest Commonalty, and the largest privileges of all other;
and yet they maintain nothing by Charter, for (indeed) they have none.

But a manufacture for my money; especially, if he sell to the wearer
immediately.

Now for the better encouragement of men of Trade. Know that in most Companies
of Tradesmen incorporate (especially in London) there is provision made by
diverse benefactors of their Societies deceased, for the enabling and setting up
of young beginners, by stocks of money remaining in the hands of some few of
the chief of their Company, (how faithfully disposed I leave to their own
consideration.) But surely the poorer sort complain much of the misimployment
of it generally.

There is but one little Crevis to peep in at their dealings. And that is
between their Masters conscience, and the Clarks connivence, which is so
narrow, that you may sooner discern the South Pole through the maine Center,
than discover their mystery.

Indeed in times past, the Clearkship of the Company has been bestowed upon
some ancient decayed member of the Company, for his livelihood. But the
Attorney and Scrivener; and some petty Clerks of the City, by the Letters of,
etc. pre-occupy those places.

And here I could wish for righting of the dead, and releeving of the poorer
members of such Companies, who are kept in ignorance. That some pains were
taken in the Prerogative Office, for the collating of all gifts of this
nature, to be published in print, that the meanest might thereby be able to call
their Grand Masters to account, if they abuse the trust in them reposited in
this behalf. I acknowledge the youth of mine age to be determined. And (God
knows) how poor a remain of life is left in my Glass, yet if it may please
those in whom the power rests, to give me leave to search (Gratis) for all
Grants and gifts of pious use in all kinds whatsoever. I could willingly
bestow that little of my Lamp, in collection of these things, and publish them
to posterity. Provided always, that I and mine may have the privilege of
imprinting the same for some fitting number of years to come.

The Navigator.
NExt to the man of Trade, or rather equally with him, I must give the
Navigator his due for that his profession is as full of science, as useful to
the Common wealth, and as profitable to himself as any trade whatsoever. If he
attain the skill of knowing, and handling the tackle, the certain art of his
Compass; the knowledge of languages, and dispositions of foreign Nations
where he travailes and trades, he may rise from a Squabler to a Master, from a
Master to be a General honestly, and with good reputation in a short time.

The Nauigator his way of Advancement, and employment is, by
The Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, The High Admiral: Commissioners
for the Kings Navy: Chief Officers of the Navyes of Societies incorporate:
Private Merchants, and the like. With the Trinity house.
But if he get to be an Owner he may trade as free as bird in air, as a man of
war or a man of trade, and Commerce. If he take heed that he entrench not
upon the incorporated Companies, especially the minotaur. He cannot do amiss
(with Gods assistnace.) He may live merrily, and contentedly, be it but in
trading as a mere Carryer of home commodities. Imported from one port to
another within the kingdom.

The Husbandman.
THe Husbandman may likewise for the happy content of the life, and the honest
gain which it brings with it, be worthy to inuit a right good man's son to
undergo the profession.

Your son whom you intend for a Husbandman, must be of a disposition part
gentile, and rusticke equally mixed together. For if the Gentleman be
predominant: his running Nagge will out run the Constable. His extraordinary
strong Beer will be too headstrong in office of Churchwarden. And his well
mouthed dogs will make him out-mouth all the Vestrie. But if the clown be
predominant he will smell all brown bread and garlic. Besides, he must be of
a hardier temper than the rest of his brethren, because the vnhealthfullest
corners of the Kingdom are the most profitable for Fermors. He must especially
aim at a Tenancie under the Crown, or some Bishops Sea, Deane and Chapter;
some College; some Company, some Hospital, or some other body incorporate.
Wherein the Auditor or Receiver, must be his best Intelligencer, and Director.
Young unthrifts acquaintance when they first arrive at the age of one and
twenty. And good old conscionable Landlords that hold it a deadly sin to
raise the rents of their Grandfathers, or hope to be delivered out of
Purgatory by their Tenants prayers will do well

These professions before mentioned, be (as it were) the orbs to receive all
fixed stars, and such dispositions as may be put into any certain frame.
But for a more libertine disposition, Fit it with the profession of a
Courtier. For an overflowing, and Ranker disposition, make him a Soldier. But
beyond this he is a lost man, not worthy a fathers remembrance, or providence.
The Courtiers ways of advancement be these:
BY the general and most ancient rule of Court, if you would have him to be
preferred unto the Kings service in the end. And in the mean time to have
sufficient means of maintenance. Place him with one of the White Staves of the
Household.

By the more particular rule, (if you can) put him unto the Lord High Steward
his Service (who amongst the white Staves) has the chiefest hand in preferring
to any office beneath stayres.

If the High Steward be full, seek to the Lord Chamberlain, who has the
chief power to prefer to the places above stayres, and to the Wardrobe.

And if there be no entrance there, then seek to the Treasurer of the Household,
and next to the Controllor. The Master of the Household. The Coferer, and the
rest of the green Cloth.

The Master of the Horse preferres to the Avenanarie and other Clarkeships
offices, and places about the Stable.

The principal Secretary has heretofore had a great hand in preferring to the
Clarkeships in the office of the Signet, and the Lord privy Seal into the
privy Seal office.

The Master of the great Wardrobe into the Clarkeships, and offices there. The
Master of the Robes. The Master of the Iewell-house, the Keeper of the privy
Purse. The Master of the Toils and Tents with some other the like have whilome
been the means of preferring diverse their followers into the service of the
King, in diverse beneficial places, and Clarkeships, in their several offices
respectively.

The Lord Treasurer without the house, preferres to his Majesty's service, in
most places in or about the Custome-houses, in all the parts of England.

And besides these, I sinde no means used of old, for preferment into the
Kings service for these kind of places.

The yeomen of the Guard, were wont to come in for their personage, and
activitie by their Captains allowance.

And the Bedchamber men's servants, ever were in way to be preferred for Pages
of the privy Chamber, or Grooms, or placed at the back stairs, not of right,
but of custom.

For the Clerks of the Household, they were wont anciently to rise by certain
degrees, according to the prescription of the Black Book, but how it is now, I
know not.

For your better satisfaction of Court Offices, their order and Fee. Search,
the Black Book in the Exchequer, and in the Court. And for all Offices
whatsoever under the King, throughout the whole Kingdom; Either in Castle,
Park, Chase, Court, or house of the Kings royalty or place soever, with the
then Fees of the same, I refer you to a book. Whereof many hundred Copies
are extant, which was collected by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and by him
delivered to the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. And so much for the
Courtier.

The Soldier follows.
ANd the question is first.

Whether the better way of thriving, is to be a Sea Soldier, or a Land Soldier.

Questionless the better way of thriving is to be a Sea Soldier. In this
Kingdom of England being an Island, for that he is more useful to his
Country. More learning is required to be a Sea Soldier than to be a Land
Soldier. A Sea Soldier is certain of victuals, and wages; where the Land
Soldiers pay will hardly find him sustenance. A Sea Soldier may now and than
chance to have a snapp at a booty or a price which may in an instant make him
a fortune for ever; where the Land Soldier may in an age come to the ransacking
of a poor fisher Town at the most.

More valor is required in a Sea Soldier than in a Land Soldier; because the
extremity of the place requires it. The Sea Captain is exposed to as much
danger during the whole fight as the poorest man in the Ship; where the land
Captain uses but to offer his men to the face of the enemy, and than
retreateth.

The way to rise to preferment at Sea, is by the Admiralls Countenance, and the
Vice Admiralls in the Kings service, or in other service by the favor of great
traded Merchants, and especially of your bodies incorporate: and their chief
Officers; and more especially their President, and Treasurer for the time being.

His breeding is a matter of more moment than his age regards.

If he be true bred, he should be first made a perfect Nauigator able to direct
the Sterage of their course, able to know the tackle, and appoint every Sayler
to his charge. He should know what number of Saylors, what Ordinance, and what
munition should be requisite for a Ship of such a burden.

He should be a skillful Caneere, and able to direct the Gunner, to say what
quantity of powder a Piece of such bore and depth requires, and of what weight
the bullet should be where such a quantity of powder is used, whether the Piece
be sound or hony-combed. He should be able to know and direct what quantity of
victual should be required for so many men, for such a voyage. And what
quantity of powder and shot.

Also, to ouersee and direct the Purser and Steward in the expense of their
victual without profuseness, or too much percemonie.

Likewise skillful in all manner of Fire-workes and fitting Engines for sea
fight.

Briefly, he should be so complete, as that none should be able to teach him in
his place, and he skillful to control every other in their places. He should
be courteous and loving to his men. Above all things he should be zealous of
the honor of God. See that the divine service be duly read on board Evening
and Morning, and that swearing be severely punished. A Sea Captain, is not a
place for a young man to leap into instantly, and imediately out of a Ladies
Vshership; a Great man's bed chamber, or a Littletons discipleship.

It is not your feathered Gallant of the Court, nor your Tavern Roarer of the
City, becomes this place I assure you.

I find not any Meson de dieu for relieving of mayned Mariners only, but that
erected at Chattam by Sir John Hawkins Knight, Treasurer of the Navy of the
late Q. Elizabeth; wherein it was provided, that there should be a deduction of
Sixpence by the Month, out of every man and boy their wages in every voyage
toward the same. Which I could wish were as well employed as collected.

The Land-Souldier follows.
IF the Land-Souldier think to thrive and rise by degrees of service, from a
Common Soldier to a Captain in this age, (alas) he is much deceived.

That custom is obsolete, and grown out of use. Do what he can do in
Land-service, he shall hardly rise by his single merit.

His happiness shall be but to fill his hungry belly, and Satiate himself
upon a Pay day.

But if he be of Kin, or a favorite to some great Officer, he may carry
the Colors the first day, be a Lieutenant the second, and a Captain before
he knows how many days go to the week in their Regiment.

The Land-service where a man may learn most experience of War discipline,
is in the Low Countries, by reason of the long exercise of Wars and variety
of Stratagems there.

Beyond that Northward, the service is both more unprofitable and more
dangerous, and less experience is to be there learned.

The more your Son turns his face to the South the more profitable the
Land-service is.

Lastly, if he have no friend or kindred to raise him in the Land-service, I
assure you that there is no Law against buying and selling of Offices in the
Low Countries, for ought that I have read. Neither is it markable amongst them.

After the Soldier returns home, it makes no matter what number of wounds he
can reckon about him.

All the ways of relief for him that I can number are these:

A poor Knights place of Windsor; If the Herald report him a Gentleman, And
the Knights of the Honorable Order of the Garter will accept him. A Brother of
Suttons Hospital; If the Feoffees have not Servants of their own to prefer
before him. A Pensioner of the County; If the lustices find him worthy. And
that he was pressed forth of the same County. Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and
St. Bartholmews, Smithfield; only till their wounds or diseases be cured and
no longer. And that if the Masters of the said Hospitals please to receive
them.
For the Savoy where Soldiers had a foundation, I know none now.

And other Houses appropriated for relief of Soldiers now in use I remember
none.

For the chief are long since demolished. The Templarij are gone. The Knights
of St. John of Jerusalem forgotten. That famous House upon Lincoln green is
rac'd to the ground. And many the like now better known by the Records than
the remains of their ruins with their Revenue, are all diverted from the uses
of their first foundation to private and peculiar Inheritances, which I pity
more than the dissolution of all the Monasteries that ever were.

Here you see, is preferment enough for your six Sons though you bestow
every one upon a several Profession. Only take this general Rule for all,
viz.

To what course soever your sons shall betake them. Be sure that they all
have Crammar learning at the least. So shall they be able to receive and
reteyne the impression of any the said Professions. And otherwise, shall scarce
possibly become Masters in the same, or any one of them. Or if they do, It
will be with more than ordinary pains and difficulty.

Your three Daughters challenge the next place.
FOr their Portions, I showed you before; how and when to raise them. That is,
by the Marriage of your eldest Son, or out of that part of your personal
estate which you may spare without prejudice of your self.

I would have their breeding like to the Dutch Woman's clothing, tending to
profit only and comeliness.

Though she never have a dancing Schoolmasters, A French Tutor, nor a Scotch
Tailor, to make her shoulders of the breadth of Bristow Cowsway. It makes no
matter. For working in curious Italia^ purles, or French borders, it is not
worth the while. Let them learn plain works of all kind, so they take heed
of too open seaming. In stead of Song and Music, let them learn Cookery and
Laundrie. And in stead of reading Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia, let them read the
grounds of good huswifery. I like not a female Poetresse at any hand. Let
greater personages glory their skill in music, the posture of their bodies,
their knowledge in languages, the greatness, and freedom of their spirits:
and their arts in arreigning of men's affections, at their flattering faces.
This is not the way to breed a private Gentleman's Daughter.

If the mother of them be a good Huswife, and Religiously disposed, let her
have the bringing up of one of them. Place the other two forth betimes, and
before they can judge of a good manly leg.

The one in the house of some good Merchant, or Citizen of civil and Religious
government, The other in the house of some Lawyer, some Judge, or well reported
Justice or Gentleman of the Country, where the Servingman is not too
predominant. In any of these she may learn what belongs to her improvement,
for Sempstrie, for Confectionary, and all requisits of Huswifery. She shall be
sure to be restrained of all rank company, and unfitting liberty; which are
the overthrow of too many of their Sex.

There is a pretty way of breeding young Maids an Exchange shop, or St.
Martins le grand. But many of them get such a foolish Crick with carrying the
Bandbox under their Apron to Gentlemen's Chambers, that in the end it is hard to
distinguish whether it be their belly or their bandbox makes such a goodly show.

And in a trade where a woman is sole Chapman, she claims such a pre-eminence
over her husband, that she will not be held to give him an account of her
dealings, either in retaile, or whole sail at any rate.

The Merchants Factor, and Citizens servant of the better sort, cannot
disparage your Daughters with their Society.

And the Judges, Lawyers, and Justices followers, are not ordinary Servingmen,
but men of good breed, and their education for the most part Clarkely, whose
service promises their farther and future advancement.

Your Daughter at home will make a good wife for some good Yeomans eldest
Son, whose father will be glad to crown his sweating frugality, with
alliance to such a house of Gentry.

The youngmans fingers will itch to be handling of Taffata, and to be placed at
the Table, and to be carved unto by Mistress Dorothie, it will make him and the
good plain old Ione his Mother, to pass over all respect of Portion or
Patrimony.

For your Daughter at the Merchants, and her sister if they can carry it
wittily, the City affords them variety.

The young Factor being fancy-caught in his days of Innocence, and before he
travail so far into experience as into foreign Countries, may lay such a
foundation of first love in her bosom, as no alteration of Climate can alter.

So likewise, may Thomas the foreman of the Shop, when beard comes to him, as
Apprentiship goes from him, be entangled and belymed with the like springs. For
the better is as easily surprised as the worse.

Some of your Clarkly men complain the moisture of their palms. Others the
Sorpego in their wrists, both movin^ ^^anes.

With a little patience your daughter may light upon some Counsailor at Law,
who may be willing to take the young Wench, in hope of favor with the old
Judge. An Attorney will be glad to give all his profits of a Michaelmas Term,
Fees and all, but to woo her through a Crevice. And the Parson of the Parish
being her Ladies Chaplain, will forswear eating of Tithe Pig, for a whole
year, for such a parcel of Glebe Land at all times.

And so much for your Sons and Daughters.

I now espy mine Host of the Bull here in Saint Albans standing at his door
upon his left leg like to the old Drummer of Parish-garden, ready to entertain
us.

Therefore I will here conclude with that of the Poet. -- Navibus atque
Quadragis petimus benevivere, quod pet is hic est,
Est Anglis, animus si te, non deficit equus.


FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAUCET for Ben: Fisher, and are to be
sold at his Shop at the sign of the Talbot in Aldersgate Street. 1631.


