THE PRICE OF OUR REDEMPTION.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, the sixth of April last, 1617.

By CHARLES RICHARDSON, Preacher at Saint Katherines near the Tower of London.

1. Peter 1.18.19. We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
Gold, etc.

But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without
spot.

Printed at London by W. Iaggard, for W. Butler, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Bulwark, near the Tower of London, 1617.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Lemmon, Knight, Lord Major of the City of
London: And, To the Right Worshipful, the Sheriffs and Aldermen of the same:
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
AS this Sermon was Preached in your hearing, and allowed by your approbation:
so now, the Doctrine of it being so generally necessary, I have thought good to
send it forth into the world, that whereas, while it was delivered by voice, it
could extend but to a few, now being committed to the Press, it might be
communicated to many. I confess the manner of handling it is plain and homely,
without any Rhetorical Ornaments, or eloquent style, (For I ever desired
rather to speak to the edification of my hearers, then by vainglorious
ostentation to seek any applause to my self.) But I doubt not but the matter
is sound and wholesome: and therefore will be acceptable to all good
Christians, that love rather to have their hungry souls fed with the
substantial food of Gods word, 2 Timoth. 4, 3 1 Cor. 2.4.
then their itching ears tickled with the intising speech of man's wisdom.

Now the reasons that have moved me to publish it in your Honors and Worships
names are diverse. First and principally, because by your favorable kindness
(though being no freeman among you) I am admitted to be Tenant to this
Honorable City, and so by your means, next under God, do enjoy a comfortable
habitation, to the future benefit of me and mine. In regard whereof, I have
thought my self bound to leave some testimony to after times, of your singular
love to men of my profession, and some pledge and token of my thankful
affection. Besides, I acknowledge I have received much kindness from many of you
in particular, which I would be loath should be buried in forgetfulness. And
howsoever this gift be in it self poor and base, not worthy any way of your
acceptance: yet seeing it is the best which my mean condition can afford, I
hope you will receive it as willingly, as I tender it sincerely: measuring
rather the affection of the giver, then the worth of the gift.

I pray God bless your Honor and worshippes all, and inflame your hearts with
a true zeal of his glory, 1 King. 19, 14
that with holy Elias you may be jealous for the Lord God of hosts, in those
high places wherein the Lord has set you: that all the workers of iniquity
(especially the prophaners of the Sabbath) being by the sword of Justice cut
off from this famous City, Psalm 101, 8.
God may still continue his blessings upon it: so as there may never be
invasion, Psalm. 144, 14.
nor leading into captivity, nor crying in our streets, Psalm 122, 7.
but that still peace may be within our walls, and prosperity within our
Palaces: but chiefly that his glorious Gospel, the means of our salvation,
may remain to us and to our posterity, even to the end of the world, Amen.

Your Honors and Worships in all Christian affection, Charles Richardson.

THE PRICE OF OUR REDEMPTION.
Mat. 20.28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister; and to give his life a ransom for many.


AT the twentieth verse of this Chapter, the Evangelist tells us, that the two
sons of Zebedeus came with their Mother to our Savior Christ, requesting
this favor of him, That the one of them might sit at his right hand, and the
other at his left hand in his kingdom. Our Savior had foretold them a little
before, Ver. 18, 19.
that his death was now at hand, and that he should rise again the third day.
Whereupon, they by and by thought, that presently after his resurrection, he
would begin his kingdom in the earth: which they imagined (as the rest of the
Jews did) should be a temporal Kingdom, like the kingdoms of this world.
Our Savior had also promised all the twelve, that when he should sit in the
Throne of his Majesty, Math. 19, 28.
they should sit also upon twelve thrones, and judge the 12 Tribes of Israel.
And therefore, these two Disciples being still carnally affected, make this
request, that they may have the chief places of command and authority next
unto himself. For they saw that our Savior respected them above the rest, and
that he used them more familiarly the^ their fellows. Only they were afraid
lest Peter should be preferred before them. For they saw that our Savior
graced him also, and that when any special work was to be wroght, he was
admitted to be present at it as well as they. As when he was transfigured on
the Mountain, he took Peter, Math. 17, 12.
and James, and John up with him, and left the rest of his Disciples below. And
when he raised up Iairus his daughter, Mark 5, 37.
he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John. Besides,
they had heard our Savior make a promise unto Peter (though, if they understood
it aright, it was made to them all as well as to him) That he would give unto
him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. And therefore, Math. 16, 19.
they labor here to prevent him, that he may not be advanced above them. Now
it is worth the noting that they do not move their suite in their own
persons, but set their Mother on work to be a Mediator for them: which they
did, it may be, because they were bashful; and (as it is with many men in
this case) were loath to say their own errand; but chiefly, because they
hoped yt by this means their suit would be the better accepted. For they knew
she was very gracious with our Savior, being one of those women which followed
him from Galile, Mat. 27, 55, 56
and ministered unto him. And therefore they hoped, that if she should move
their request, he would not give it the repulse.

Verse 22, 23.
Well, our Savior notwithstanding, utterly denies and rejects their suite;
and thereupon, there is kindled a new flame among the Disciples. For it is
said, that the other ten disdained the two Brethren; Ver. 24.
not because they detested their fact as carnal, but because they also were
carried with ambition, and gaped after the same preferment, and desired to be
eminent in the Kingdom of Christ; and therefore they thought it would be an
injury to all the rest, if the chief rule and government should be conferred
upon a few. So that as the two brethren offended with blind ambition; so the
other ten offended no less with ambitious indignation. As they did carnally
make this request; so these did as carnally disdain them, seeing every one of
them did no less desire the cheifest place, Luke 9, 46. Mar. 9, 34.
as appears by their manifold contentions and disputations about it. But our
Savior, as by his wonted mildness and clemency he tolerated the carnal
petition of the two brethren: so he does not sharply reprove the carnal
indignation of the rest. Ver. 25.
But calling them all unto him, as if he had had some serious matter to
impart, he labors to cure them all with one Medicine, and hereby takes
occasion to exhort them to humility and lowliness of mind, and that by two
contrary examples. The one is taken from the Kings of the earth, from whom he
would have his Disciples to differ the other is his own example, Ver. 25, 26.
whereunto they ought to conform themselves if they desire to reign with him.
The former example is first propounded in these words; Ye know that the Lords
of the Gentiles have domination over them, and they that are great exercise
authority over the^. But it shall not be so among you. And afterward it is
expounded in the next words, Ver. 26.
But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant: where he
declares how he would have christians to differ from the heathen. He does not
forbid that even among his disciples one should be greater and another lesser:
but prescribes another way, and other manner of maiority and minority, which
consists not in lordlinesse and outward pomp, nor in lofty seats and worldly
pride, but in labor and service. And to the end yt he might affect them the
more, and make better impression of his doctrine, he adds another sentence,
Verse 27.
saying; Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Where he
teaches us how a man may be great, and the chief before God in the kingdom of
heaven; namely, if he subject himself to minister and to do service to al men:
whereupon Ierom says, Christus humilitatis magister, etc ad locum.
Christ the master of humility and meeknes, does neither reprove the two suitors
for their immoderat desire, nor rebuke the other ten for their indignation and
envy: but propounds such an example, whereby he would teach them that he is ye
greater that is the lesser, and that he is a lord, that is servant of al. And
therefore it was in vain either for them to seek superfluous things, or for
these to grieve at their desire of greatness, seeing men must come to the
height of honor, not by power, Externis nostra similia non haben^, etc. ad
locum.
but by humility: and so does Chrysostom also expound the place. As if our
Savior should have said, our estate is not like the estate of strangers. For
among the Gentiles they that are princes do bear rule; but with me, he that is
the last is the cheifest. But there are others that will have the meaning of the
speech thus: that our Savior teaches in this place, how he that has attained
rule and authority in the church, ought to behave himself in the same; namely,
if he will execute his office well, he must be the minister and servant of them
over whom he is set, so as in all things he seek their benefit and salvation,
and not his own honor. And this sense agrees best with that wc Christ says in
another place to the disciples, when they contended for superiority, Luc.
22.24.25 26.27.
The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them
are called gracious Lords. But ye shall not be so: but let the greatest among
you be as the least: and the cheifest as he that serves. For who is greater,
he that sits at table, or he that serves? Is not he that sits at Table?
And I am among you as he that serves.

The example of our Savior Christ is set down in this verse that I have read.
There are no arguments that prevail more with Scholars and hearers, then the
example of their Master. And therefore as Christ does every where urge and
press it, that they might in it as in a glass see how to conform themselves:
so here also to his precept he adds his example, that he might the more
effectually move them. Now this example is first propounded generally, in these
words, The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. As if
he should have said; If I had come into the world in any such pomp, as to
bear rule like an earthly King, and to be guarded with a troop of many
servants, then it would be no marvel if your minds were enflamed and set on
fire with ambition, and that you should also conceive haughty thoughts. For
then there would be some reason that my followers should contend for
superiority; and it would be a necessary question, who should bear rule, and
who should obey. But you your selves do see, how I am come in the form of a
servant, to do service for the good of all men. And therefore, what excuse can
you have, if neglecting my example, whereby I minister unto others, you desire
to bear rule over others? For you should always remember that which I have so
often said unto you: The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant
above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his master is, and the
servant as his Lord. And herein we have to consider two things. First, the
Title that is here given unto our Savior Christ, he is called The Son of
Man. Secondly, the end of his coming, (...) is set down first, negatiuely,
not to be ministered unto; and secondly, affirmatively, but to minister.
Secondly, this example is amplified by a particular instance of the greatest
humility, and of the basest service that ever was performed, and that was to
give his life a ransom for many. Wherein we are to observe, first, what it was
yt he gave, his life. Secondly, how he gave it; willingly and voluntarily
without compulsion, which is insinuated in this, that it is said he gave his
life. Thirdly, the end why he gave it, to be a ransom. Fourthly, and last of
all, for whom he gave it, and that is, for many. And thus I have led you along
to see the dependence that these words have upon the former, and also have
given you the sum and resolution thereof. Let us now see the doctrines
therein contained for our instruction.

[The Son of man.] This title is every where appropriated to the Messiah in
the new Testament. And it is taken out of the Prophecy of Daniel, where the
Prophet describes the person of the Messiah in this manner. As I beheld in
visions by night, behold, Dan. 7, 13, 14
one like the Son of Man came in the clouds of heaven, and approached unto
the Ancient of days, and they brought him before him. And he gave him dominion
and honor, and a kingdom, that all people, Nations, and Languages should
serve him, etc. Hence our Savior Christ has properly applied this Title to
himself. There be diverse Reasons why this name is given unto him. Some say,
he was so called because he had no Father, but was the Son of the Virgin
Marie, as it were of one man. But this is idle and frivolous, and without
ground. For, the masculine Article, (...), not (...)
and not the feminine is every where prefixed before it. The true causes
therefore of this title are these. First, he was called the Son of Man,
because he was a true man like unto us in all things except sin. For, being
the Son of GOD, he could have created his humane flesh of the earth, as the
body of Adam was formed; but because he would make it appear, that he did
truly take our Nature upon him, he took his flesh of the Virgin Marie, Gal.
4.4.
and so was not only man, but the Son of Man. And indeed our Savior was very
man, consisting of a true reasonable soul, and a true substantial body like
unto other men, as the Scripture does manifestly declare. There is one Mediator
(says the Apostle) between GOD and man, 1 Timoth. 2, 5
even the Man Christ Jesus. Heb. 2, 14.
And in another place, Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also likewise took part with them, etc. Apollinaris the heretic
confessed, that Christ had a true humane flesh, but in stead of his soul, he
had the word united to it. But that is easily confuted; for then it should not
be true which the Apostle says, Heb. 2, 17. and 4, 15.
that in all things he was made like unto his Brethren, sin only excepted
Again, the Prophet Isaiah does lively set out the truth of this point, where
he says, Isai 7 14, 15.
The virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and she shall call his name
Immanuel. Butter and Honey shall he eat, till he have knowledge to refuse the
evil, and choose the good. In this testimony, as Fulgentius well notes, De
mysterio Medeatoris Christi. lib. 1.
is contained the whole fullness of the mystery of our salvation. For the
truth of his flesh is manifested in the conception of the Virgin: and in the
election of good, and refusing of evil, is declared his intellectual soul:
and in the name Immanuel, the true Nature of his Deity is expressed. And this
the Evangelist plainly teaches, when he says of Jesus being yet a child,
That he grew, and waxed strong in Spirit, and was filled with wisdom, etc. And
again, He increased in Wisdom and stature. As it is proper unto the flesh,
to grow in stature; so it is proper to the soul to increase in Wisdom and
Grace. And our Savior himself gives testimony also heereunto. For his soul
he says, Matthew 26, 38.
My soul is very heavy, even unto the death. This cannot agree to the body,
which of it self without the soul, is but a brutish and an insensible thing;
nor to the Deity, which is not subject to any passion; and therefore it must
needs be understood of his reasonable soul. And for his body, he says even
after his resurrection, Luc. 24, 39.
Handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. So
that our Savior had not an imaginary soul, and a fantastical body, but true,
real, and substantial, having their full and perfect essence, and the essential
properties of both. As in his soul there was understanding, will, memory, and
human affections: his body had all the dimensions of a natural body it was
circumscriptible, visible, and palpable, and wanted nothing wc served either to
adorn the essence of man, or to the constituting of him according to the order
of creation. Yea, he was subject to the same passions of the soul, and the same
infirmities of the body that we are, save only yt he was without sin. Heb. 4,
15.
As the Apostle says, He was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without
sin. In his soul he was subject to sorrow and heaviness, Math. 26, 38.
his soul was heavy to the death: and he was not a little sorrowful, Luke 19, 41.
when he wept over Jerusalem: As also to joy and gladness, I am glad (says he
to his disciples when Lazarus was dead) for your sakes, John 11, 15.
that I was not there yt ye may believe. He was subject to fear, he was herd in
that which he feared: Hebr. 5, 7.
To anger, Mark. 3, 5.
He looked round about on the Jews angerly, mourning also for the hardness of
their hearts: To desire, Luc. 22, 15. Mark 6, 6.
I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover before Easter: To admiration,
he marvelled at their unbelief: To love, John 13, 23. and ^1, 20.
yea he loved one of his disciples more then the rest John is often called the
disciple whom Jesus loved. In his body, Luke 2.52.
he increased in stature. He was not a perfect man at ye first, but was born a
child, and increased in stature by degrees, as other children do. He was
subject to hunger, Mat. 21, 18, 19 John 4, 7. and 1^, 28. John 4, 6.
when he came to the fig tree and would have eaten: To thirst, when he asked
drink of the woman of Samaria, and when he cried out as he hanged on ye cross,
I thirst: To wearines, when he sat on the Well to rest him. And necessary was
it, yt our Savior should be a true man as we have heard first, that ye justice
of God might be pacified in the same nature wherein it was offended: and
secondly yt he might be fit to suffer for our sins: which, if he had been only
God, he could not have done: for the Godhead is impassible, and not subject to
suffering. Again, it was necessary that he should have a true soul, and a
true body; that seeing we had sinned, and so deserved to be damned both in our
souls and bodies, he might be able to save us in both.

This is a point full of comfort to all the children of God. We have a
merciful Savior, who having himself felt all the miseries that any of us can
endure, will no doubt be ready to succor and relieve us. It was a good speech
of the Heathen Queen to the distressed Troianes; Haud ignara mali mis^ris
sucurrere disco. Dido in Virgil. Aenead.
Experience of misery, has taught me to succor them that are in misery. So
the experience that he has had of our miseries, makes him compassionate
toward us. And this is that which the Apostle says, Hebr. 2, 17, 18
In all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be merciful, etc. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted. And again. and 4, 15.
We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. And
therefore, 16.
he infers this comfortable conclusion, Let us go boldly unto the throne
of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
So that whatsoever misery it be that we suffer, whether poverty, or infamy, or
perplexity and heaviness of mind, yea, the very agony and panges of death, we
need not to be discomforted. Christ himself has felt and endured them all;
and therefore, we shall undoubtedly find him both able and willing to relieve
us.

Secondly, he was called the Son of man, not only because he was a true
man; but also, because he was a vile and an abject man. For it is an Hebrew
kind of speech, which for the most part has vileness joined with it, and
signifies an ordinary and a mean man. As appears in diverse places of the
Psalms. Psalm 8, 4.
What is man (says David) that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man
that thou visitest him? Psalm 144, 3, 4.
And again, Lord what is Man that thou regardest him! Or the Son of man that
thou think upon him! Man is like to vanity, etc. And again, Put not your
trust in Princes, and 146, 3, 4.
nor in the son of man, for there is no help in him. His breath departs,
and he returns to his dust, etc. But more plainly in the book of Job: Job 25,
verse 6
How much more man a worm, even the Son of man which is but a worm? And this
was (as it were) the proper name of the Prophet Ezekiel, the lord calls him
almost in every Chapter the Son of man, Thou Son of man, etc. thereby to teach
him humility, that he might not exalt and lift up himself by reason of the
excellent gift of prophecy bestowed upon him, and the celestial visions
revealed unto him. And for the same cause this name was also given to the
Prophet Daniel, Daniel 8, 17.
although he were descended of the kings stock. And hence it is, that our
Savior Christ does so often call himself by this name, especially when he
would debase himself, and manifest his humility, as we see in this place. And
to the Scribe that offered to follow him whither soever he went; The Foxes
(says he) have holes, Matthew. 8, 20.
and the birds of the heaven have nests: but the Son of man has not whereon
to rest his head. And he told Nichodemus, John 3, 14.
that as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lift up. And this the Apostle insinuates, Philip. 2, 7.
when he says, That he was made after the similitude of man; that is to say,
none otherwise then any of the common people; not only a true man, but in the
judgment of the world no better then one of the basest of the people. According
to that which David said as a type of him: I am a worm, Psalm 22, 6.
and not a man; a shame of men, and the contempt of the people. And the Prophet
Isaiah foretold the like: Isaiah 52, 2, 3.
He has neither form nor beauty (says he) when we shall see him, there shall
be no form that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men: we
hid our faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Philip 2, 6,
7.
And so the Apostle says of him; that being in the form of God, he thought
it no robbery to be equal with God. But he made himself of no reputation,
and took on him the form of a servant, etc. So that we see, there is great
Emphasis and force in this Title. For as it is more vehement to call a man the
Son of destruction, John 17, 12. 2 Samuel 3, 34.
as Christ called Judas: The Son of wickedness, as David called them that slew
Abner: Ephesians. 2, 3. Psalm 79, 11.
the Son of wrath, as the Apostle calls all unregenerate persons: the son
of death, as it was said of the Martyrs, rather then a destroyed, or a wicked,
or a dead man, etc. For it signifies one that is destinated to destruction,
and to wrath, and to death: so it is more significant and forcible to call our
Savior Christ, the Son of mon, rather then simply man. Here then appears
the goodness of Christ to usward, that for our sakes, he would stoop to so
low a degree of humility, and even destinate himself to so base a condition.
And therefore one says well, that he was more ours then his own, being
wholly devoted and addicted to our good. But of this we shall have fitter
occasion to speak afterward. And thus much for the title.

[Came not.] Here the end of our Savior Christ his coming, is set out
negatiuely. He does not deny, that any body ministered unto him, or that they
might not minister to him; but he denies that he came for this end, to be
ministered unto: but rather, in the whole course of his life he debased
himself. Howsoever his second coming shall be most glorious and full of
majesty ( For he shall come in the clouds of heaven, Matthew. 24, 30.
with power and great glory: yea, he shall show himself from heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, etc.) yet his first coming was most base and
abject. He came not in any outward pomp, though he could if it had pleased him.
For, Philip. 2, 6.
as we have heard before, He was equal with God, and that without any injury;
and therefore he could have come in greater state, and with greater majesty
then all the Kings and Emperors in the world: but he came in the poor and
base form of a servant. He was born in a stable, because there was no room for
him in the Inn; and he was laid in a cratch, Luke 2, ver. 7
for want of a better cradle. And as his coming into the world was thus poor
and base; so all the while that he lived amongst men, he did utterly refuse all
outward honor and authority, as appears in many instances. When two
Brethren fell at strife and variance about the patrimony which their Father had
left them, and one of them came and entreated our Savior Christ that he would
bid his brother divide the inheritance with him; Luke 12, 13, 14
he would not meddle with them, but answered him in this manner; Man, who made
me a Judge or a diuider over you? John 8, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
And again; When the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in
the act of Adultery, and would have had him to have pronounced sentence against
her; he would not take so much upon him; but having taken them down a little
by conuincing their consciences of their own sins, and so sent them away
with a Plea in their ears: he turns him to the woman, and perceiving that no
man had condemned her, Neither do I condemn thee (says he) go and sin no
more. But most plainly, when the Jews being drawn into admiration of his
person by his preaching and miracles, John 6, 15.
were about to take him and make him a King, he departed from them, and would
not be found.

This example of our Savior Christ is our instruction, and teaches us that we
must not ambitiouslie aspire unto outward honor and dignity in the world.
Galath. 5, 26.
The apostle Paul has a grave exhortation to this purpose; Let us not be
desirous of vainglory, (that is, let us not be ambitious) provoking one
another, envying one another. Where he sets down two dangerous effects,
whereby an ambitious man does both hurt others, Pareus ad locu.
and vex himself. The first is provoking one another; namely, by contempt, by
contumelies, and injuries. For ambitious persons do eye and observe both their
inferiors, and also their equals and superiors. Such as they think to be any
way under them, those they contemn, and reprochfully disgrace, and
importunately provoke with wrongs and injuries. Ester 3, 5, 6.
So did proud Haman despise and contemn poor Mordecai, and wrought all the
mischief against him that he could devise. And such an one was Diotrephes in
the Primitive Church, 3 Ioh. ve. 9, 10
who loving to have the pre-eminence among them, received not the Apostles, but
pratled against them with malicious words, and was injurious to the Saints,
thrusting them out of the Church. For such is the corruption of our nature,
that when a man is once advanced above others according to the old Proverb,
Honor changes his manners, and makes him become proud and disdainful. The
second effect is, Envying one another. For as ambitious persons do contemn
and provoke their inferiors, so also they envy the good estate of their equals
and superiors. For this is our natural affection and disposition, that every
man is highly conceited of himself, and every man thinks himself worthy of
the chiefest and greatest honor, and therefore enuieth all that are advanced
above them. As we see in the sons of Jacob, Gene. 37, 11.
who were displeased when they heard that their brother Joseph was like to be
preferred before them. But what else do these persons by envying others, but
torment themselves? For, this is the nature of envy, that it does not so much
hurt another, as it vexes and greeueth it self. Whereupon Bernard says well,
O ambitio ambientium crux! quomodo omnes torquens, omnibus places? etc. de
consid. lib. 3.
O ambition, the very cross and gibbet of ambitious men; how is it that
tormenting all men! thou please all men? There is nothing does more cruelly
vex, nothing does more greeuouslie disquiet, and yet nothing is more frequent
amongst miserable men. It is not possible to reckon up all the fearful
effects which ambition has brought forth. It overthrew Adam, and cast him
headlong out of paradise; who when he disdained that subjection which he ought
to God, and desired to be like unto God, he found himself (as S. Cyprian
says) to be altogether without God. De ieiumo and tentat. Christi.
It was nothing else but ambition that moved Cain and Esau most cruelly to
imbrue their hands in the blood of their Brethren; the one actually, the other
in intent and purpose; breaking thereby the very strongest bonds of Nature. For
ambition, Ambitio te ad dignitatem nisi per indigna non ducit. Sen. Not qu.
lib. 1.
as one says well, commonly leads a man to preferment by shameful and
villainous courses. Neither has it only ouerthrown private persons, but Cities
also, and many kingdoms. For the prouocations, which we heard of before, do
usually breed contentions and wars, and murders, and disturb the public
peace. There were many causes of the civil wars between Caesar and Pompey,
Si mulos dedit aemula virtus, Nec quemquam iam far potest Caesar ve priere,
Pompeius ve parem. Lucan Lib 1.
but the chief and principal was ambition, that the one could not endure a
superior, and the other could not abide an equal. But well were it, if
ambition had kept it self only in the Commonwealth mong Temporal persons,
but Experience has taught us, that this most foul monster, has set her foot
also in the Church of GOD. What was it but ambition, that made the Disciples of
our Savior Jesus Christ so often contend and strive for the chief place, as
we have heard before? And what was it else but ambition, that brought in the
Romish primacie, and established the Antichristian tyranny, and thereby has
almost undone the Church? As Saint Cyprian says, Cyp. lib. 1 Epist. 3.
That swelling and proud boasting that is amongst them, came not from the
School of Jesus Christ, who teaches Humility, but it proceeds from the
Spirit of Antichrist. And therefore, we may well conclude with Saint
Bernard, Ambitio subtle ma^um, secretum virus pestis occulta, matter
hypocrisis, virtutum aerugo, tinca sanctitatis. in Psa. 91 Sermon. 5.
That ambition is a subtle evil, a secret poison, or an hidden plague, the
Mother of Hypocrisy, the rust of Virtue, the moth of Sanctity.

Again, besides these fearful and pernicious effects, ambitious persons are
accompanied with many and great dangers: Stella de contemp. mundi.
They that climb up upon the tops of high buildings, are subject unto much
peril: they had need to have a good brain, that they fall not. So is it with
them that are advanced to high degree of honor. Non in praerupto tantum illic
stant, sed in lubrico, Sen Epist 85.
The place whereon they stand is not only high and steep, but slippery and
uncertain. Whereupon, Bernard has a good saying, Quo progrederis miser? An vt
ab altiori gradu sit casus grauior? etc. Declam.
Whither dooest thou adventure poor man? that thou may have a greater fall
from an higher degree? So shall thou not fall by li le and little, but as Satan
was suddenly down from heaven: so shall thou with vehement force be cast
down like lightning. The old saying has always been true, Mediocria firma.
The mean estate is the surest. And we see by daily experience, Saepius ventis
agitatur ing^ns Pinus, and celsae grauiore casu Decidunt turres, seriuntque
summos Fulmina montes. Horat. lib. 2. od. 10
that the low shrubbes are safe, when the high and lofty trees are shaken with
the wind: and the mean Cottages stand firm and sure, when the stately
Turrets come tumbling down: and the lowly Valleys are without danger, when
the high mountains are stricken with thunder. And have not our own eyes beheld
the sudden falls of many that have bin advanced to great height of honor? As
indeed it is a wonderful hard matter for such persons to keep their
standing. The heathen Orator could say, Cic. in Verrem lib. 5.
Believe me (and he spoke by his own experience) these Ornaments and benefits
of the people of Rome, are kept with no less labor then they are gotten. And
howsoever honor and advancement do for the present minister great comfort and
pleasure to the mind: yet they bring with them much more vexation and trouble.
For, if a man that is raised to preferment Errato n^lla venia, recte facto
exigua laus. Cic. de lege Agrar.
offend but once, there is no pardon; and if he do never so well, there is
but little praise. Yea, for the most part it falls out, and that justly, that
such as seek to make other men's falls a step to raise their honors, come to
ruin themselves. As Eleazar going under the Elephants belly to kill him; 1
Match. 6, 46.
the Elephant fell upon him and crushed him to death: so they that thrust sore
at others to make them fall, are so oppressed with a weight of envy, as they
can never recover it: and then, the loss of honor is far more intolerable,
then if a man had never known it. Eli^n. lib 14. cap. 1.
It is reported of Aristotle, that when one had deprived him of the honor that
was decreed to him by the Oracle of Apollo, he writes thereof to Antipater his
friend in this manner: These things do so affect me, as I neither greatly care
for them, neither am I altogether careless of them. Though he were a great
Philosopher, and professed an outward contempt of all such accidents, and it
is like had also morally subdued his affections: yet he could not but be
touched with the loss of his honor. For he wisely thought, that it is all
alike for a man unto rise to dignity, and afterward to be bereft of it. For,
it is no great matter for a man not to be advanced, but when he is advanced, to
be cast down again, that is intolerable. But it were happy for ambitious
persons, if this danger were only to the body, and outward estate: but
unless they take heed, there is as great danger to the soul.

Plin. not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 36.
Pliny writes of the Pigeons, that taking a pride in the excellency of their
Feathers, and the height of their flying, they tower it in the air so long,
that at last by this ostentation, they become a prey to the Hawke; whereas
otherwise, if they would fly outright, they are swifter then any other bird.
In like manner, men that take a pride in the height of that honor whereto they
are advanced, are many times made a prey to the devil, and a laughing stock
to men. Whereupon S. Bernard has a good saying, comparing ambition to the
arrow that flies by day. Time sagitta^, leuiter volat, leuiter penetrat, sed
dico tibi, non ^eue infl^git vulnus: cito interfi it in Psalm, 91 Sermon. 5.
Fear the arrow, it flies lightly, it pierces lightly; but I tell thee, it
inflicteth no light wound, it kills speedily.

Again, though there were no such danger in advancement: yet all the honor
that a man can attain unto, is but vain and deceitful. Volatile quod dam
est, auraque mobilius. Seneca Epist. 123.
A flitting thing, more light and inconstant then the air. Lud. viues in Aug.
de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 13 and Plutarch in Agid. prooem.
As the Poets feign of Ixion, that when he thought to have embraced Juno the
Queen of heaven, he caught in her stead an empty cloud: so ambitious persons
catching at honor and preferment, find nothing in the end but vanity and
emptiness Saint Ambrose wittily compares them to foolish children, that run
up and down to catch Butterflies; who many times, because they look not to
their feet, fall into a ditch and hurt themselves: or at least, are wearied with
following them that never abide long in one place: and if at length, after their
long travel, they take one of them, what have they got but a thing of naught,
a foul and a filthy worm? Calcagn. in funere Herc. Strozzae.
It was gravely spoken by a great man in Rome; There is nothing sure and
certain in humane affairs: riches are wavering and inconstant, Kingdoms are
variable and unstable, that same glory which we so ambitiously seek after,
is the vainest thing in the world; Authority is skipping and mutable, and many
times is conferred on him that deserves worst: so that neither in outward
felicity, nor greatness of dignity a man can promise any certainety unto
himself. Wheteunto agrees that saying of S. Augustine, Non pro magno haberi
debet honor humanus quod nullius est ponderis fumus. De Ciu. dei. lib. 5. cap.
17.
Worldly honor is not to be much esteemed, being nothing else but an empty
smoke. And indeed, honor of it self cannot make a man truly great. He that
has nothing else to commend him but his outward preferment, he may well look
big, and strout it with a stately and a lofty pace, but he shall never be
truly a great man. For, as one says well, Cum sua illum basi metire. Paruus
pumilio, tametsi in monte const^terit: Colossus magnitudinem suam seruabit,
etiamsi steterit in puteo. Sen Ep. 77.
Measure him by his foundation, or the ground that he stands upon, and see
then if he be great. Set a dwarf on the top of a Mountain, and he is a dwarf
still: but set a giant in the deepest pit, he loses not an inch of his
stature. This is our error, here we are deceived, that we esteem no man by
that which he is himself; but consider him with his complements, additions,
and Ornaments. Whereas, if we would make a true estimation of a man, and know
what he is indeed, we should behold him naked. We should strip him out of his
patrimony, strippe him out of his honor, strippe him out of all the leasings
of outward things, yea strip him out of his body; and behold his mind, if that
be great, he is great indeed, otherwise all the rest cannot make him great. And
therefore Archidamus a noble man of Sparta, Plutar in apo thegm. Lacon.
when as Philip the King of Macedonia, waxing proud by reason of a great
overthrow that he had given the Athenians, had written somewhat roughly and
insolently to him: writes wittily back again in this manner. If thou would
take a measure of thy shadow, thou should not find it any larger then it
was before the victory. Last of all, ambition is most insatiable. Let a man be
never so much advanced, yet still he aspireth higher. It was the device of an
ambitious King, to give the new Moon in his colors, with this Motto or word,
Done^ totam circumferentiam impleat.
Till it fill the whole circumference. We see the truth this in Adam, who was
not contented with the honor that God gave him in Paradise, though he made him
Lord over all his creatures, but ambitiously desired to be like unto God.
Neither were the evil Angels content with that glory which they had in the
presence of God in heaven. It is reported of Plutar in eius vita.
Pyrrhus, King of the Epyrotes, that while he was making expedition for war
against Rome, Cineas his chief favorite, asked him what he would do when he
had conquered Rome, then says he, I shall subdue all Italy: and what when
he had subdued Italy? then shall I take Sicile that is next adjoining: and
what when he had taken Sicile? then we shall overrun Africa and Carthage,
and so easily make our selves Lords of all Greece. And being asked again, what
he would do when he had overcome al; the^ says he merrily, We will take our
ease, and be Frolic with our friends. The^ Cineas replies; and what hinders
thee, O King, yt thou may not do this now, but that blind ambition will not
suffer thee to rest? And surely, if he had subdued all these nations, and made
himself Lord and Ruler of them all, yet he would not then have been quiet.
As we see in Alexander, Plutarch. de tranquil. animi.
who having conquered all Asia; yet (as if he had been but a Beggar) he wept,
because he had not subdued the whole world. For when he heard Anaxagoras the
Philosopher disputing, that there were infinite worlds, he burst out into
tears; and being asked what he ayled, he answered, he had cause to grieve,
seeing he had not yet conquered one world. Whereupon one says very wittily,
Alexander or by magnus, Alexandro orbis angustus.
Alexander was great in the worlds conceit, but the world was little in
Alexanders conceit. Nemo quos vin^at sed a quibus vincatur aspicit: and illi
non tam iu^undum est, multos post se videre, quam grave a ^ quem ante se. Habet
ho^ vili^ omnis ambit o ^o^ respicit. Sen. Epist. 74.
And indeed this has been always the nature and property of an ambitious
person, that he never considers whom he excels himself, but who excel
him. And it is not so much pleasure to him to see many after him, as it is a
grief to see any before him. All ambition has this fault, it never looks
back; but always forward. Sen. Epi. 85.
And an ambitious man is as careful not to see others before him, as not to
see himself after others.

Tu ista credis excelsa, quia long ab illis iaces. Et vero qui ad illa
peruenit, humilia sunt. Mentior, nisi adhuc quaerit ascendere. Istud quod tu
summum putas, gradus est Sen. Epi. 118.
They that are in mean and low place, when they see a man raised to honor, they
think he is advanced very high: but he himself thinks his estate is but
low, and therefore he seeks still to climb higher: and that which another man
counts the highest degree, is but a step in his conceit. And to speak the
truth, how can that honor satisfy and fill the mind of man, which is
deceitful, light, and vain? In Psalm 91 Sermon. 15,
as Bernard says; and therefore like to make him more empty rather then to
replenish him: as he that has a great deal of wind in his stomach, is so
far from being filled, that he is made more hungry with it. Opta. lib. 2.
And therefore one compares the throat of an ambitious man to an empty
sepulcher, and says, it is more insatiable. For one corpse is sufficient for
one sepulcher, and then it is shut up again; but all the honor in the world
cannot satisfy an ambitious mind.

This serves for the just reproof of all those, that do so greedily gape
after preferment, and so eagerly desire to be advanced above others. The
Apostle exhorts every man in meeknes of mind to esteem another better then
himself. Philip. 2, 3.
But it is far otherwise with us: we think our own penny the best silver:
and account basely of our brethren in comparison of our selves. Again, Romans 12,
10.
the apostle teaches us, in giving honor, to go one before another. If he
had said, in taking honor, go one before another, he should have had
followers enough; every one would have been his scholar. For we all desire to
be preferred above others. We have all a spice of Diotrephes his disease, 3
John ver. 9
We love to have the pre-eminence. And we are too Pharisaicall in this case,
Mat 23, 6, 7. Luke 14, 7.
We love to have the chief seats and the chief places in all assemblies. I do
not deny, but that it is lawful for a man, both to desire and to maintain
that honor which is due unto him, that a fit decorum and convenient order may
be observed. Neither Philosophy nor Divinity does condemn the mediocrity of
ambition, wc Aristotle calls a virtue, whereby men desire moderate honor, as
far as is meet and convenient. Only these cautions are to be observed. Pet.
Martyr.
First, that we rest not in it as in the main and principal end, but refer all
to the honor and glory of God. Secondly, yt we seek it not by unlawful
means, by hook or crook, by right or wrong. Thirdly, that we desire no more
then for our just deserts is due unto us. But we stand in need rather to be
restrained, then any way encouraged in this case. For we all offend rather in
the excess then in the defect: and if there be but an inch given us, we are
apt to take an ell. Lud. Viv. in Aug. de ciuit. dei. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Though we can and do reprove ambition in others, yet we love and like it in
our selves: and (as Cato said in an oration yt he made in ye Senate for the
people of Rhodes) We are angry if we see any prouder then our selves. P. Iouius
histor. lib. 25.
It is with the most of us, as it was with the Florentines; we are so inflamed
and run mad with such an insatiable desire of honor, that we cannot endure
any man that is above us indignity, but with envious eyes behold the
advancement of others, because we think our selves worthy of the same honor.
It is reported of Julius Caesar, that as he passed over the Alps in his
journey to Spain, he lodged one night in a little poor village: where one of
his company came unto him, and asked him merrily, if he thought there would be
any contention in that place for the sovereignty. Whereunto he makes this
stout answer, Mall^m hic esse primus, quam Romae secundus Sabel. lib. 5. Ennead
6.
I had rather be the first man here then the second at Rome. I fear there are
many at this day thus affected, that they had rather be Kings though it were
but of a molehill, then to be in subjection under any. Yea, the intemperancy
of Nero his mother is revived again; who being very desirous that her son
should be Emperor, and being certified by the soothsayers, that if he were he
should kill her: she brake out into this unstayed and out-ragious speech,
Occidat, dum imperet. Cor. Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
Let him kill me and spare not, so he may be Emperor. So many do not stick to
say, let me perish, so that I may but bear rule. As we see in the example of
K. Richard the Usurper in our own Chronicles; Ad honores festinatur quocunque
periculo, quocunque detrimento.
yea men make have to preferment, by any danger, by any damage. Solinus.
The Dragon, as it is written of him, is so thirsty, as no water can satisfy
him, which makes him stand gaping against the wind when it blows, that so
his flame may be assuaged. And therefore, when he espyeth the sails of ships
a far off, he flies to them, that he may sit on the Mast: but many times he
rusheth against them with such violence, that he ouer-turneth the ship, and so
falls himself headlong into the sea. In like manner; ambitious persons (as we
have heard before) do so earnestly thirst after honor, as they cannot be
satisfied: and therefore they aspire to the high sails of preferment with such
eagerness, as many times it turns to their own destruction. In other
affairs of this life, there is no man so foolish or so mad, as to undertake
any business which he is not fit to accomplish. But every peasant thinks
himself fit for any advancement, never considering his own weakness. As the
bramble, the basest plant that grows, thought it self fit and able enough
to be King over the trees. For when the Olive tree, and the Fig tree, and the
Vine refused it, the Bramble readily accepted it, Judge. 9, 12, 13
saying. If ye will indeed anoint me King over you, come, and put your trust
under my shadow. And this we see plainly in these Disciples of our Savior
Christ, to go no further. Our Savior had taken these two brethren from their
fish-nets, and made them fishers of men. Mat. 4, 21, 22.
He had called them to be Apostles, to bear his Name before the Gentiles,
Acts 9, 15.
etc. as he said of S. Paul. What could be more honorable then this divine
vocation? For what is more base and abject then the state of fishermen,
especially such as are occupied in mending their broken nets? And on the other
side, what is more high and eminent in the Church, then the dignity of the
Apostolical function? So that it might be truly said of them, Psalm. 113, 7, 8.
that he raised the needy out of the dust, and lifted up the poor out of the
dung, 1 Samuel 2, 8.
to set them with Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory. And
yet these base fishermen, advanced to such an height of excellency, are not
content with this honor, but come to our Savior, and they that a little
before were with their father, patching their torn nets, do now desire to be
great Princes and Rulers in the kingdom of the Messiah. Who would ever have
sought so great ambition under fishers mantles, but that we find it in this
place? For the most part, ambition bears sway in Princes Courts: but here
we see it descends even to fisherboats.

It was a witty question that one made; Sphinx aenig. mat.
Why Honos, that signifies honor, was written with an aspiration, and Onus,
that signifies a burden, was written without.

And it was as wittily answered, because there are none that desire the burden
that accompanies honor, but all men gape after the honor and preferment.

And therefore we are here to be exhorted and admonished, to subdue this
immoderate affection in us by all means possible, and not suffer it to break
out in this manner. It was a good speech that S. Augustine had of himself, and
worthy our imitation, Quod esse potui, esse nolui. nec tamen quae siui esse
quod sum, etc. de vita morib. Cleric.
I would not be that which I might be, neither yet did I ever seek to be that
I am. But this was all my care, and al my endeavor, that I might be safe in a
low estate, and not be in danger in an high estate. And that we may the better
perform this, it shall be good for us to consider our Original, and our
resolution, what we are, and what we shall be. For as one says well, He that
desires superiority and preferment, he does it because he knows not
himself. Now both by our original, and by our resolution we are no better
then earth. Of the earth we were framed, and to the earth we must return. It
was the doom of Adam after his fall, and in him of all mankind; Dust thou
art, Genesis 3, 19.
and to dust thou shall return. And therefore, what a shame is it, that such
base creatures should conceive such high thoughts, and nourish such haughty
spirits? As the mountains seem to be high, and yet they are but earth, and
have their foundation below: so ambitious persons when they are at their
greatest height, they are but earth, nay as Abraham confessed of himself, they
are but dust and ashes. Genes. 18, 27
The consideration of this should nurture us to humility, and keep us from
aspiring too high. And indeed, if the proud hearts could be brought to
acknowledge it, the best and readiest way to come to preferment, is by
humility. As our Savior Christ told the Jews, when he marked how they chose
out the chief rooms, He that humbles himself shall be exalted. And we see
it in our own experience, that honor accompanies none more then such as least
desire it. And therefore it is fitly compared to the shadow of a man's body,
Gloria fugientes magis ac magis sequitur Sen. benes. lib. 5
which, if he follow after it, it goes away from him, but if he run from
it, it follows after him. So if men do eagerly pursue after honor, many
times they come short of it, but if they neglect it, and be careless of it,
God will cause the Spirit of glory to rest upon them unlooked for, 1 Pet. 4, 14.
as the Apostle Peter says. Yea, many have been had in exceeding great honor
after their death, that have refused all honor while they lived.

Last of all, here is a good admonition for all that that are advanced unto
honor, not to be puffed up with their preferment, but carry themselves lowly,
toward their inferiors, according to the exhortation of the Apostle. Romans 12,
16.
Be not high minded; but make your selves equal to the^ of the lower sort. And
great reason there is, why it should be so. For as the Prophet says, Have we
not all one Father? Mal. 2, 10.
has not one God made us all? and that al of one mould. If he had made great
persons of one kind of mould, and mean persons of another; then there had bin
some reason for them to swell in pride, and to lift up themselves above others.
But seeing GOD has made all mankind of one blood, Acts 17, 26.
as the Apostle says, it is not meet that one should proudly insult over
another. Yea, which is more, we were all in the hands of God, Jeremy 18, 6.
as the clay is in the hands of the Potter. And as that which is now a vessel
of honor, the Potter could have made it a vessel of baser use: and that which
is now a vessel of dishonor, he could have made it a vessel of honor. So
in the like manner, thou that art now noble and honorable in the world, GOD
could have made thee a poor Tankerd-bearer. Thou yt art now exalted unto a
place of authority, God could have made thee a base slave to grind at the Mill.
And thou that art now a great Lady, God, if it had pleased him, could have made
thee a mean kitchin-maide. This point the Apostle urges very earnestly. For
having exhorted the Corinthians (though upon another occasion) not to presume
above that which is meet, 1 Cor. 4, 6.
and not to swel one against another, like bladders that are full of wind: he
adds this as a forcible argument to convince their consciences. For who
separateth thee? and what have thou that thou have not received? Verse 7.
If thou have received it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had not
received it? Where we see, he would have such proud persons to descend into
themselves, and examine themselves thoroughly, and see whether they find any
matter of insolency in themselves, or no. As if he should have said, There is no
reason why ye should swell one against another; because, if you be separated
from your brethren in any respect, it is only GOD that has put the
difference: for by nature you are no better then they. If you consider the
nature of them whom you do despise, they are men, as your selves are, endued
with reason, made after the image of God, and sprung from Adam. And if you
consider their condition, they are sinners, they are the children of wrath, and
subject to eternal damnation. And is not your condition the same? why then
should you lift up your selves? And lest any man should object, that there is
great difference of men in the world; some are noble, some ignoble; some
learned, some unlearned; some Magistrates, some Subjects: some rich, some
poor: therefore he adds, What have thou that thou have not received?
Namely, of Gods free grace and mercy. He that receives any thing of duty, and
not of grace, may in some sort rejoice: but he that glories in a free gift, is
vain and unthankful. Now, whatsoever prerogative is in any man, he has it
not of himself, but has received it of God. And what is more vain then to be
puffed up with gifts received from another? What is more unjust then to glory
of those things we have received, as if we had not received them? that is, to
forget the author, and to translate the honor to our selves that is due unto
him? As Bernard says well to this purpose: Est superbia et delictum maximum,
vti datis tanquam inna tu; and in accept^ beneficijs gloriam vsurpa re benefici
de diligendo Deum
It is pride and a very great sin, to use the things that are given us, as
though they were bred in us, and in the benefits received to usurp the glory
of the benefactor. To conclude therefore, this sentence should make us leave
our haughty pride, and contein our selves within the bounds of humility. One is
borne or created a Prince, another a subject: one Noble, another ignoble: one
is more honorable, more rich, more mighty then another. Shall he therefore
be proud? Who has separated thee? And what have thou that thou have not
received of God? to whom thou owe thankefulnes, and not insolency.

[But to serve.] Here we see what was indeed the end of our Savior Christ's
coming. He came to do service to his Church, and in all things to apply
himself unto the benefit of all men. He taught the people, as a Minister of
the word; he healed their diseases; and for this cause he walked about
corporally, through diverse Cities and countries, not for his own profit or
glory, but only for the salvation of others. For, as he was anointed by his
Father, Luke 4, 18.
and sent to preach the Gospel to the poor: so he taught continually in
their Synagogues. 15.
And therefore he said to his disciples, Mark 1, 38.
Let us go into the next Towns, that I may preach there also: for I came out
for that purpose. And the Evangelist testifies of him, that he went about al
Cities and Towns, teaching in their synagogues, Mat. 9, 35. and 4, 23.
and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness, and
every disease among the people. For no doubt, but this place is chiefly
understood of the ministry and service which he performed in spiritual
things; because he says, he came to serve in such a Ministry, as wherein he
would have his Apostles to imitate him: though we may also understand it of his
ministry in temporal things; as when he humbled himself to wash their feet.
As S. John says, that he rises from supper, John 13, 4, 5.
and lays aside his upper gurment, and took a Towell, and girded himself.
After that, he poured water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples
feet, and to wipe them with the Towel wherewith he was girded. Where it is
worth the noting, that the Evangelist does so exactly set down this action
of our Savior Christ. He might have said briefly, that he washed his
Disciples feet. But to the end, that he might more deeply imprint in our
minds this admirable humility, he is careful to express every circumstance
thereof, that we might (as it were) behold it with our eyes. Giving us to
understand, Musculus ad locum.
that our Savior did not slightly perform this duty, as though he cared not
how soon he were rid of it, but carefully and diligently: yea, he performed
all with his own hands and had not another to do it for him: that so he might
every way express to his Disciples the form of a servant, whereunto these
servile Offices do appertain. It is not said, that the Apostles did rise
also, but that Christ only did rise, and they sat still at the Table.
According to that which himself says in another place; Luke 22, 27.
Who is greater, he that sits at table, or he that serves? Is not he that
sits at Table? And I am amongst you as he that serves?

As this does set out the great Humility of our Savior Christ: so it also
commends his singular love to us, that he would be pleased in this manner
to respect such poor wretches as we are. For we might every one of us say, 2 Samuel 9, 8.
as Mephibosheth said to David, What is thy servant, that thou should look
upon such a dead dog as I am? If an earthly King should appoint one of the
Nobles of his Court to attend upon some poor despised person, as the great
King Ahashuerosh commanded Haman, the most honorable of all his Court, Ester 6,
10, 11
to attend and wait upon poor Mordecai, it were a token of great love: but if
the King himself shall lay by his Princely robes, and put on base apparel,
and so shall in his own person perform every base office to a poor beggar
that lies at his gates, it would be a wonderful spectacle, worthy to be
chronicled and registered to all posterity. In like manner, if the Lord had
appointed any of his Angels, the Nobles of his Court of heaven (as I may call
them who are ministering spirits, Heb. 1, 14.
sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation) to
attend upon us, it had been exceeding Love, considering our base and wretched
estate: But, that he himself, the Son of God, Apoc. 19, 16 Math. 28, 18
King of kings, and Lord of lords, who has received all power from his Father
in Heaven and earth, should not only strip himself of that glory which he
had in heaven, and to take our Nature upon him; but also take upon him the
base form of a servant, and therein do service unto us, it is a love
surpassing all love, and therefore should cause us to love him again.

Secondly, this example is propounded for our imitation. As our Savior
himself applies it; when having washed his Disciples feet, and taken his
Garments, and being set down again, he said unto them; Know ye what I have
done to you? John 13, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Ye call me Master, and Lord: and ye say well: for so I am. If I then your
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another
Feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do, even as I have
done unto you. And this is also the exhortation of the Apostle: Phil. 2, 5, 6, 7
Let the same mind (says he) be in you, that was in Christ Jesus. Now, what
mind was in him? Why (as we have heard) he laid by his Majesty and glory
that he had with his Father, and for our sakes debased himself to the lowest
degree of humiliation that could be. So must we, as much as lies in us, apply
our selves to the good one of another. We must lay by our greatness, and
serve one another by Love. And, Galath. 5, 13.
as he exhorts others: so himself did carefully practice this Duty.
Though he were free from all men, yet he made himself a Servant unto all
men, that he might win the more. 1 Cor. 9, 19, 20 21, 22.
Unto the Jews he became as a Jew, that he might win the Jews: to them that
were under the Law, as though he were under the Law: to them that were without
law, as if he were without the Law. To the weak, he became as weak. In a
word, He was made all things to al men, that he might by all means save some.
As if he should have said, I am in all things free, and may live as I list:
yet have I willingly subjected my self to all sorts of men. For, to become a
servant, is to live at the pleasure and commandment of another, and not to be
his own man. Thus the Apostle shows himself exceeding humble, who as though
he were the meanest of all, was ready to perform his service unto all men, as
if they had been his superiors. If so great an Apostle did debase himself thus
low, let us think what is meet for us to do. We must not spare for any
difficulties, but by the example of the Apostle, become all things to all men,
though it be with the loss of our liberty and profit. It was a good speech of
one of the Christian Emperors, Luitprand. lib. 5. cap. 11.
That he reigns more gloriously, that serves the base estate of Gods
servants, then he that rules over the greatest sinners in the world. But to
the end we may be the more willing to perform this duty, let us a little
nearer examine this example of our Savior Christ. And in it, let us consider,
first, who it was that in this manner humbled himself, and that is, the only
begotten Son of God, who is Lord of heaven and earth. Secondly, how far he
humbled himself: even unto death, and that the most shameful death of the
cross. Thirdly, for whom he humbled himself, even for sinners and wicked
persons, as the apostle says; When we were sinners, Christ dyed for us. Rom
5.8.
There could not any thing be propounded more forcibly against ye pride of our
nature, then this example. It may be thou art a great man, a Learned man, a
wise man, a noble man, a rich man, a mighty man; and therefore thou think it
would be a disgrace to thee to do service unto others. But thou art not
greater, nor learneder, nor wiser, nor nobler, nor richer, nor mightier, then
our Savior Christ was. It may be thou art discouraged by the baseness of the
service which thou must perform. But what ever was more base and vile in the
world, then the death of the Cross? It may be thou considerest the baseness
of them to whom thou art to do service, and comparest it with thy greatness,
and so think it some disparagement unto thee. If it were to perform some
kind office of love for one of thine own rank, thou would not stand upon
it. But to stoop so low as to do service to every mean person, thou think it
cannot stand with thy reputation. But what is more vile and abject, being
compared unto God, then wicked sinners, the Children of wrath, and subject to
eternal destruction? So that, to conclude this point; by virtue of this
example of our Savior Christ, there is no man living, though he be never so
great and honorable, that should refuse to do any thing, though it be never
so base, for any man, though he be never so abject, if his necessity do
require it.

[His Life.] Thus we have heard the example of our Savior Christ, as it has
been generally propounded. Now, follows the particular instance of Humility,
whereby it is amplified and set out; which was, To give his Life a ransom for
many. In the first circumstance whereof, we are taught what is the price of
our Redemption. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 6, 19, 20
that We are not our own, for we are bought with a price. And this price, as
another Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1, 18, 19
Was not Silver and Gold, or such like corruptible thing: they were all too
base to come in this account; but, The precious blood of Christ. and 2, 24.
And so he says in another place, That his own self, bare our sins in his
body on the Tree. And the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.17. Ephesians. 1, ver. 5
That by him we have redemption through his blood. And again, Heb. 9, 12,
By his own blood he obtained eternal Redemption for us. And, Without
shedding of blood is no remission. But it will be objected; what necessity was
there that our Savior should pay any price or ransom, seeing we were
prisoners to the devil? A man would think it had been more convenient, that
seeing we were violently and unjustly held captives, our Savior should have
come upon him with greater power, and have rescued us out of his hands without
any price: according to that speech in the Gospel; Luke 11, 21, 22
When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, the things that he possesses are
in peace. But when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he
takes from him all his armor wherein he trusts, and divides his spoils.
To this I answer, that our Savior Christ did not pay this price to the
devil, but to God: who had power to condemn us, and in his just judgment had
given us over for our sins, unto the power of the devil, as his Iailor. Now,
when the King is pacified toward a prisoner that has offended him, the Iailor
has nothing to do to keep him any longer in prison. So Gods wrath being
appeased toward us by the death of Christ, the devil has no more power over
us. So that our Savior by paying this ransom, made satisfaction to God, and
not to the devil. As the Apostle says, he offered himself to God. Heb. 9, 14.
But it may be further objected: The sufferings of our Savior Christ were but
of short continuance, for some few hours: whence then have they that dignity
and worthiness, to be a sufficient price for our redemption? I answer first,
that he suffered most innocently, having no sin of his own that might
deserve death. And that made his sufferings the more meritorious for us. As S.
Peter says, He was a Lamb undefiled, and without spot. 1 Pet. 1, 19. And
again, 2, 22. He did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his
month. and 3, 18. He suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, to bring us
to God. And the Apostle says, Hebr. 7, 26. He was holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from Sinners. and 9, 14. He offered himself without spot unto GOD.
Whereunto agrees that speech of one of the Fathers, Peccat iniqui^* punitur
iustus: delinquit reus and vapulat innocens: offendit impius, et dam nature
pius: quod meretur malus, patitur bon^^: qud perpetrat seruus, exsoluit d.
minus: quod committit homo, sustinet De us.
The unjust sins, and the just is punnished: the guilty transgresses, and
the innocent is beaten: the wicked offends, and the godly is condemned: that
which the evil deserves, the good suffers: that which the servant owes,
the master pays: that which man commits, God sustaineth. And indeed, if he
had any sins of his own, they would have swayed him down to hell, and so
have disabled him from being a sufficient Savior for others. But, being
altogether innocent himself, he is the more fit to satisfy for our sins.
According as Saint Augustine says well, Iustum est vt debitores liberi
dimitt^ntur, etc. De Trinit. lib. 13, cap. 14
It is just that the debtors should be set free, believing in him, who without
any debt was put to death, and paid for us debtors, that which he himself
did not owe. And in another place, Ibid. Cap. 15.
The blood of Christ, because it was his that had no sin at all, was shed for
the remission of our sins.

Secondly, the death of Christ was not the death of a mere man only, though
never so innocent: but of him that was true God and man. And this is that which
the Apostle says Heb. 9, 14. that Christ thorough the Eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God: Beza. Pareus. Piscator. Aretius
where, by the Eternal Spirit, is meant the Deity and Godhead of our Savior,
whereby he gives influence of divine vigor to the sacrifice of his body and
blood. And in his farewell sermon to the Ephesians, he charge the Elders,
Acts 20, 28.
to Take heed to the Flock, which GOD has purchased with his own blood. 1
Cor. 2, 8.
And in another place he says, that the Jews crucified the Lord of Glory.
Which places are not so to be understood, as if GOD had any blood to be shed,
or that the Lord of Glory were subject to suffering, and could be crucified:
but, because of that near Union and conjunction of the two Natures in his
person; whereby, that which is proper to ye one, is affirmed and spoken of the
other. Hence it comes to pass, that though the sufferings and death of
Christ were temporary: yet they were of infinite merit, to purchase eternal
redemption for us: Hebru. 9, 12.
because (as was said before) the eternal Spirit of his Deity, gave eternal
efficacy unto his sacrifice: or because that infinite vigor which purges our
consciences, issued from his eternal Spirit. So that there is no doubt, but
that Christ has satisfied the wrath of god for us by finite means. For, as
the Father being infinite, was infinitely provoked by finite sins: so the Son
of God being equal to his Father, and therefore infinite, could not but
infinitely pacify his wrath, by his finite satisfaction.

But some will say, Was it not possible for the Lord to have accomplished our
redemption by some other means, but that Christ of necessity must give his
life for us? This question, though it be curious, yet it shall not be
unprofitable to give an answer to it. We are to know therefore, that to speak
simply and absolutely, it was possible for God to have found out a thousand
means of man's redemption, and all of them should have been available. For, as
the Angel said, Luke 1, 37. Math 19, 26.
With God nothing is impossible, but all things are possible. But if we
consider the foreknowledge and eternal decree of God, then we may truly say,
it was altogether impossible for man to be redeemed by any other means.
Augustine, Bernard, and others
Some of the Fathers have invented this witty devise; namely, that the cause of
man was from al eternity debated in heaven: where the justice and truth of God
stood on the one side; and his mercy and peace on the other: and his wisdom
was the Judge and vmpire. The justice and truth of God pleaded hard against
man, and called for punishment according to his deserts. But his mercy and
peace pleaded for him, and defended him. In the end, his wisdom found out a
way, whereby both his justice might be satisfied, and his mercy might take
place; namely, that the Son of God taking our flesh upon him, should in it
suffer the death that was due to our sins: that as man had trespassed, so man
might make satisfaction. And therefore, in this respect it was necessary that
Christ should dye for us. As Hilary says well. In Mat. 26, 42
Therefore could not the cup pass from him, but he must drink of it, because
we could not be recovered but by his passion. But that we may not be mistaken
in this point, we are to know that there are diverse kinds of necessity.
First, there is an absolute necessity, when a thing in regard of the nature of
it, cannot be otherwise. Thus the Sun does necessarily shine in the Firmament:
thus the fire does necessarily burn, and the night does necessarily follow
the day. Secondly, there is a necessity of constraint. Thus a Malefactor
necessarily goes to prison, because he is forced whether he will or no.
Thirdly, there is a necessity in respect of the end: and thus armor and
weapons are necessary for him that goes forth to fight.

In the first sense, there was no necessity that Christ should suffer. For, (as
we have heard before) GOD had a thousand other ways to redeem man by, if it
had pleased him. Neither was it necessary in the second sense, because God
cannot be compelled by any power or violence. But in the third sense it was
necessary, because GOD had so decreed and appointed it. And indeed, this was
the most convenient and necessary means of our redemption that could be,
both in respect of God, and also in respect of us.

There are many Reasons, why it was most convenient in respect of God. As
first, in respect of his truth. God had foretold in his Word, and promised that
it should be so. He was wounded for our transgressions, says the Prophet
Isaiah, chapter 53. ver. 5. He was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And therefore, our
Savior Christ appearing to the two disciples that went to Emmaus, and
perceiving that they began to stagger and doubt of his resurrection, Lu. 24,
25, 26.
said unto them; O Fools, and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets
have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to have entered
into his glory? And when Peter had drawn his sword, and began to fight in his
quarrel, he tells him that He could pray to his Father, and he would give
him more then twelve legions of Angels. Mat. 26, 53:54
But how then (says he) should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say, that it
must be so? Mark here, the Scriptures have said that Christ must die; the
Prophets had foretold as much, and God is always true in his word, therefore
it must be so. Secondly, in respect of his Justice, which, as we have heard
already, did require, that the same nature that had offended the majesty of
God, should also make satisfaction. Thirdly, in respect of his mercy. For,
seeing it was in his power to destroy all mankind, and that justly too, it was
an evidence of unspeakable mercy, to make choice of one to be punished instead
of many. Fourthly, in respect of his wisdom, which tempered and allayed the
rigor and severity of his justice, with the sweetness of his mercy: so that
in the sufferings of Christ there was neither cruelty nor remissness: Psalm
85, 10
but as David says, Mercy and truth have met together: Justice and peace have
kissed one another. Fifthly, in respect of his hatred of sin, for the destroying
whereof, he would have his only begotten Son to be put to death. Will not
all men say, that that man bears a deadly hatred to his enemy, that if he
cannot otherwise come at him, will cast a spear through the sides of his son
to kill him? So the Lord, to testify his great hatred against our sins, has
wounded his own Son to death for the abolishing of them. And therefore, by the
way, we see, how lamentable the estate of desperate sinners is, who knowing how
the Lord hates sin, will yet notwithstanding continue in sin, and drink
iniquity even like water, Job 15, 16.
as Job says. They shall find, unless they prevent it in time by speedy and
unfeigned repentance, Psalm 5, 5, 6
that as God hates all them that work iniquity: so in the end he will
destroy them. Sixthly, and last of all, in respect of his love to man. For
rather then we miserable sinners should perish, as we had deserved, he
suffered his only begotten Son, whom he so often calls his Beloved Son,
Math. 3, 17. and 17, 5. Coloss. 1, 13.
and the Son of his love, or his dear Son, to be crucified for us. And
therefore, our Savior Christ himself says, John 3. verse 16. GOD so loved
the world (that is, so admirably, so wonderfully, so exceedingly) that he gave
his only begotten Son etc. Romans 5, 8.
And the Apostle says, God sets out his love toward us (as it were, upon a
stage, that all the world may take notice of it) seeing that while we were
yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And indeed, it was far greater and more
abundant love, that he spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to
death, as the Apostle says, Romans 8, verse 32. then if he had released and
acquitted us without any satisfaction. So that we may now worthily say with
the Apostle, Ephe. 2. verse 4. God which is rich in mercy, through his great
love wherewith he loved us, etc. There was no way in the world, whereby he
could have more manifested his exceeding love unto us then by this.

Secondly, in respect of us. This was the most convenient means for our
salvation that could be, as Saint Augustine has worthily declared in many
places, De Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 10.
It was possible (says he) for GOD, to whose power all things are equally
subject, to have found out another way of our redemption, then the incarnation
and death of Christ. But there neither was, nor could be a more convenient
means to heal our misery. For, what was so necessary to raise up our
hope, and to free and set at liberty the minds of poor men, being cast down
with the condition of their mortality, from despairing of immortality; as to
show unto us how highly GOD esteemed us, and how much he loved us? And what
could be a more manifest and evident token hereof, then that the Son of God,
being immutably good, and abiding in himself that which he was, and
receiving from us, and for us that wc he was not, without any detriment or
loss to his nature, was content to take part in our condition, and without any
evil desert of his own, to bear our sins and miseries? etc. And in another
place. Ibid. Cap. 16
Why should not the death of Christ come to pass? Nay, why should not the
omnipotent God, letting pass innumerable other means which he could have used
to redeem us, chiefly and principally make choice of it; where neither any
thing was changed or diminished from his Deity; and by assuming of his manhood,
so great a benefit was conferred and bestowed upon men, that the eternal
Son of God, being also the son of man, should pay a temporal death
undeserved, thereby to deliver us from everlasting death? And again, De agone
Christiano.
They are fools that say, why could not the wisdom of GOD redeem man
otherwise, unless his Son should become man, and be borne of a woman, and
suffer all those things at the hands of sinners? To whom we say, he could
without question. But if he should have done otherwise, it would likewise have
displeased your folly. And then he concludes, This remedy that God has
provided for men is so excellent as cannot be imagined. For what pride can be
healed if it be not healed with the humility of the Son of God? What
Covetousness can be cured, if it be not cured by the poverty of the Son of
God? What impiety can be helped and remedied, if it be not helped by the
charity of the Son of GOD? etc.

By this that has been spoken, is confuted that abominable doctrine and
practice of the Papists, who join the afflictions of the Saints to the
sufferings of Christ: and besides, do boast of a super abundance of merits
and satisfactions, which do not only profit the living, but are beneficial
also to the dead, that are in Purgatory. But this is a couzening device of
Satan, and an intolerable profanation of the blood of Christ, and a great
derogation from the merits of his passion. Yet they labor to prove it, by
that speech of the Apostle, Colos. 1, Coloss. 1, 24.
24. where he says, Now therefore I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and
fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake,
which is the Church. Here (say they) we see that the Apostle suffered for the
Church, etc.

To this I answer, That there is no such sense to be gathered out of this
place, as they intend. For first, it is directly contrary unto other places of
Scripture, which do plainly teach us, that Christ only suffered that which
was to be suffered, for our sins. Isai. 53, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10.
The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that He has borne our infirmities, and
carried our sorrows; that he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken
for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are healed. That the Lord laid
upon him the iniquity of us all. That for the transgression of Gods people he
was plagued. That he made his soul an offering for sin, etc. And the
Apostle says, Heb. 9, 26.
that he appeared once to take away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. And
Saint John says, 1 John 2, 2.
That he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole World. And our Savior Christ, immediately
before he gave up the Ghost, said, It is finished. John 19, 30.
Whatsoever was to be suffered for the sins of men, it was fully
accomplished, and the price of our Redemption was fully paid: and therefore,
we need not any of the sufferings of the Saints. Again, if this sense of
theirs be admitted, a very gross absurdity will follow, namely, that the
Apostle suffered all that was wanting; and therefore nothing now remains for
any body else to suffer. For he says, he fulfilled the rest of ye afflictions
of Christ. Their great doctor Thomas Aquinas, though otherwise he favored the
doctrine of merit: yet he understands this place more soundly. Part. 3. sum
quaest. 48. artic. penult.
The sufferings of the Saints (says he) do profit the Church, not by way of
redemption, but by way of example and consolation: according to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1, 6.
If we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation. And he says, it
is heretical to affirm the contrary. And the ordinary Gloss expounds it
thus, I rejoice in my sufferings for you, (that is to say) Pro vobis. i.
confirmandu in doctrina Euangelij.
to confirm you in the doctrine of the Gospel. And in this sense the Apostle
suffered that measure of afflictions which God in his own counsel had
appointed for him. Now, whereas they are called the rest of the afflictiont of
Christ, it is not so to be understood, as though the sufferings of Christ
were imperfect, and that something were wanting in them, (for, as the Apostle
says, By the shedding of his blood he obtained eternal redemption for us)
but because of that sympathy that is between Christ and a Christian in their
sufferings. The afflictions of his Saints go as near him, and he is as
sensible of the^, as if a man should touch the apple of his eye. Zachary 2, 8.
And therefore he said to Paul, when before his conversion he made hauock of
ye Church, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9, ver. 4.
Our Savior in his own person was in heaven, at the right hand of his Father,
and therefore he was out of his reach; yet he acknowledged himself to be
persecuted in his members. And this is that which the Apostle says in diverse
places. If we suffer with him, Romans 8, 17.
we shall be glorified with him. Whatsoever our sufferings are, we do not
suffer alone, but Christ suffers with us. And in another place, Philip. 3, 10.
he desires to know the fellowship of his afflictions. And again, 2 Cor. 1,
5.
The sufferings of Christ abound in us. Our sufferings are not ours alone, but
they are Christ's as well as ours. By this that has been spoken, we see the
doctrine concerning the sufferings of the Saints, does fall to the ground. Now
whereas they boast of the superabundance of their merits, it is most
blasphemous. For the Apostle says plainly, Romans 8, 18. Beza.
I account (that is to say, having compared the Reasons on both sides, and cast
up my account, I conclude) that the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us. Whereunto agrees that
saying of Origin, Si quis omnem obedientiam impler^t, etc.
If a man should perform all obedience, and yet withal should suffer and
endure all miseries and punnishments, that can befall to the nature of man, as
Job did: yet these things shall not be worthy of the future glory. If all our
sufferings, if martyrdom it self cannot merit our own salvation: surely,
much less shall we be able thereby to merit salvation for others. As the
Prophet David says, Psalm 49, 7. A man can by no means redeem his Brother;
he cannot give his ransom to God. Let us therefore renounce this cursed and
damnable doctrine, and send it back again to hell, from whence it came: and
let us rely upon the all-sufficient merits of Christ his sufferings for the
salvation of our souls, assuring our selves, that He was made unto us
Wisdom, 1. Cor. 1, 30.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Let us acknowledge
with that blessed Martyr Lambert in the midst of the fire, Fox martyrol.
None but Christ, None but Christ.

Secondly, this great price that our Savior has paid for our Redemption,
should move us to godly sorrow, and remorse for our sins. It is true, that
the very bare consideration of our Savior Christ his sufferings, without any
respect to us, should work sorrow and commiseration in our hearts. For who is
so hard-hearted, that can but read or hear the Story of Abraham, about to
sacrifice his innocent son Isaac, or the selling away of poor Joseph, by his
most unnatural and cruel Brethren, or the fearful torments, which many of
the Martyrs have suffered and endured at the hands of cruel and bloody
tyrants, and not be moved to ruth and compassion? Nay, who can endure to behold
even notorious malefactors executed for their just deserts, without some sense
of sorrow? For the communion and mutual participation of nature does so
affect us, as we think that part of our selves suffers in them: yea, that
very humanity that is bred with men cannot but be troubled at the torments of
brute beasts. But when we shall consider that our Savior suffered all that he
suffered for our sakes, and for our sins: much more then ought we to grieve
and sorrow. It was ordained in the Law, that when a man brought a beast to the
door of the Tabernacle for a burnt Offering, he should put his hand upon the
head of it. Leuit. 1, 4.
Thereby acknowledging that he had deserved to die, and that the beast was to
be slain for his offenses. So should we acknowledge that Christ, was put to
death, nor for any desert of his own (for, as we have heard before, he was
altogether without blemish) but only for our sins. When David saw the
miserable death of his people by the pestilence, and considered that his sin
in numbering of his men was the cause of it, his tender heart was vexed within
him, and with great remorse he cried thus unto the Lord: Behold, I have
sinned, yea, I have done wickedly: 2 Samuel 24, 17.
but these Sheep what have they done? In like manner, we have all cause with
bitterness of heart, to cry out in this case: It is we Lord that have sinned,
it is we that have done wickedly: as for this innocent Lamb Christ Jesus,
alas, what has he done?

But that we may be the better affected, it shall not be amiss a little to
consider the greeuousnesse of his sufferings. And that will appear, first, by
the generality of them, and that in diverse respects. First, he suffered of all
kinds and sorts of men. He suffered of the Gentiles, and of the Jews; of the
Princes and of the people, of masters and servants, of his acquaintance and
strangers, of male and Female. So he suffered in all things wherein it is
possible for a man to suffer. He suffered in his friends and followers, who
seeing him apprehended and carried away, They all forsook him and fled. Mat.
26, 56, 58
Only Peter followed him, but it was a far off, and afterward most
shamefully denied him. He suffered in his good name, which was wounded with
blasphemies and reproaches. For, besides the shameful indignities that were
offered him when he was arraigned before the Highpriests and Pilate, when he
hanged upon the cross, and deserved to be pitied of all that had but common
humanity: he was flouted and derided and scoffed at, by all that beheld him,
Lu. 23, 36, 37
by the soldiers, Ma. 27, 41, 42
by the Highpriests, Luke 23, 35.
by them that stood and looked on, Math. 27, 39 40.
by them that passed by, Math. 27, 44 Luke 23, 39.
yea by the very thieves, at least by one of them that were crucified with him.
He suffered also in his outward things such as he had: for though he had nothing
but the clothes to his back: Math. 27, 35.
yet the Soldiers stripped him of them, and shared and divided them before his
face. Thirdly, he suffered in all his outward senses, and in all the members of
his body. His glorious head was wounded to the brain with a crown of thorns:
his fair face was horribly defiled with the filthy spittings of the Jews: his
bright eyes dazeled and languished in his head, to behold the outrageous
cruelty of his Tormentors: his holy ears were wounded to hear the insulting
blasphemies of the Jews; his sacred mouth, which taught men all truth, was put
out of taste with Gall and vinegar: his hands which wrought so many famous
miracles, and his feet that had wonderfully walked upon the Sea, were
fastened unto the Cross with sharp nails: His blessed heart, that was never
defiled with the least evil thought, was pierced with a spear. In a word,
his whole body was pitifully rent and torn, with whipping and scourging: so
that we might say of him as the Prophet says in another case, Isaiah 1, verse
6. From the sole of his foot unto his head, there was nothing whole in him,
but wounds, and swelling and sores full of corruption.

Secondly, the bitterness of his passion will appear, by considering the
kind of death that he suffered, and that was ye death of the cross, which the
Apostle added as an augmentation of his torments. Philip. 2, 8.
He became obedient (says he) to the death, even to the death of the Cross.
Now, the death of the cross was most grievous in many respects. First, because
it was an accursed death: As the Apostle says, Cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree. Galath. 3, 13.
Not that all that were hanged if they did unfeignedly repent, were rejected
and forsaken of God: but because that kind of punishment was accursed and
hateful to God, and a spectacle of horrible malediction. We do not read any
such thing of other kind of punishments, as stoning to death, burning, slaying
with the sword, etc. only God pronounced the hanging on the cross to be
execrable and accursed. And therefore, Constantine the Great, that good and
mild Emperor, Tripartit. histor. lib. 1. cap. 9.
made a law, wherein he forbad that any Christian should be hanged upon the
cross. Secondly, because it was also an ignominious and a shameful death. For
it was principally inflicted upon slaves and servants (and therefore was called
a servile punishment) either for accusing of their Masters, or conspiring their
death, or for running away. Such as were free men, though otherwise very vile
and base, were seldom punished with it, unless it were for some heinous and
notorious crime: As for robbery: and therefore there were two robbers crucified
with him: Or for rebellion and sedition; and therefore they wrote in the Title
over his head, Jesus of Nazareth, Ioh. 19, 19, 21
the King of the Jews: which the Priests of the Jews would have altered,
Write not (say they) King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the
Jews: as if he had indeed affected the kingdom. For, they accused him when
as they first brought him to Pilate, Luke 23, 2.
We found this man perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to
Caesar, saying, that he is Christ a King: Or for false witness, or murder,
etc. And therefore, it was called Et nodum in formis lethitrabe nectit ab alta.
Virgil.
a foul and ill-fauoured kind of death, by reason of the infamy and disgrace
wherewith it was accompanied. Last of all, because it was a most painful
death. For they were fastened to the cross with great nails which were driven
thorough their hands and their feet, the most sensible parts of all the body,
because they are most full of sinews. And then, the whole weight of their body
hanged by these parts, which could not but make their pain intolerable.
Besides, it must needs be an increase of their torment, Morsque minu^ Daenae
quam mo ra mortis hale
that it was so lingering a death. In other kinds of death, a man is quickly
dispatched, and soon rid out of his pain: but here they were very long a
dying; for they hanged either till their blood distilled by little and little
out of these wounds in their hands and feet, and other parts of their bodies
rent with whipping, or til they died with hunger; unless in pity their
tormentors by violence hastened their death, by breaking off their legs (as
they did to the Thieves that were crucified with our Savior) or by some other
course. Illis ego de Libya natum iurabo leaena, Arcadiasque inter delituisse
lupas: Cui tua crux lacrymas non mouerit o bone Christ, Ille erit and ferro
durior and chalybe. Rauisius Textor. Apoc. 19, 5.
Surely, he that is not affected with the consideration of these things,
shows himself strangely and fearfully obdurate. But though these things were
terrible, yet this was not al. There was far more in the sufferings of Christ,
then these outward torments. For he wrestled with the wrath of God that was due
to our sins: as it is said in the Revelation, that he trod the wine press of
the fiercenes and wrath of almighty God. And this appears, Luke 22, 44.
first because he was in an agony. Now an agony is a sudden and horrible fear
which surprizeth the heart, when a man is to enter into some great conflict. But
there can be no conflict in the world so great, as to grapple with the
intolerable wrath of GOD, as David says, Psalm. 76, 7. Thou, even thou art to
be feared; and who can stand in thy sight, when thou art angry? Secondly, Luke
22, 44.
because (as is said) His sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to
the ground. We may imagine it was no small pain that forced this sweat from
him. For it was not some little dew that stood upon his face, nor some few
small drops that fell from him, but it was (as one calls it) a shower, or
rather a stream of blood, And therefore, Isaiah. 53, 3.
no marvel if the prophet call him. A man full of sorrows. Thirdly, because
an Angel was sent from heaven to comfort him. Luke 22, 43.
And last of al, because when he hanged upon the cross, he cried out with a
loud voice, My God, Math 27, 46. Heb. 5, 7.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? And that with strong crying and tears, as
the Apostle says. All these laid together, do make it evident, that it was
more then an ordinary torment which he endured. For many of the Martyrs,
supported by the Spirit of God, nay many malefactors by their natural fortitude
have endured far greater things in their bodies. So that our Savior might
truly say in this case, as it is in the Lamentations of the Church; Lamen 1, 12
Behold and see all ye that pass by, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the
day of his fierce wrath. The consideration of these things should intenerate
our hearts, and work them to remorse. Shall he suffer all these things for our
sins, and shall not we whose sins they are, be moved and affected? Shall
his heart bleed for us, and shall not our hearts bleed with sorrow for our own
sins? Shall not we cause our bed every night to swim, Psalm 6, 6.
and water our couch with tears of contrition? Pliny writes of the Adamant,
Lib. 37. Cap. 4.
yt though it be so inuincibly hard, as neither the force of the Hammer, nor
the heat of the fire can work any thing upon it; yet if it be steeped in
the warm blood of a Goat, it may be broken. And surely, if the blood of
Christ cannot supple and soften our hearts, we are devils incarnate. The
Prophet Zechariah says, That they shall look upon him whom they have pierced,
and they shall lament for him, Zechar. 12, 10.
as one mourns for his only son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry
for his first borne. Thereby giving us to understand, that no sorrow in the
world should go so near our hearts, as the sorrow for our sins, whereby we
have pierced and wounded our blessed Savior. We read in the story of the
passion, Luke 23, 44, 45
that the Sun in the firmament withdrew his light, as greeuing to behold so
woeful, a spectacle. Math. 27, 51
The earth moved (as it were) with piety, trembled and quaked, and the grave
stones were cloven asunder; yea, Judas that vile Traitor, that betrayed and
sold him, Math. 27, 3.
when he saw the indignities that were offered unto him, his heart relented,
and he was touched with remorse. What hearts have we then, of oak, or brass,
or of marble, yt can see the torments that he suffered (for in the gospel it is
as lively described to us, Gal. ^, 1.
as if we had stood at the foot of Mount Caluary, and had seen him crucified
with our own eyes) that we can see him lie groueling on the ground all in a
bloody sweat, yt we can behold him crowned in scorn and derision with a crown
of thorns, buffetted with fistes, spitted upon, whipped and scourged with
rods, and at the last haled upon the cross; and there hanging in grievous
misery, crying out (as we have heard) in the horror and anguish of his soul,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and not be touched with compunction?

Thirdly, the consideration of these intolerable sufferings of our Savior
Christ, should teach us for ever to detest sin, seeing no other expiation
could be made for it. And indeed, as Origin says well, Comment. in Rom: 7.
where the death of Christ is duly meditated on in the mind, there sin
cannot reign. For such is the force of his cross, that if it be set before
our eyes, and faithfully kept in mind, no Concupiscence, no Lust, no Rage, no
Envy can overcome us, but presently upon the sight of it, all the army of
sin, and the flesh is put to flight. The Reason is, because when as two
contraries, such as the passion of Christ, and sin are, meet together; the
weaker must of necessity give place unto the stronger.

Again, so many virtues do appear in the passion of Christ, so many
arguments and tokens of his love are therein manifested, and such and so great
a benefit of our redemption is wrought by it, as sin cannot possibly stand
with the diligent consideration thereof. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 2. cap 4.
An old Soldier in Rome, being cited to appear before the Judges, and being
in some danger, came openly to Augustus Caesar, and entreated him to stand by
him, and defend him; who presently appointed him an Advocate, whomsoever he
would choose in his Court. The man by and by cried out with a loud voice; But I
(O Caesar) when you were in danger in the wars, did not seek a Deputy to
defend you, but I fought for you my self, and showed the scarres which he had
received in that fight: whereat the Emperor was ashamed, and came to be his
advocate, as fearing lest he should seem not only proud, but also
unthankful. In like manner, when we shall behold the scarres which our Savior
Christ received in his flesh for our sins, we should be ashamed to show our
selves unthankful unto him by continuing the course of our former wickedness.
We detest Judas, and rail upon the Jews, and abhor Pilate for putting him
to death: but there is more cause why we should detest and abhor our own
sins. For, they were but Instruments to effect his death, our sins procured
it; yea, our sins sharpened the spear that opened his side; and caused his
very hearts blood to gush out. We must therefore take heed that We tread
not under foot the precious blood of Christ, Heb. 10, 29.
and count it an unholy thing, as the Apostle says. For if the blood of Abel
cried unto God for vengeance against Cain; Genesis 4, 18.
doubtless the blood of Christ will make a far louder outcry in the ears of
the Lord, against all the despisers of it. If thou were sought for to be put
to death for thy due deserts, and some friend of thine should put on thy
garments, and should suffer himself to be taken, condemned, and haled upon
the cross for thy sake, if thou should not pity and grieve for him, but
rather on the contrary side should provoke and stir up his Tormentors
against him; nay should offer thy self to be his executioner, were thou not
worthy of a thousand deaths? Such is the case of every wilful and impenitent
sinner, who as much as lies in him, Heb. ^, 6.
by his sins Crucifieth the Son of God again, who for his redemption has
suffered such unspeakable torments.

Last of all, in token of our thankfulness, we must be ready and willing to
suffer any thing for Christ his sake. Unto you it is given (says the Apostle)
that not only ye should believe in him, Phil. 1, ver. 29
but also suffer for his sake. It is in vain for a man to boast of faith, if
he be a Coward, and refuse to suffer when God shall call him to it. Our
Savior has drunk unto us in the cup of his passion, (as he said to these
two sons of Zebedeus, Mat. 20. ver. 22) and we must pledge him when occasion
is offered. If we will be his Disciples, we must be content to Take his
Cross upon our backs, Math. 16, 24.
and follow him. Yea, the Apostle Peter tells us, 1 Peter 2, 21.
That we are called thereunto. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that we should follow his steps. This is harsh to flesh and blood,
and we are loath to suffer any trouble, we must therefore encourage our selves
by his example. It was the manner of the Heathen, to provoke their Elephants to
fight, 1 Macca. 6, 34
to show them the blood of Grapes and Mulberries: so the blood that Christ
has shed for us, should put courage into us, to fight in his cause. Heb. 12, 2.
We must look to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who (for our
sakes) endured the Cross, and despised the shame, etc. When Alexander the
Great, Quin: Curtius, lib. 5.
marched through Persia, his way was stopped with snow and ice, in so much as
his soldiers being tired before with sore labor, were discoraged, and would have
gone no further: which he perceiving lights off his horse, and goes on foot
through the midst of all, making himself way with a pick-axe: whereat they all
being ashamed, first, his friends, then the Captains of his army, and last of
all the common soldiers followed him. So should we all follow our Savior
Christ, by that rough and unpleasant way of the cross which he has gone
before us. Vriah refused to go home unto his house, and to refresh and solace
himself with his wife; because, as he said, The Arc, 2 Samuel 11, 11.
and Israel, and Judah, dwelt in Tents, and his Lord Ioab did abide in the open
fields. Much more should we refuse to pamper our flesh by delicacie, when we
shall consider what hardness our Savior endured especially for our sakes.

[Gaue.] This is the manner how our Savior laid down his life for our
redemption; namely, willingly, and freely without compulsion he gave himself
to death for us. And this the Prophet Isaiah foretold long before, when he
says, Isaiah 52, 10.
He shall make his soul an offering for sin. And the Apostle affirms,
Philip 2, 7, 8.
that he made himself of no reputation: but humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death. And our Savior himself says, No man takes my life
from me, John 10, 18.
but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again. Non aufertur, quod vliro ponitur. Muscui.
That which a man willingly lays down of himself, is not taken from him.
Hence was it, that when he knew the time of his passion to be come, He went
with his Disciples over the brook Cedron, John 18, 1, 2.
into a Garden, a place that Judas which betrayed him, was well acquainted
withal. For as the Evangelist says, Jesus oft-times resorted thither with
his Disciples. This he did of purpose, as one ^yril.
says, that he might be more easily found of the traitor, and that he might
save them a labor that came to take him. If it had pleased him, he could have
hid himself, and have kept himself out of the way, as he did at other times,
when his hour was not come. ohn 8, 59.
As when they took up stones to cast at him, he hid himself, and went out of
the Temple. And at another time, and 10, 39, 40
when they went about to take him, he escaped out of their hands, and went
beyond Jordan, Ioh. 11, 53, 54.
etc. And when they consulted together to put him to death, when he had raised
Lazarus, he walked no more openly among them, but went thence into a Country
nere to the wilderness, and there continued with his Disciples. But now the time
being come indeed, which his Father had appointed, he never seeks any
starting holes, but goes to a known place, that he might lie open to his
enemies. And afterward, when Judas and his company came to apprehend him,
Ioh. 18, 3, 4.
with Lanthornes, and Torches, and Weapons, he never sought to escape their
hands, but came forth, and offered himself unto them, saying, Whom seek ye?
Like a stout and a valiant Champion, he enters the Listes, as to an open
combat. And indeed, if he had been unwilling to dye, all the power in the
world could not have put him to death, as may appear by many examples. When he
had preached a sermon in the Synagogue at Nazareth, Luke 4, 29, 30
which had netled all his hearers, and they being full of wrath, were minded to
cast him headlong from the edge of the hill, whereon their City was built, He
passed through the midst of them, and went his way; they could not all hurt
him. And when Peter at the time of his apprehension drew his sword, and began
to lay about him, he bids him put up his sword into the sheath. Think
thou (says he) that I cannot now pray to my father, Mat. 26, 53, 54
and he will give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? If it had pleased
him, he could have had all the Angels in heaven come to rescue him. But he
needed not the help of Angels; his own power was sufficient, if he would
have used it. For, when they came to take him, though they had weapons, and he
were altogether naked and unarmed: yet he did but speak a word to them,
telling them he was ye man they sought, presently they all went backwardes, and
fell to the ground. That man's presumption (as Bernard says Vt cognesceret
humana prae. sumptio, nihil se posse aduersus te, nisi quantum permitteretur a
te. Feria 6. in Parase.
) might know, that they could do nothing against him, but what they were
permitted by him. He blew them away with the breath of his mouth, as with a
strong whirlewinde. The lightning of his countenance, and the thunder of his
voice, cast the^ headlong to ye ground. He could as easily have cast them into
hell, but his desire was only to convince their consciences, and to let them
see their presumption. And therefore it is said so often, that he gave
himself for his Church. Ephesians. 5, 2, 25 Titus 2, 4. Luke 22, 19.
And in the institution of his last supper, he says; This is my body whieh is
given for you.

This serves to commend unto us the singular love of our Savior toward us:
as himself says, Greater love then this has no man, John 15, 13.
then when a man bestows his life for his friends. The highest love of Christ
is set out in the highest degree: for there can be no greater evidence of
love, then to lay down a man's life. And this the Apostle respected when he
said, Galath. 2, 20.
He has loved me, and given himself for me. If his life had been taken from
him against his will, it had not been such an argument of his love: but in that
he was so willing to die for us, it was the greatest love that could be. And
therefore Bernard says well, Amor ^uu^ nescivit habere modum, etc. de caena
Dom. ser. 12. Lacrymae dicant quia voces explicare desistunt
Thy Love knew not how to keep any mean or measure. Thy Charity (O Christ)
could not contain it self within the bounds. How great that love was, which
Christ by dying showed toward us, no man living is able to express: let
tears show it, when words cannot utter it. And a little after, Conscientia
mihi testis est, O Jesus, quid fecerim tibi, etc. Ser. 13.
My conscience is my witness (O Jesus) what I have don to thee: and thy cross
does give testimony what thou have done for me. Thou wast God, and I a man; and
yet thou God, wast made man for me. Thou wast the Creator, and I thy creature,
and yet thou have vouchsafed to redeem me. Thou wast the Lord, and we thy
servants: and yet thou have vouchsafed to save us. For us strangers, thou
becamest a stranger; for us exiled persons, thou becamest an exile; for us that
were poor, thou becamest poor: for us base wretches, thou becamest base; for
us that were mortal, thou did not only become mortal, but diedst for us,
and that not any kind of death, but a most cruel, a most bitter, a most
shameful death, even the death of the cross. What could he have done more for
us, that he has not done? How could he love us more then he has loved us?
And again, Parum suit charitati tuae, etc ser. 6. in parasc.
It was but a small matter to thy love, to appoint Cherubim or Seraphim, or one
of the angels to accomplish the work of our salvation, but thou thy self have
vouchsafed to come unto us. And being God of infinite glory, thou did not
despise to be made a contemptible worm: and being Lord of all, you would
appear as the fellow-seruant of thy servants. The like example cannot be
found in any history. For, as the Apostle says, Doubtless one will scarce die
for a righteous man. Roman. 5, 7.
It is hard to find one that will hazard his life for a just and a good man's
fake, and redeem his safety by his own death. It may be there be some that
will run and ride, and peradventure be at cost with their purses to do him
good; but when it comes to the life once, O that is sweet: Skin for skin,
Job 2, 4.
and all that ever a man has, will he give before he part with his life.

There are indeed some examples among the heathen, of such that have
adventured their lives for others. As the three Curiatij, Liu Dei. 1. l. 1
and the two Horatij, that for the liberty of their Country died in single
combat. And Decius the Consul, Val. Max. l. 5. cap. 6.
that for the Roman army devoted himself to death. And M. Curtius, Ibid.
who for his countries sake, cast himself into the pestilent lake. And Codrus
the King of the Athenians, Herodotus.
who for the preservation of his kingdom offered himself to the swords of his
enemies. Virgil Aen. 9
And Nisus that would have died for his friend Euryalus. But al these are
nothing to Christ's dying for us. For none of al these was altogether innocent,
as Christ was: none of the^ of mere love were willing to venture their lives, as
Christ did: but al of them, either by the instigation of the devil, or for
ambition and vainglory, or in desperation, when they saw all things adverse
and cross, did choose rather to die then to endure that misery. In a word, they
hazarded their lives to procure safety to their Country, or to their friends,
both wc they were bound to love. But Christ has purchased eternal life for us
yt were not his friends, Rom 5, 10.
but his enemies, as the Apostle says: Neither is this repugnant to that
speech of our Savior alleged before, Ioh. 15, 13, 14, 15.
that he gave his life for his friends. For without Christ and the
reconciliation that is wrought by his blood, we are the enemies of GOD: but in
Christ we are reconciled unto him, and made his friends. So that both is true.
Christ died for his enemies, and he died for his friends: he dyed for his
enemies, for such we were by the corruption of our nature: and he died for his
friends, for such we were by the reconciliation which he has wrought.

Secondly, it serves to confirm our faith and confidence in Christ Jesus.
Surely, he that lays down his life for any man, will withold from him
nothing, though it be never so dear, which he will not willingly bestow for
his safety. But a man's life, is the dearest and most precious good thing that
he enjoys. And therefore the Apostle reasons concerning the love of God.
Roman. 8, 32.
He that spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death: how shall he
not with him give us all things also? So may we reason concerning the love of
Christ; He that spared not his own life, but willingly and freely gave it for
us all, how shall he now deny us any thing?

Last of all, it should stir us up to love him again, and to consecrate our
selves wholly unto his service. According to the exhortation of the Apostle, I
beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 12, 1.
by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies, a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable unto God, etc. And this was his own practice, as himself
says; Galath. 2, 20
In that, that I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith in the Son of
God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Thereby giving us to
understand, that the greatest and strongest reason why we should live to the
Son of God is this, even because he has loved us, and given himself for us.
For so great love and honor which he has done to us, not to do the like for
him again to the uttermost of our power, were the grossest ingratitude that can
be in the world. And to conclude this point, we must also for Christ his sake
love our brethren: as our Savior says; John 15, 12.
This is my commandment that ye love one another, as I have loved you, etc.

[A ransom.] Some do read it, a redemption: but the word in the original does
not signify the act of redemption, (...).
but the price or ransom wherewith captives and servants are redeemed: and it
is chiefly borrowed from them that are taken prisoners in war; and the notation
in the Greek is very elegant: for it is derived of a word that signifies to
loose. (...).
For when they that were prisoners were bound, and afterward were to be set at
liberty, of necessity they were first to be loosed from their bands and
fetters: and therefore, this ransom was the price that was paid for loosing
them out of their chains. Now we are to know that there were in times past
diverse means of redemption. Sometimes by Manumission, when the Lord of his
own accord, did set his bondsman or slave free. In this manner we were not
redeemed. Sometimes by permutation, or by way of exchange; as when in the wars
one prisoner is exchanged for another. Thus were not we redeemed neither. For
who was there that was fit to be exchanged for us? Sometimes, by force and
violent rescue: Genesis 14, 14, 15 16.
as Abraham rescued Lot, when he was taken prisoner by Chedor-laomer, and the
Kings that were with him. Neither were we redeemed by this means. Sometimes,
and most commonly, by paying of a price or a ransom: and thus were we
redeemed, even with a great price, as we have heard before. Here then we are
taught, what a wretched estate we were in, before Christ paid this price of
redemption for us. We were no better then miserable slaves and vassals. If we
desire to know wherein this slavery consisted: generally we were in bondage to
the whole power of darkness: Coloss. 1, 13
More particularly we were in bondage first to sin. As the Apostle says,
Roman. 6, 16.
Know ye not that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, etc. And
Saint Peter tells us of some that promise to others liberty, 2 Peter 2, 19
and are themselves the servants of corruption. For (says he) of whomsoever a
man is overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage. And our Savior affirms,
John 8, 34.
that he that commits sin, is the servant of sin. Secondly, to the Law;
for so says the Apostle, that Christ came to redeem them that were under the
Law. Galath. 4, 5.
Thirdly, to death, as S. John says. 1 John 3, 14.
We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the
brethren. Fourthly, to the devil, 2 Timothy 2, 26.
being taken of him in a snare. And last of all, to hell and condemnation,
Eph^^. 2, 3.
being by nature the Children of wrath. Now there was never any bondage
comparable unto this bondage. Great was the bondage wherein the Egyptians kept
the children of Israel four hundred years: insomuch, as God said of their
deliverance, Leuitie. 25, 13
that he broke the bonds of their yoke, and made them go upright: Psalm 81, 6.
And that he withdrew their shoulders from the burden, etc. Miserable was the
slavery of those seventy Kings under Adoni-bezek that cruel tyrant, Judges 1,
7.
who cut off the thumbes of their hands, and the toes of their feet, and made
them gather bread under his Table like dogs. Grievous was the bondage of
Sampson under the Philistims, Iud. 16, 21, 21.
who having prevailed against him, Put out his eyes, and bound him with
fetters, and made him grind in the prisonhouse, and afterward insulted over
him in his misery. Great was ye thraldom which Zedekiah endured under the
proud King of Babel, Ierem. 52, 11.
who put out his eyes, bound him with chains, carried him to babel, and put
him in prison til the day of his death. But we need not go so far for
examples. Many of our poor brethren do suffer lamentable misery under the
barbarous Turk, and cruel Spaniard. But all this is nothing in comparison of
the bondage of a sinner, that is not redeemed by Jesus Christ. For in all
bodily slaueries, still the mind and the soul is free: all the tyrants in the
world have no power over that. As our Savior Christ said, Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to hurt the soul, Math. 10, 28.
etc. But here the very soul also is in bondage. Never was there any bondslaue
endured greater villainy and drudgerie under any earthly master, though never so
hard and cruel, then every impenitent sinner does under sin, and the
devil. Matthew 8, 9.
As the Centurion had his servants at his beck, that he said to one go, and
he goes: and to another, come, and he comes: and to his servant, do this,
and he does it: So the devil has all wicked men at his commandment, if he
bid them but go, they are ready to run. He has taken them in a snare, 2. Tim.
2, 20.
and leads them as a dog in a chain. He rules over them like a Prince, and
works in their hearts as in a shop, Ephesians. 2, 2, 3. Titus 1.
causing them to fulfill the will of the flesh and the mind, and to serve
diverse lusts and pleasures, even like slaves. That which one speaks of
bodily servants in Princes courts, may much more be applied unto the servants
of sin. Qui vita^ seruilem agunt, alienis negotus o^ci pantur, etc Petrarch.
de vita solitaria.
They that lead a servile life, are ocupied in other men's businesses, and are
ruled by the will of another man's beck, and learn in another man's countenance
what they must do. All that they have is another man's: another man's
thresholde, another man's house, another man's sleep, another man's meat, and
which is worst of all, another man's mind. They neither weep nor laugh at their
own pleasure, Quid interest nolens seruias an inuitus? Na^ etsi coacta
seruitus miserabilis, sed affectata miserior est. Ber. de consid. lib. 5.
but they cast away their own, and put on another man's affections. Finally,
they do another man's business, they think another man's thought, they live
another man's life. I cannot see what difference there is between these persons,
and such as are judged to perpetual imprisonment, but yt the one are bound in
Iron, and the other in Golden fetters: the chain is more honorable, but the
slavery is all alike.

This may serve first for such as are not yet redeemed, to stir them up to
bewail their wretched and miserable condition. The people of Israel when they
were in bondage in Egypt, They sighed for the bondage, Exo. 2, 23, 24.
and cried, and made their moan to God. And the poor prisoners, as David
says, That dwell in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being bound in
misery and Iron, Psa. 107, 10, 13
do cry unto the Lord in their trouble, etc. Much more should they that are the
vassals of sin, and the prisoners of the Devil and hell, cry earnestly unto
God for deliverance.

It is a lamentable thing to see, how the God of this world has blinded the
minds of Infidels, 2 Cor. 4, 4.
that they see not the misery of their wretched estate, but rather count the
service of sin to be sweet and pleasant, and think it the greatest liberty
in the world, if they may be suffered to swear, and whore, and be drunk, and
run to all excess of riot without controlment. Whereas, if they had grace to
see it, there is no bondage (as we have heard before) so grievous as the
bondage of sin. Naturally, Nihil faedius seruitute. Cicer. Phillipic. 3.
men do abhor bondage, Omnibus ita est libertas insita, vt emori potius quam
seruire praestaret. Cic. in L. Pison
and the love of liberty is so deeply settled in the heart, as that many choose
rather to die then to become servants. But for a man that has been nobly
borne, and well brought up, to become a slave, it is the greatest misery in
the world. Much more miserable is it for Man that was the most excellent
creature on the earth, made after Gods own image, Lord and ruler over all the
creatures, to be brought into bondage and subjection. Cum omnis seruitus
misera, tum vero intolerabile est seruire impuro, etc Cic. Phil. 3.
But as all service is miserable: so is it a most intolerable thing to be a
servant to a vile and base master. But there is nothing so base in all the
world, as sin and the devil. So that it may be truly said of every wicked
sinner, that he is a servant of servants: even the basest and vilest slave that
lives. And therefore let all such persons be admonished, never to give rest
unto their souls, never to come upon their beds, Psalm. 132, 3, 4.
nor suffer their eyes to sleep, nor their eye-liddes to slumber (as David
says in another case) until they find some comfortable assurance, that they
are redeemed and delivered from the power of darkness.

Secondly, for them that are redeemd by the death of Jesus Christ: First, it
serves to admonish them, worthily to esteem so great a benefit, and to
magnify the name of God, who has done so great things for them; saying with
Zacharias in his song, Luke 1, 68, 69
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people: and has raised up the horn of salvation unto us, in the house of his
servant David. And certainly, howsoever this benefit be nothing esteemed of
carnal men, who savor nothing but the things of the flesh: Romans 8, 5.
yet they that have once felt and tasted the sweetness of it, do contemn the
wealth of all the world; and with the Apostle, Phil. 3, 8.
count it to be but dung in comparison of it. And therefore, they are careful
to stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made them free. Gal. 5, 1.
And having once escaped from the filthiness of the world, 2 Peter 2, 20.
are loath to be entangled again therein. The Heathen man could say, Plane
confiteor, nihil fieri posse dementius quam scientem in cum locum venire, vbi
liber tatem sis perdi turus. Cic. pro C. Raber.
I plainly confess, that nothing can be more foolishly and madly done, then
for a man wittingly to come into that place, where he shall loose his
liberty. Much more should Christians make that account, especially if they
consider the worth of the price wherewith they were redeemed. They that once
do understand what their Redemption cost the Lord, they cannot but think it a
shameful thing, to cast away themselves for naught. Precious things, and
things that cost much, are carefully kept. Things that are gotten with much
labor and sweat, and bought with much money, are most commonly much set by.
So should we esteem highly of our selves, being bought with so great a
price, and with an holy kind of pride, contemn and despise sin. Meditat.
cap. 3.
This whole world (says Bernard) is not to be esteemed in comparison of the
price of one soul. For Christ would not give his life for the world, and yet
he gave it for man's soul. Therefore, the price of the soul is greater, which
could not be redeemd but by the blood of Christ. Noli ergo vilipender animae
tuae passionem, cui a tanta maiestate tantam vides exhiberi compassionem. Heb.
12, 16. Ge. 25, 29, 30.
Do not therefore set light by the passion of thy soul, whereon thou see so
great a majesty has had compassion. The Apostle exhorts, Let there be no
profane person as Esau, who for a portion of meat sold his birthright. But
all ungodly sinners are far worse then Esau: for he was faint, and weary, and
almost dead for want of food, and therefore sold it to save his life. But these
wretched persons, do swear away their souls, drink, and whore away their
souls: and basely sell themselves to the devil, to satisfy their own
beastly lusts.

Secondly, it serves to teach them, that in token of their thankfulness, they
must willingly serve Jesus christ. The name of servants (as S. Augustine says
Seruorum nomen proprie a seruari, quod eos domine victores seruauere, quos iure
belli occidere sas illis ^urt. de Ciuit. dei. lib. 19. c. 15
, properly comes of being saved, because they that were conquerors in the
wars, did save them, whom by the law of arms they might have slain. But it is
also applied to them that being taken prisoners, were ransomed and so set free.
Nomen admonet beneficij and officii.
The name puts us in mind of ye benefit we have received, and of the duty
that we owe. You are bought with a price (says the Apostle) therefore glorify
God in your body, 1 Cor. 6, 20.
and in your spirit: for they are Gods. And this use does Zacharias make of it
in his song, when he says, We are delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
that we should serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the
days of our life. He has Saved us, and we must Serve him. And this we must
do, not only in the general duties of Christianity, but also in the several
places and callings wherein the Lord has set us. The Magistrate must serve
God in his place; as David exhorted Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28, 9
when he was to succeed him in the kingdom, And thou Solomon my son, know thou
the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind.
So must every Magistrate serve the Lord, in laboring to promote and advance
his service, in looking carefully to the observation of the Sabbath, and in
punishing all dishonor that is done to his Name. So likewise, Ministers must
serve the Lord in their places, by faithful and diligent preaching of the word
in season, 2 Timoth. 4, 2
and out of season. And every private man must also serve God, in the
conscionable performance of those duties that appertain unto him. And indeed,
it is the greatest glory of all me^, though they be never so highly advanced
in the world, to be ye servants of God. David, though he were a King, yet he
glories more in this, yt he was the servant of God, then in all the titles
that belonged to his crown. Behold Lord (says he) I am thy servant, Psalm 116,
16,
I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid, etc. And at the least,
twelve several times in the 119. Psalm, he calls himself the servant of
God. And the blessed Virgin, though she were preferred before all other women
to be the mother of the Son of God; yet she boasts not of any such title,
but styles her self the servant of God. Behold (says she, Luke 1, 38.
to the Angel that brought her that heavenly tidings) the servant of the Lord,
be it unto me according to thy word. And again, in her song she says, and 48.
He has looked on the poor estate of his servant. And all the holy Apostles,
though they were advanced to the most honorable calling yt ever was in the
church; yet in all their Epistles they call themselves the servants of Jesus
Christ. And no marvel: for the service of God is perfect freedom, yea, to
serve him is to reign as a king. Apoc. 1, ver. 6
For our blessed Savior has made us Kings and priests unto God his father.
Only, we must take heed, that we content not our selves with the outward
name and bare Title only, but labor to be the servants of God indeed, and
to approve our selves to be so, by performing acceptable service and obedience
unto his will: as the Prophet Malachi says, Malachi 1, 6.
A son honoreth his father, and a servant his Master. If then I be a Father,
where is mine honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of
hosts.

Thirdly, and last of all, it serves for our imitation, that we by the example
of our Savior Christ, should to the uttermost of our power deliver them that
are in captivity. Diverse is the captivity of men, according to the diverse
calamities whereunto they are subject. The poor man is a captive to want and
penury; he that is rich, 1 John 3, 17.
and has the worlds good (as the Apostle says) must be his redeemer by
releeuing of him. A man that is sick is a captive to his disease: he that is
able any way to help him, must seek to redeem him by what means he can.
And he that is not able to redeem the body, if he comfort the mind that is
afflicted he plays the part of a redeemer. He that lives in error and
blindness is a bondslaue to satan, as he also that serves sin; whosoever
relieueth this man with the word of doctrine and admonition, is his redeemer.
According to that speech of the Apostle, What know thou, o wife, 1 Cor. 7, 6.
whether thou shall save thy husband? or what know thou, o man, whether thou
shall save thy wife? And S. James says to the same purpose, James 5, 20.
He that has converted a sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save
a soul from death. In these and such like things, let us follow our Savior
Christ, and every man labor to deliver another out of bondage. And he that is
endued with any faculty, let him employ the same, 2 Cor. 12, 15.
yea let him be willing to bestow himself, as the Apostle says, to do
service to his brethren, wherein soever he is able.

[For many.] This is the last circumstance noting the persons for whom our
Savior Christ paid this price: where we are taught, that all have not
benefit by the death of Christ. This our Savior testifies in another place,
when he instituted and administered his last Supper; in delivering of the cup,
he said, Math. 26, 28.
This is my blood of the new Testament, that is shed for many for the remission
of sins. If any man shall demand who these many are? I answer, they are all
the believers, and all that do belong to Christ. As he himself says, John 3,
16.
God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
this was signified by the angel, before he was borne, Matthew 1, 21
in the giving of his name. Thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save
his people from their sins. Whereby it is plain and evident, that he saves
none by his death, but them that are his people. John 10, 15.
So he says in another place, I lay down my life for my sheep. But we
know, that all are not the sheep of Christ. Mat. 25, 32, 33
There are many Goats that belong to another fold. But it may be objected,
that Christ gave his life for many, and the believers are but few, as our
Savior says in diverse places, as namely, The gate is strait, Matthew 7, 14
and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And
again, he says to his Disciples, Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. Luke 12, 32.
The flock of Christ then is but a little flock. I answer, that if the
children of God be compared with the multitude of the wicked, then indeed
they are but a few, even an handful, A small remnant, Isaiah 1, 9.
as the Prophet Isaiah says: but if we consider them in themselves, they are
innumerable, as it is said in the Revelation: where besides the many
thousands, Apoc. 7, ^. and 9
even 144000 that were sealed for the servants of God of the Tribes of Israel,
there was a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations and
kindreds, and people and tongues, which stood before the Throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with long white Robes, and palms in their hands. 2 Cor. 5,
15.
But it will be further objected, that the Scripture says plainly, that
Christ dyed for all. I answer, that there the Apostle speaks of the Church,
or of the elect alone, Beza.
universally considered. And therefore of necessity, the particle or note of
generality must be restrained to the point whereof the Apostle entreats. And
this is very usual in the Scripture. Our Savior alleges a place out of the
prophecy of Isaiah in this manner. John 6, 45. Isaiah 54, 13.
It is written (says he) in the Prophets: and they shall all be taught of God.
Now in the Prophet it is thus: And all thy children shall be taught of God.
That which our Savior speaks universally, the Prophet restrains only unto
the children of God. Again, it is certain, that our Savior Christ died for
all sorts of men, of whatsoever nation, degree, or condition they are.
According to that speech of Peter in his sermon to Cornelius; Of a truth I
perceive, Act 10, 34, 3^
that God is no accepter of persons. But in every Nation he that fears him,
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. And this is agreeable to other
places of Scripture, where the word All is restrained in this manner: Genesis
7, 1.
As where it is said, That every beast, and all cattle, and every thing that
creeps and moves upon the earth, and every Towle, and every bird came into
the ark unto Noah. Now, it is certain that all the beasts, and all the cattle,
and all the souls that then were, did not universally come into the Arc; for
there came but two, and 9. and 21.
a male and female of every kind, and all the rest were drowned in the flood.
And therefore, the meaning of the place must needs be, that there came all
kind of cattle and fowls, etc. into the Arc. So likewise it is said of our
Savior Christ, That he healed every sickness, Math. 4, 23.
and every disease among the people. Now there is no man can imagine, that he
healed all diseases generally, for doubtless there were many died in his time:
but he healed all kinds and sorts of diseases. So when it is said that our
Savior Christ died for all, we may safely understand it, that he died for men
of all sorts and conditions, whether they be high or low, rich or poor, bond or
free But it will be objected again, that our Savior says, John 3, 16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. and therefore
he was given for the whole world. I answer, that our Savior says in another
place, I pray for them, that is, for my disciples; John 17, 9.
I pray not for the world. Here the world is excluded from the benefit of
Christ his prayer, So that we have a World opposed to a World. There is a
World of them that shall be saved, for them Christ was given: and there is a
World of them that shall be damned; for them Christ does not pray. I do not
deny, but that the death of Christ is sufficient to save al men; for his blood
(as we have heard) is of infinite value. But it is not effectual to save all,
because many do reject it and trample it under their feet.

This serves for the reproof of them, that think that all shall be saved by
the death of Christ. It is a fearful error wherewith the devil carried many
thousands of poor souls to hell. But they shall find and feel the
contrary to their woe, unless they prevent it by repentance. For certainly,
there are many in the world, to whom it may be said as Simon Peter said to
Simon Magus, Acts 8, 21, They have neither part nor fellowship in this
business. There are vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, Romans 9, 22, 23
as well as vessels of mercy prepared unto glory. Jude verse 4.
There are some that were before of old ordained unto condemnation; that were
appointed to be damned before ever they were borne. There are many ungodly
persons, 2 Thessalonians. 7, 8, 9
Which know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power. And our Savior describing the manner of his
coming to judgment, tells us plainly, that at that day there shall be a
separation made between the sheep and the Goats (though here they graze all
in one pasture) and the Sheep shall be set on his right hand, and shall hear a
most comfortably sentence, Math. 25, 32, 33, 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world. But the Goats shall be set on his left hand,
and shall hear a fearful doom denounced against them; Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, 41.
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

And therefore, let every one of us be admonished, according to the exhortation
of the Apostle, to give al diligence to make our calling and election sure. 2
Peter 1, 10.
We are very careful to make sure our outward estates in the world; and we had
need to do so in respect of this cunning and subtle age wherein we live. Much
more should we make it our chief care, by all good means, to assure our hearts
that we are in the number of those that shall be saved by the death of Christ.
Otherwise, we can have no sound comfort, neither in life, nor in death.

FINIS.

