A Canticle of the victory obtained by the French King, Henry the fourth. At
Yvry.

WRITTEN JN FRENCH BY the noble, learned, and divine Poet, William Salustius;
Lord of Bartas, and Counsailor of estate unto his Majesty.

Translated By Josuah Siluester Merchant aduenturer.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Yardley, on Bredstreete hill, at the sign of
the Star 159^.

To the worshipful Master James Parkinson and Master John Caplin Esquires,
his well-beloved friends.
A Quatorzaine.
TO make one slender sum (a season) to suffice
two creditors, for two long-dew deep debts J owe,
I am perforce constraind to part my payment so;
which use (I grant indeed) is but bad marchant-guise.
Yet when through wrack by sea, or hindrance otherwise
great worlds of massy wealth do into wanting go
right honest men (of force) in such sad overthrow
to please all parties, thus their rests must portionize.
As I, alas! (the ship of mine hopes treasure rent
on ruthlesse ragged rocks, in seas of swollen despair)
seek as my rest will reach, your bonds (deer-loued pair)
Of count-lesse courtesies, and kindness to content:
take thus much in mean while, I call not in my bill,
if fortune chance to smile, J stand your debtor still.
Your Worships faithful and affectionate, IOSVAH SILVESTER.
After the dawne, comes day.
A canticle of the victory obtained by the French King, Henry the fourth. At
Yvry.
O God! what glorious sun, beams bright about our bounds?
What high triumphall hymn, so sweetly shirle resounds,
In our archt temples fair? what noise runs longst our streets?
What ruddy flakes of fire with clouds high climing meets?
Then is the victory ours: and heavens most righteous wrath
Upon the cruel camp of Leaguers showered has.
My brows be-slick your selves, and you my throbbing thoghts
(Deep sunk in sigh-full cells of sorrows sable vaughts)
Soar up to heaven again: you sisters threefold three,
Which of your sweets some years have now bin niggardlie,
And left my lips a-drie: insucket now my tongue
In your best syrrops; now pour down upon this song
A lake of learned gold, a rich May-month of flowers:
Let not my blubbered eyes disturb with sorrows showers
The common public joy: nor me dumb-thanklesse hide
Among so many Orphes, these brave Trophes tried.
Ah in my brain I feel, already gin to boil
Inventions thousand fair: and now is the fittest while
To give my spirit carreer, whilst others whist their voice
For silence never long accompanies greatioies
But how, or at which end, or of what thread shall I
This rich gold-grounded web, to weaue begin to try?
Lord, here I will not show, nor consecrate to fame
Of thy first brave exploits, the now far-noised name:
I will not sing of all those numbrie hoasts vndunne,
Those walls defended well, those rampires warlike (...)
By thy young valor great: nor will I Lyl^ again
Repurple with my pen: nor smeere the fertile plain
Of Courtras with dead grease: nor shall thy fauchine dred
Now here again cut off thy foes vnfaith-ful head.
I will not neither now, that my learnd Calyopa
Shall cornet through the world, that whilst that our Europa
(Of Church, and King with-al, abusing th'-holie style)
Against thee was combinde in league most law-lesse vile:
Thou, (Prince then parti-les, sans men, munition, treasure,
Prince, poor at-once in all, save rich in hope boue measure:)
Did seem of thy huge hills like one of greatest height
Which beaten day and night, is stablisht by his weight,
With right-vp-lifted looks beholds the starrie stages,
Skornes stormy winds, mocks rains, and laughs at tempests rages:
And treads-downe loftie-braue, on each assailed side,
Beneath his knobbed knees the thunders rolling pride.
I may not ouer-cast our glad thoughts watchet sky
With cloudie sad recite of passed misery:
I may not cruel now to lance again begin*
The wound which waxing whole begins a pace to skin.
Let others storize that: Me shall suffice to sing
That since some happy months, since thou weart Fraunce's king
Thy heau'n-holpe, hardy hand, more fenced Forts has won
Then on both sides, the heads in thirty years have done:
Al-though the swarms beseeg'd, (in far vn-equal count)
Of thy beseeging troops the number did surmount;
So that there often seems more standards of thy foes
Then in thy Kingly Camp there single Souldiars goes.
Thou seem a lightning swift, and then thy squadrons yare
Warnd of thy will do seem, feathers not feet to bare:
Thy warriors winged with plumes of honors mounting mind
Are bravely borne about by thy good fortunes wind:
Thou comst, thou see, thou winst: and thou triumphant fliest,
More swifter yet then I have these swift words deuisd.
Near Arques only, proud, the foe for certain days
Of thine exploits a space the expedition stays:
But as an angry stream, whose wrathful waves for stop
The thicknes have and height, of some new kawsies top.
His bottom vnder-mines, and wrastles with his shore,
And still ads (though in vain) to forces, forces more;
Til taking to his aid the succor of the snowes
Wrath-foaming, roaring, he his prison ouer-throwes:
The forests turui-turnes, drives down the bridges all,
And having won the plains, does now the hills apall
Swells like a surging sea, and then his furious soap
Steals from the one her land, enlarging thothers scope:
So thou returnst to field: thou runst, incounterst, beatst,
Holds, houses, cities do wne: and never thy paces seatst
Until fore Paris walls the rebel pale for fear
In her vast sub-urbs see thy face (which bright does bear
Too-iust a wrath depaint) sub-urbs entrenched strong,
Sub-urbs which flancked well with souldiars thicklie throng.
Thou takst Etampes, and then (sans loss of man almost)
Th'vnthankful Vandom's sacked by thine vn-vanquisht host:
Man's is assaild, and taen Falaise soon after that,
Lizieux, Eureux, and Mayn, stoop to thy standards flat:
And so does Honfleur too: thy bumbard's brimstone thunder
Prepared the prowdful walls of Dreux to pash in sunder,
When as the Leaguers Lord, puffed with his fresh supplies
From fatal Philip sent (which Philip craftie-wise
Wide-gapeth after France; ambicious waiting still
For nothing, but to see our Peers poure-out and spill
Each others life and blood, that at more easy rate,
He fox might bear-awaie the price of their debate.)
Draws nigh thy honored host, Then thou whose greatest fear,
Is least he fear too-much: makst a retreat as twere,
Thou seemst to shrink a space, coolst thy hot heart renownd
And stepst a-little back to leap the larger ground.
Thou makst a stand, he flies: thou followst, then he stays
Both parts prepare a pace, to wars death-dealing plays
They seem two forests great: each Captain does apart
His squadrons quickly raunge (though quickly yet with art)
The lightning, flashing-fire, from swords, caskes, curtilaces,
With trembling beams depaints the neighbor-growing grasses
Like as the starrie host, of heavenly torches bright
Be spangles richlie-gaie the mantle of the night.
The Soldier past his wont, his face more fearful makes,
Rage in his sparkling eyes, in's mouth he railing takes,
His corslet on his back, in's hand his fauchine fell,
Erinne to Yvry fields transport her hateful hell:
Theirs nothing heard but dru^mes, fifes, clarions, trumpets noise
But sharp-shirle neighings loud, and dreadful tempests voice:
Terror is over al, each-where is horror spread;
Horror is each-where fair, and each-where sweeet is dread
Al ready fight their toongues, already fights their gest
The valiant Knight his lance has now-now coucht in rest
Like as for all the world when meeting on the sand
With boistrous Bull the Lion tameles hand to hand,
The Bull with nostrel wide, wrath-fuming, fearful, great
Against his enmie proud, bold bellows out a threat
Defies his valiant foe, his head lifts lofty high,
With hooues the ground, with horns he beats the breathie sky
Then the other wyding wood his sparkle-spewing throat
From hollow greedy gulf, intunes a thundering noat,
A ruth-les roaring fell: and rowles in furious wise
Beneath his bug-beare brows his brandie blazing eyes
He reares (in rearing high his crest) his courage stout,
And spurs his rage a-pace with fisking train about.
The cannon is prepared, dischargd, hand-stroks begin,
The neighbors, brethren, friends, the cousens, and the kin,
All eyes of duty cloze, and open eyes to know
Where, worthy of their wrath, and deadly strokes to stow.
But never North-west wind beneath the weeping Kid
So threefold-thicke let fall on smokie mountains did
(Which stand, the Gascoine ground eternally confining)
The quick rebounding beads of yce-pearle slippery shining:
As here drop showers of lead, as here hail sudden deaths:
Ofbloud they rivers make, of bodies make they heathes:
Tossed truncheons, noises, smokes, the flames, the fuming damps
With thickened clouds obscure the face of both the camps.
The Earth trembles terrified, the winds reflecten steep,
And Pluto's self empales, within his Chaos deep.
This side aduances now, anon this side retreats;
Where fear did lodge of late, now valiant courage seats:
For yet dame Victory (blessed daughter of the Lord,
With trumpet at her back, and by her side a sword:
Her hands of scepters full, crowns hundred on her head;
Her corpse, in robe depaint with thousand conquests cled;
With standards flourisht fair, embost with brodered towns,
Powdered with palms, and wrought with great Achill's renowms)
Flies swift from camp to camp: and longst the purple plain
She Glory alluring-sweet leads with triumphant train:
To souldiars shows her face, O Sons, O who: today?
Who of you al (digne spouse) shall valiant bear away
This peer-les beauteous bride? who shall her bed-mate be
Who wel-content shall suck her balm-breath's Ambrosie?
O happy thousand-times! him shall the Kings adore:
The nobles humble bow, his honored feet before:
The gazing common sort, (like wauing Sea vntamd)
Through streets flock-follow him: and's face for-euer famd,
Shall sudden set a-worke the life-like pencill bold,
The hammer, grauing tool, the chisel, and the mould.
He shall be thargument of an admired story:
Al ages, every sound shall celebrate his glory:
In short his high renown, shall only bounded be,
With limits of the world and of eternity.
Thus spoke fair Victory; and in their boosoms blew
A more then common fire, a fit of fury new:
Here number ouercomes, their force, here conquers art:
Thus yet good-fortune fell indifferent t'either part.
Even so, (or much a-like) the earth angrie-spitefullie,
To war against the seas, and combat with the sky,
Sets-on, prouoks, inflames, in fight of new device
The south wind armd with showers, and north wind lade with ice:
The flood floats certain-les, the cloud's tossed too and fro,
Driu'n to his place again; and both, rough blasts do blow,
Til the one of them, by stroke of valiant victory
Be made King of the sea, and tyrant of the sky.
But see my mighty King, ah see him, courage, all,
O what bright honor bears his face Maiesticall,
O God, what burnisht beams, in's eyes fresh-flaming fair,
What more than princely port: what sweet presaging air
Of some good fortune near? he does not flaunt it nice,
In rich-rare shining show of pearls of costly price,
He is bare armed all: and steely temp'rament
Is of his valor rich the sole rich ornament:
His nurse him lullabied in steel, in steel he dight
With down his royal chinne, in steel it gins to white:
And by the caruing steel he does reconquer bold
Crowns, sceptars, diadems, and pearls, and goods, and gold*
Yet wholly void of mark, he does not dastard shroud
His person in the prease: a plume dread-dansing proud
Beclowds his creasted caske: and like a willow shows
Which proined smooth beneath, close by a river grows,
So soon as it enuide has heavens calm favor lost
Of his wight-wauing top the great green tuffe is tossed:
Now up, now down; and waves (made slave unto the wind)
Now too, now fro; and swaies now forward, now behind.
Thus that he might be known, our bold Achilles great
With his six hundred horse upon six thousand set:
The first that felt the force of his far*swathing keen
Was (O blind valor bold) a warrior that did ween
His stomach by his strength, his strength by deapth of wound,
Who daring hand to hand frunts Henry high-renoumd:
Th'vnconquerd Henry then, bears level with his eye
His pistol flinting-fire, yet lets no bullet fly.
Then with an angry voice, hence guilefull arms (quoth he)
The shining sword indeed of valiant chivalry
The noblest glory is: then quickly tossing light
The fiery flaming fear of fauchine flashing bright,
Like an Autumnall star, which ruddie does foreshow
Some dearth, some pestilence, some bloody ouer-throw)
He buckles with his foe, th'assailant he assaults
And resolute he marks his armors weak defaults:
Then entering in between his brestplate and his bases
He seeks his sinful soul, their finds and thence it chases.
Go happy soul, go tell, go tidinges tell beneath,
That by th'vnuanquisht arm thou honored had thy death
Of the Hercules of France, because the glorious fame
Of so fair death is more, then if ye overcame:
Say that here lives again a new Martellus brave:
And say the fields of France another Rowland have.
But thou die not alone; of all this goodly play,
Thou art but prologue thou, or first fruits of the fray:
He deals as many deaths as he bestows blows,
He hacks, he hewes, he hurts, them all he overthrows
More soon than whirlwind swift, or cannot shot, or thunder,
Can ouerturne a tree, pash walls, or tower mine-vnder:
One place, one troop, one wound, one death, one doghty deed
Cannot contain his rage, nor can restrain his steed:
Ech-where he lays on lode, and's fiery fury stout
Crosse-carues an hundred ways, the quaking camp throughout
All fall at once dismayed: yet diversely they tumble,
Some stabd, some stund withstroks, some on their fellows stu^ble.
But like a Lion fierce, which longst Numidian lawne,
Vnlades his hungers load on trembling trowpes that fawn:
If of a bear he hear the hollow howling voice
With ears erect and creast he roares an hideous noise,
Leaves lambs, and kids, and kowes: glad he incountred has,
An object matching more his honorable wrath:
My match-les Monarch so, discovering Duke Lorrain
Scorns baser blood, and plies to meet with him amain,
Throngs thwart the thickest trowpes of souldiars, men at-arms
Dead horses, horses live, pikes, bills, bows, ensigns, arms:
Incounters: and beneath the steel seeks buissie-braue
The heart that only life unto the Leaguers gave.
But dreading his disdaigne, the Duke de-Maine retires
And from al hopes at-once dejected, faint, suspires:
Him past-blisse makes to blush, him thousand cares molest,
Of his new foil he does the witness feelds detest.
Now Jvry out of sight, he near to Mante approaches
His heel, his weary horse with weary rowell broacheth
(His horse which breathles melts to dustie deaw his fat
Which on his bridle hangs his long neck crest-falne flatt
Which having mouth more dry the pum-stone spungi-light
Respects the spur no more then stock that is stirr-les quight.)
O wherefore noble Prince, o wherefore do thou fly?
What Panike terror choakes thy virtues valiancie?
Who graves a pale-faint fear upon thy constant face?
Thou lackst a lawful cause, not courage (in this case)
The cause does combat thee: stay Charles, confess thy miss,
And humble, of thy king the right hand come and kiss.
If ruth-les red revenge for thy dead brothers fall
Made thee take arms in hand, what is that to France at all?
What Is that unto the King? which has of brothers gore
Heart no less free (thou know) then fingers ever more.
If greatness made the fight, then might thou not attend
More honor from a Prince, which prudent can comprend
Thy noble virtues high; and which as king can grace
Those that his service will with courage stout embrace:
Then from base people blind, poor, thanklesse light, inorme
Which sail with every wind, and leake in every storm:
Which do reward with death, or exile (at the best)
Just Phocions, Camills stout, wise Dions with the rest:
Which have no rule but rage, and which cast down to ground
(Like yuie green) the wall to which they most are bound.
But if bleake fear to find no more now open never
The wide gates of his grace: ah was there known yet ever
A King of service true and just remembering more:
Or King that more forgot old quarrels quenched before.
He rather would subdue by benefits then blows
His rebel subjects al: his wrath that hottest glowes
Is like a fire of straw: striking he sigheth sore,
And from his foe-mans flank of blood he draws not more
Then tears from his own eyes: his spirit is void of gall,
This special gift from heaven the house of Bourbon all
Holds for blessed heritage, and this worlds glorious eye,
Which bout the heaven each day one restless round does plie
Did neuer'see a prince religiously more loath
To shake in any sort his honnor-binding oath.
Offer unto my Lord the crown of Germany
The diadem of Spain, the Turks Grand-Signorie:
Yea make him Monarch of the world (by guile)
He Will spurn al scepters, fore his faith defile.
Perhaps (th'wilt say) thou fight'st for church-creed catholic
But tell me, who conducts the Pinnesse Politic?
Who in his camp commands? but those that more than thou
Do zealous tooth and nail the faith of Rome auow?
Serves not his healthful name for freedom (bout our borders)
And presence for azile unto the preestlie orders?
No Atheism in his heart he broodeth hyppocrite,
A Christian king he is, and prince religious right:
He does believe he sucked with his kind nurses creames
Gods service pure reformd (more dear to him then realms)
Yet he not partial is, nor heddie opinionated:
If th'holie temple fair, now newly ruinated
By our foul hands profane, by our strife-stirring quils,
May ever one day look for to repair her ils:
And if the Church at all may hope to reprocure
An happy blessed estate, a peace firme-founded sure:
The same shall doubtless be, in such a Princes reign
So free from passion blind. My Muse cast back again,
Return we to the fight. But what, there al are fled
All Is full of rumor there, disorder, death and dread:
Al-readie none obey, al-readie none command,
Each soldier now apart makes by himself his band:
The large bloud-bibbing plains are covered al about
With swords, caskes, lances, guns; and brauest soldiors stout
Bear into forests black, their faint, liue-deaths conceived
And cast in hollow gulphs, their fallen, dead-deaths received.
The Victor following fast, ore-takes their hinde-like heels,
Fears not the flier's way: the greatest fear he feels,
Is least th'ones hare-like dread, the others desperate fury,
Find out some ferry boat, some bridge, some way securie,
To escape to safe retreat: they gasping headlong throw
Their bodies here and there, into the waters low.
The azure-eyed Nymph, Nauonda neuer-dying
Which (Queen) the crystal cleues of those waves (woeful crying)
Bleake began to breath this plaint, from out the streaming glass:
(Her head in dropping koife of rushes kercherd was.)
Alas (quoth she) whence comes? whence comes this iron spawn?
This mettle-moulded folk? from what Mount Gibel drawn?
What Vulcan? what Myron, has cunning given (I say)
To steel, a life to stir: to iron, breath to naigh?
Hence monsters, hence, away; (of war the workmanship)
Go, and your mother Earth with blood bedie and dip.
Let us slide toward the sea, with streams smooth-swifting sweet
Our Tritons loving, kind embracing arms to meet.
Her voice does vanish void, amid so many noises,
One combats with his weight, one through his armours poises
Swallows the choking flood: another has for grave
Naught but his bayard bold, his bayard naught but but wave:
Another more amazd, for skiffe his target takes,
For owers his aching arms, his Plume his sail he makes:
But straight a whirlpoole-place, that roareth ringing-round
Down-gimblets al at once, owers, sail, and ship to ground.
Those that by happy hap, safe the other shore do find,
In changing air, with-al yet do not change their mind:
Dikes, barricadoes, brigges, towns, rampires, trenches cast
Cannot suffice to stop their heed-les headlong have.
And if that any band resist thy victory;
It Is not to stoop, but more thy praise to multiply:
Witness that warlike troop of valiant souldiars bold,
Which martch't well orderd fair, beneath three standards old:
Thy self the fifteenth man with thine arme's lightning just
That mighty body beat'st down to the blood-died dust
Like as in calmie seas a gallie with her gunnes
Drownes in the deep a ship of full four hundredth tons:
Or like as in carreer the Spanish Iennet light
Turns topsi-turuie down the Germain Coursers might.
Thou heawst, thou beatst, thou breakst, thou ouercommest aye
Until the niggard night, have robbed thee of the day:
And death of foe depriud: th* Heluecian band alone
Not willing to forget their ancient valor shown,
Against the conquering camp, shake the sharp ashen dart
The more their number grows the higher swells their heart.
But of thy warlike face th'hot shun-shine in a trice,
Their Diamantine heart transformes to brittle ice,
That brittle ice to wet, that wet to vapor vain,
And those (whom pinching death, before pale dread did pain:)
Yea those I say, that never turned shameful back at-all,
But to the warrious Phaenix, tamer of our Gaul:
Those old whip-tirants tough, those king-correcting braues
Prostrate before thy feet their bodies, and their staves:
Then, least that thou should blot with brand of euer-blame
A people ever true to the Flower-de-luce (offame)
Of thy high hearts disdaigne, the warlike wrath relenting
Thou to their Cantons go their colors loved presenting.
O Trophe statelie-proud, which needs no Trophes more!
O head whom Laurels green, still flourishing decore!
O thou (indeed) inuict, o more then kingly breast,
Which happy over thy self, and triumph triumphest:
Which blessed contentst al parts: with victory thine host,
With grace thy vanquished foe, both with thy glory most.
Thou this worlds ornament, thou honor of our times,
May ever on the wings of mine heroike rimes
This brave exploit be borne: and may our Country Nations
(which, fostered-vp in fraies, wars, treasons, innouations,
Stood as it were at-gaze, with diverse winds reflecting,
And of this battle great the issue stood expecting)
Reap their right profit thence: may eke our Nobles yield,
Thy prowess, of the world the Empire fit to weeld,
That now they have for head, a king, wise-fortunate:
That by this fight thy hand has blessed restord the state
Of nobles to their place, reuengd the dead Kings wrong,
Authorized the Crown, freed France from bondage long.
May Clergymen devout, at last begin confess
That God vpholds thy side, and does thy bosom bless
With princely virtues rare, and that upon thy crown
Th'oile of his holy ghost he powers ever down.
In short may al our French confess this certain thing
That thou oughtst only be, and can be sole our king.
But what (alas,) a plague, gangrene, or leprosy,
Spreads all this body over: a torch of mutiny
Burns France to ashes all: and but thy hand vn-idle
Of this state's stumbling steed bears up so short the bridle,
Our scepter (honored erst of many men of might)
Would fly to shiuers al, or waste in sparkles quight.
The Prelate strikes the fire, the Noble blows the coal,
Of this consuming flame, the people peevish whole
Delighting in the blaze, do wretched-witched elues
Instead of fuel (fools) cast in their willing selves.
O, Clergy (that forget the holy room ye hold)
Is It well done, against your own, your own to arm so bold?
To kill your king? a King, which in the womb (akin
To thousand famous Kings) that office did begin:
A King which for your laws, your altars, honors, miters,
His blood aduenterd often among so many fighters:
A King (sans doubt) devout if ever were on ground:
A King that feared most the fearful thunder-sound
That roares from Vatican: and more, t'inregister
Amongst most glorious saints, a monstrous murderer
Which sheathed in belly of the Lord of hoasts anointed,
(First'nine-times steept in Stix) a steel of purpose pointed.
O little-noble Nobles, see you not alas,
Supplanting of the king ye do your selves abass?
That whilst ye do pull down this royal Monarchy,
Ye do establish mad a very Anarchie,
A shape-lesse Chaos rude: still stabbing night and day
Against your breast the blade of peoples violent sway;
Which hate the honest sort and have their chief delight,
In hope t*ensue the Switzers too-rebellious rite.
And thou peopl*vndiscreet, which for a Monarch blessed,
Just, lawful, mighty, wise, and valiant boue the best:
Takst hundred tyrants base, whose tusk-teeth tearing fell
Thy marrow-kernel suck, and crack thy bones (the shell)
To whom the glittring gold, from forth the earths bowels brought,
Or midst the slippery sands of shining Tagus sought
Seems nothing near so fine as does the gold they fet
From forth thy womb, or gold that with thy tears is wet.
No no, the French-man's deaf, deep drowned in Lethargy,
Senseless he does not feel, his murdring malady,
Or if he live and feel, he frantike arms his force
Against his Physician kind, that feign would cure his corpse,
Appliyng thousand sorts of sound-sweet medcines fit
Yet he does more and more increase his furious fit.
Then courage mighty King thy thoughts let anchor here,
O noble Prince pursue thy wel-begun carreer,
And since this festred sore a plaster helps so small,
Set me the lance a-worke, the sword, the fire and all:
Choke me this Hydra huge whence monsters muster out
And with thy fair renown fill me the world about:
Use thy good fortune now; the hills most loftie-browd
Do trembling give thee place: the floods profoundest proud,
Dry up before thy feet: the hugest mighty camps
Fore beams of thy bright eyes, vanish in smokie damps:
And of the strongest holds the massy founded frame
Affrighted shakes sore at sole sound of thy name.
But (mighty King) take heed, do not alas expose
Thy life in pray so often to sparelesse Atropos:
Be sparing of thy blood and think for certeintie
That our good hangs on hooks of thy prosperity.
But if thou shut thine ear, against th*humble low request
Of thy fames trumpetter: yet hear how France (at least)
Presents her self to thee, not such as once she was,
When near the Danish deep her limits bounds did pass:
When Euphrates and Nile in favor of her realms
Longst fruitful plains did roll their tributarie streams:
When to the Spaniard proud she rulers did allow:
And when the pride of Rome beneath her laws did bow:
But lean, and bleake, and broke, and tatterd, rent, and torn,
And sunck in ^^ngerous Seas or hard mishap forlorn.
o my dear son (quoth she) nay my defender rather,
My staff, my stay, my fort, my second-founding father,
Through grief and forrow (sure) I should dispairing die,
I should my stommach stab, with shamful halter I
Should stop my weary wind, and stint these cares of mine
Weart thou not mine (my Lord) and if I were not thine.
Be not (my dearest hope) then of thy life so lauishe
My kind King let no more fame-hunting envy rauishe
Thy thoughts to see all things, to make thee hardi-heed-les
To get too great renown run into dangers need-les.
A mighty Monarke must, whilst greening youth does flower
Make one, or two, or three, proofs of his peer-les power
For valor is the gate of honor beautified,
The first stair-step it is, whereby good-hap does guide
Our feet to Glorie's mount: and nothing hartens so
The men of arms to fight, as valiant Prince (we know:)
But after-wards he must with wary wisdom war,
More often with his witthen with his weapon far:
And feeding so his spirit with sweet-sharp easie-paine,
Not keep a souldiars place, but Captains room retain.
My son, but al too-much th'-hast fought with thine own hand
The virtue of whose force thous-thousands understand:
My King, t'inlarge thy laud thou have labourd al too-long,
But not for my repose: brave Lord my Victrie strong
Lies in thy length of life, not in thy boystrous arm:
Thy life's my life, thy death my death, thy hurt my harm:
If thou neglect thy self, I pri-the love me tho
Upon thy country dear (at least) some pity show
Think what I should become is some untimely ^eath
Betwixt mine arms toosoone should stop my Henry's breath*
Even like a widow-ship which wanting Pilot sage,
On suddie Seas is tossed in time of tempests rage
Which surging, at the last against th*-horned stone does knock
And with farr-spreading split does hide the hoarie rock.
But if that too-much heart, too-prodigue of thy life,
Set not too-soone a-worke the edge of Atrop's knife,
I hope to flourish more, then ere I did in Arts,
In manners fair, in laws, in stoar of valiant hearts,
In faith, in knowledge, wealth* and thy just reign and sage
Shall nothing yield in bliss to calm Augustus age.
FJNJS.

