THE COVRTE of Civil Courtesy: Fitly furnished with a pleasant port of
stately phrases and pithie precepts: assembled in the behalf of all young
Gentlemen, and others, that are desirous to frame their behavior according to
their estates, at all times, and in all companies*

Thereby to purchase worthy praise, of their inferiors: and estimation and
credit among their betters.

Out (...) Italian, by ^. R. Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jhones. Primo January, 1577.

To the nourishinge Youths, and Courteous young Gentlemen of England, and to
all others that are desirous, and lovers of Civil Courteste: R. I. the Printer
hereof, wishes an happy New year present, and many: to the pleasure of God,
and their own hearts desire.
MOst Courteous young Gentlemen, presuming upon your great Courtesy: I have
been so bold as to present your estate, in token and wish of an happy new
year, with these the first fruits of my poor Press, finished since the
cu^ming in of the same.

Surely, the traueill of a Gentleman whom I know not, no not so mutch as by
name, much less by person: And concerning the copy, as he that brought it
unto me made report, that it was translated out of the Italian, by a
Gentleman, a freeinde of his, desyringe me that it might be printed. And I
beeinge always desirous to farther the study, and procure the delight of all
men, by publishinge books of semblable argument: thought good to dedicate the
same unto you, judging it in this respect a present more meet for your most
flourishing degree: for that I perceive it to have bin first written by a Noble
and grave per sonage of Italy, and directed unto his nephew, a young Gentleman
also of noble parentage, for the better conforming of his behavior at his
entrance into the Court, as it may appear by his Epistle hereafter following.
Now for that this case is common unto most of you, and above all other, the
study of ciuell Courtesy, most incident unto your calling, I am the bolder to
crave your Courteous countenance, and freindly favor in accepting the same now
in English at my hands, as a testimony of my serviceable heart, and good
meaning toward you. And that receiving it now from me as your own, you
would vouche safe of your great courtesy to take both me and it into your
assured protection: and to defend both the present, and him that offers it,
from the spightfull toungues of malicious carpers. And in so dooinge, you shall
evermore bind me to employe what traueill and service I can, to the
aduauncing and pleasuring of your most excellent degree.

Farewell in the Lord.
The Censure of a freinde, concerning this work.
Our Parents well deserve the prick of price,
Who give us life which we had not before.
The teachers care deserves great thank likewise,
Who trains the child, and gives the learned lore:
Immortal praise we ought give him therefore.
Some strife has bin in respect of these things,
Who best deserves of these two Noble springes.
Though one give life, the other learning lendes.
Let reason rule, let wit this matter scan.
And things are iudgde according to their ends,
And Proverb old says manners makes the man.
The vital sprite must yield to learning than.
Wherefore you youths, sprunge up from gentle line,
Unto this Court your courteous ears incline.
This Court, the which of Courtesy takes name,
Declares what port each Gentill shall ensue.
At all assayes how he himself shall frame,
To follow what, and what for to eschew.
Thrice happy he whom God shall so indue.
A thing of weight, and wun for simple price,
Reject by fools, but purchased by the wise.
(...)
(...)
Benga^a^a de^ Mont. Prisacchi Retta, unto Seig. Princisca Ganzar Moretta. For
his behavior. vz.
To my Nephew Seig. Princisca Ganzar Moretta.
AT my last being at Prisacchi, understanding by your fathers talk, that he
minded to have you a while in the Court, where he has spente the better part
of his life: and because it is frequented with all sorts of companies, as any
place in Italy is. I have directed this little book, which if you read and
mark diligently, shall be as it were a guide, to lead you from a number of
snares which you may be trapt withal, also for your behavior in all
companyes: with many other things fit to be known of young Gentlemen, and
especially for such as have not been conversant in all companyes.

Fare ye well.
The Contents of this Book.
HOw a young Gentleman may behave himself in all companyes: and be prepared
for ordinary entertaynmentes, and to get a good oppinion and credit among his
betters. Chap. 1. How a man shall be have himself in bad company, and among
such roysters as will offer familiarity with him, will he or no: and first a
guess of such means as they will use thereto. Chap. 2. How a man shall answer
to the praise and thanks, and courtesies seriously offered by his betters or
equals. 3. How a man shall acquit himself toward noble persons, that shall
either for his freeindes sake, or his own, offer him courtesies: or assure him
of freindship, willinge him in all chances to be bold with him. Chap. 4.
How when the foresaid speeches be offered by a Noble person pleasantly, that
is of acquaintance: which must be also pleasantly answered. Chap. 5. How to
an equal, or but little better* beeinge a friend and familliar. Chap. 6. How a
man shall take thanks of a noble person. ca. 7. How a man may give thanks to
his betters and equals. Chap. 8. What manners be requisite at the Table, and
what to be shunned: what is to be considered in the washinge before Dinner, and
in the sittyng down, is set forth in ye beginning of this Direction. Cha. 9.
How a man shall pacify his friend, his better, or his equal: if he have
given him unwillingly any cause of offense. Chap. 10. How a man shall shift off
reproaches or tauntes offered beetweene sport and earnest: by envious and
scornful persons that will seem to do it so cunningly as the other shall
have the taunt, and yet at his own pleasure will deny if. Chap. 11.
FINIS.
THE COVRTE OF CIVIL CVRTESIE.
How a young Gentilman may behave himself in all companies, and be prepared
for ordinary entertainments, and to get a good oppinion and credit among his
betters. Chap. first.
FIrst he has to consider, that the lack of good behavior, which is a
comely audacitie, with out a sausie presumption (which argues discreet
judgment and wisdom) makes his inferior to be his equal, and makes his
equal his better, till himself has attained not only the habit of being the
like, but the time to make himself know to be the like. Therefore if he shall
light in the company of any, whose living and birth is worse then his own,
and yet perceyueth the other for his wisdom and gravity to be well esteemed
of by others, it becomes the young Gentleman to give him the place (or at
least with instance to offer it him) but yet with such a modest audacitie,
mingled with a smylyng grace, and courteous speech, neither too loud nor
whisperyng, as the rest of the company may well perceive: it is the virtues,
and not the man that is preferred, and that it is offered rather of a courteous
disposition, then of a sheepishe simplicity, which wilbee the better
understood if he shall utter some famillier speech in yelding the place at
the door, as thus:

I pray you go, for I love to follow the steps of mine elders. Or thus:

You must needs go, for I cannot a way to go foremost. Or thus:

On, on I pray you, you be the next the door. Or thus:

If you go not we shall strive all day, for I will not. Or thus:

You make too mutch ado for so small a matter: And at the placing at the table,
as thus:

Will you sit sir, and I wilbee next you? Or thus:

Not I by your leave. Or thus:

Such a one will needs have you by him. Or thus:

You shall not rule me till you come to your own house. Or thus:

The place is fytter for you then for me. Or thus:

Go too, shall we strive all day like women?

And if it be one that be of great estimation, either for office, or ancientie,
and will yet of too mutch curiosity refuse the place, then it shall be best to
sit down first, but to take a lower place either on the other side, or on the
same side. But here (by the way) it is to be considered that this curtesy is
not so precisely to be used, either at common tables, where each man pays
equally for his meal, nor yet at ordenary tables in the court: for in either
of these two places, except diversity of degree make difference, men use not
this curiosity: then this aforesaid at the table, is when men meet in their
equals or inferiors houses, in which it is to be considered that the owners
of the tables must bear the swaye of placing, if he be the better or equal.
Howbeit, if the owner shall call or place one (either not knowinge who ought or
not caringe who do) that is inferior every way, saving for wealth, in such a
case, the young Gentleman shall do well not to tarry till other be set, not
abydinge the placinge of the owner: but taking his next companion to set
himself down first, rather two or three lower, then he should be the next to
his inferior: whereby the owner shall be (in silence) taught to consider better
an other time. And he must not suffer himself to be removed any higher,
that he may keep the owner still in doubt whether he so placid himself of
mislike or of good fellowship. But if there be mutch ado made, and that he
find the owner to find his own error: then it wilbee curtesy to couller the
fact with good words pleasauntly, As thus:

Why? think you that I can eat no meat but at the upper end of the bourd. Or
thus:

I pray you hinder not my good hap, I am where I like. Or thus:

I pray you give me leave to sit where I like. Or thus:

I pray you trouble not your self, you shall see us as merrye here as you be
there. Or thus:

As long as I find good meat I never use to study for my place. Or thus:

I warrant you if I had not lyked this place, I would have bin so bold as
chosen an other. But if it happen the owner of the house, be so gross and
careless, that he either do not or will not find any mislike of the matter:
then would I wish* in such a case, the young Gentleman should be furnished
with some guirdinge speeches, or else some pleasant scoffs, to countenance
out the matter, with those that sit by him, that the rest may see he choase
the place in scorn of the other, as thus:

I am happily placed here, for if I had mounred any higher, I had been clean
out of countenance. Or thus:

We wilbee as merry here, as though we sat at the upper end of the bourd:
or to some companion, that sits next above by the young Gentleman's placing,
thus:

If you behave not your selves gently, and be good to us of the second mess,
we will keep you from mountyng the next time. Or thus:

Beware friends, pride will have a fale: speak not so loud your betters be
in place. And to conclude, to make as mutch mirth and pastime as may be all the
meal. But if a man be in a noblemans house, or a knight of great reputacion,
then he must be contented for that time, as pleases them. But he may the
next time, take as good a place as he can with modesty get, and when he is
from the bourd, not loose any place that reason or courage can advance him to.
For as no man is disgraced by giving (of his curtesy) place to whom he list,
so to have it taken from him by others being his right, is an abasement not to
be suffered, it a man can take it either by slight or courage.

Now that this young Gentleman, may know in what sort he may accompany
himself with all sorts, and to all estates: he shall know, that the eldest
son of a knight while his father lives, may count himself equal with a
Gentleman of. cc. li. land rent of assise (for so the statute limiteth) and may
offer himself a companion with ye best squire, if his wit we a modest
audacitie will serve him there to, but not without some reverent respects in his
speech: specially if the said squier be of gravity, and so of reputacyon,
either for his wisdom or office, as if he will ask a question, thus:

I pray you sir, what? where? or why is such a thing? Or thus:

Will it please you to do, or have such a thing: and in his affirmation and
negation to answer as thus:

Ye sir, no sir. And if the other ask him any question, as whether he will
do this, or that. Then thus:

Mary sir I will tell you. Or thus:

With a good will, if it please you, etc. As the matter shall fall out. Howbeit
these speeches, if it be to no better then to the best squier, or an ordinary
knight be to be used, with such a famillier kind of pronuntiation, as it may
appear to be vttred by him of his curtesy: meaning rather to give them more
then he greatly needed, then of any great difference he thinks to be
between them: specially if they be such, as he is not like any way, either
to be in danger of their hurt, or in need of their help. And though these
kind of reverent speeches need not to be so curiously used, by the
inferior, to one mutche his better, when they be once very familier: yet they
become the speaker so well, as if they be used with a good audacitie and
familier countenance, a man may use them to his inferior, without any
abacement or disgrace at all to himself, and specially to Ladies and gentle
women of credit.

Then he has to consider that among young Gentlemen, or young Noblemen,
there needs no great curiosity, but before a Barron, and so upward, he may not
be covered while he stands in his view, except the nobleman bid him: unless
that Nobleman use such an ordinarye kind of good fellowship with all men (as
he sees) as mean as himself use him with small curtesy: and yet he must way
withal whither that goodfellowship be withal men indifferently, or only to
such as be his familliers: for such as be noble may make their companions
whom they list, and the rest though they shall be better to such companions, not
to use ever the less honor to him. And let this stand for a general rule,
that whatsoever familiarity a noble man shall show to any his inferior, yea
though he profess to make him his equal friend: let y^ inferior still beware
of vsinge himself rudely, sawcely or carelessly, especially in the presence of
others. For though many to assure their inferior of their goodwil, seem to
banish all curiosity: yet such an one shall be best esteemed, and longest hold
freindship with his better, y^ in all their greatest familiarity can make it
appear to others that he does not forget, that he plays or iesteth with his
superior. Which a man may very well do and yet hold company in all manner of
sportes, iestes, and pastimes: then mutch more he that is a stranger must
have the more regard. And as it is good manner for a man in his own house, or
his freindes, if he be the best in the company, to offer intertaynment to any
nobleman: so in a strange place in the house of his better, though there be
no better then himself in the place, he may not presume to begin
intertainment: but it is his part to be ready, and next the Nobleman in
sight, against it pleases him to use him, till he sees him accompanied with
some others, or call some other to him: and if it be but open talk devised to
pass away the time, then to help lengthen the same at his discretion:
otherwise to find some talk with others, and rather to stand or sit, with a
steady and assured countenance, as though he were studiynge some matter of
weight, or harkening to others talk if it be not secret: then to accompany
him self with such as be unworthy of his company: and such count I serving
men, and foolish doltish persons though they be his betters, But when a man
shall sit still and say nothing, he must be sure to have an assured
countenance, not gnawing any thing in his mouth, or playing with his legs,
toes or fingers, and to have always an ear and an eye about him, to here what
is said, and to be reddy if any part of an others talk, either by word or
look be addressed to him, that he may receive the occasion, and win in the
talk: and though no such cause be offered, yet it is a better grace to harken
other folks communication, then to be talkyng with a person of vain credit:
and if a man shall get him out of the way for lack of countenance, when noble
persons or others of reputacion be in place: then will his inferior lie in a
wait for occasion, and step in, to be of familiarity before him.

Furthermore, if talk be offered to this young Gentilman by his better, he
has to consider whether the same proceed of a desire to pass away the time,
and for want of other company: or else (as some do) because they will be thought
courteous, they will say some thing to every body, but for fear of too mutch
familiarity, will not stay long with their inferior. To this last it shall be
good only to answer to the question, addyng some reason to verefie the same,
but not to enter any new matter, nor to dilate any further in the old, then
he shall perceive him by his countenance and attentiuenes to hear without
provocation. But if the inferior perceive, that the talk is ministered upon
the first respect, that is to make entertaynment: he must not only answer all
his demands, but enlarge the same to the uttermost: And when he sees his
better pawse, so that he turn not awaywarde (as though he would begone from
him) to invent some matter of himself, to lengthen talk: And that he may the
better do so, he must before hand have enquired (of such as come in In any
wise let a man shun as much a^ he can in his entertaynme^ts to speak of
himself as to tell, what he has said or what he has done: for that will be
taken to come of a desire to tell his own praise, except it be either to his
very friend or else that it be sumthing that the other is destrous to here.
his company) if otherwise he cannot learn, what manner of country the
stranger dwells in: from what place he comes: and whither he is going:
what pastime or exercise he loves. By which means he may redemaunde of the
wearines, or plesantnes of the journey: of the fowlenes or fayrenes of the
weather: whether the country he dwells in serve commodiously to the use of
such things as he delights in: whether the Gentlemen of that shyre be
companiable in y^ like or not: and by this means, also he shall be able so to
understand of mo count^i^s, and men, then he knows, although he met with them
as strangers, yet he shall be provided of sumwhat to discourse with them
thereof. But if a man talk with his better, he must always observe with what
attentiuenes or willing mind the other gives ear to him, y^ he may leave
of, before the other be weary: and to be very heedefull that he speak
nothing affirmatively, but that himself has seen: but he may well say I have
hard, or I have read, that this, or that is thus. And in telling any thing
by heresay, specially to a stranger, he must respect three things, the one, that
it sound not to the disprayse of any by name, except it be a thing openly
known, and yet the dispraysed may hap to be so near a friend to him that
shall hear it, as the teller shall get mislike. The other is, that when they
tell a tale of an other man's mouth, he forbear to tell the name of his
aucthor especially, if he be his friend, for if it shall seem unlikely
though it be true, he shall bring his freindes credit in suspect. The third
kind is, that he never take upon him in open presence, to make any report of
the sayings or doings of his betters, except they be such as the company
knows him to be familliarly acquainted with, for otherwise, he shall make
himself compared to them that talk of Robyn Hoode and never shot in his bow.
Lastly let him never make up his entertaynments with the disprayse, or mockyng
of any, either present, or absent, though he hear other do the like, (except
only in the company of his very assured friends) and that for this respect. A
young man must ever think that it is impossible for him to be so complete in
all perfections of beehauour, but that some thing remaynes in him worthy the
laughyng at, if men should not forbear him in respect of time, which brynges
experience to the wisest, and peradventure too, even some of the same defects
which he sees scoft at in another, may be in himself, unknown to himself,
or atleast others as ill: And therefore the wisest way is, if his better seem
to deride any for his beehauour, to appear by a smiling countenance to be of
the same opinion: but in words to escuse it, if he may, as if the doings of
him that is mocked show simplicity, thus:

It may be that bashfulnes is the cause: if they show rudenes, then thus:

Want of experience makes men err. But if they be his equals, or interiours
that so scof, then merely, thus:

Go too syrs, many a one going about to mock one he cares not for, does
often touch himself or his near freende, or by a similitude thus:

On, on, saw ye never any or this, that lift up a weapon to strike another and
hit himself. Or thus:

Take your pleasure my masters, I warrant you therebee that do asmutche for
us, as we do for them. And in deed there cannot any greater praise be given
to any man, then this, that one shall never here him speak ill of any, and
hearing ill, will make the best of it. How be it, it is both within ye limits
of honesty, wisdom, and freindship, any man to discourse plainly with his
friend, either of the misbehauour, or dishonest dealings of any: that on the
one side he may show himself a misliker of ill persons, and also make his
freinde ware of them. And by the way it is to be noted, that there be three
sorts of people, which whosoever shall scoff and skorne at, or else jest with
them, further then the compass of curtesy shall permit, shall receive more
disgrace by dooyng it, then the other shall by sufferyng it.

The first is women, or simple mild sprited men: for women must never be
iesters, nor scoffers, further then the bounds of modesty and courtesy, to
make the time pass away the more pleasantly: so that a man to jest so far
with them as they may not for shame answer, nor for insufficiency quarrel
for, wilbee accounted a dishonorable battle, wherein the vanquished has more
honor then the vanquisher: for it is better to yield with silence, then to
contend This is meant by sharp and taunting iestes when a man will seek to
disgrace or put one out of con^tenance by iestes.
for the masterie in vnfittyng terms, and to offer the mild spreeted man the
like: that fynding himself agreeued, has neither the wit to shift of it in
words, neither the courrage to revenge it in deeds: is in the same
predicament that the woman is: And all noble minds do of their courtesies
forbear to offend, and offer to defend all those that either cannot (as
feeble persons) or ought not (as the feminine sex) revenge or defend them
selves.

The second sort that may not be mocked or scoffed at, be aged persons, and
such as ve deformed, for want either of beauty, favor, or other blemishes in
their shape, stature or limbs: because none of these things be faults of
their own making, neither lies it in their power to amend them. So as we
ought rather to be moved thereby to thank the maker of us all, for dealyng
so mutch better with us, then with them, then to scorn or deprave them for
that they cannot help. And if withal we will consider, that the deformities
of the mind, be so mutche fowler then those of the body, as the soul is of
more value, and ought to be more uniform: it wilbee a good mean to make the
outward defects of others, very small in respect of our own, which cannot, but
be greater and many more, and consequently, rather to escuse them, then despise
them.

The third sort that cannot bear, neither ought to be offered scoffing,
mockyng, or jesting: be those that be in misery: either by sorrow,
imprisonment, or any adversity, by loss of freeindes, substance or credit:
For these be things sent from God, to put us in remembrance, that we having
deserved as ill, may fall into the like when it pleases him: and in the mean
times be objects for us, to practice our compassion and charity upon. But
there may rise this question, seeing that public enterteinments, specially
among young folks, are continued more often with speech of little importance
then with matters of weight: How a man findyng himself in such company, as are
neither fit to discourse of matters of wisdom, nor yet to be imparted with of
his own private affairs, shall find matter sufficient to pass the time in
company? For answer hereunto, let this be remembered, that where as I have
said, that men must take heed in their open talk, how they be to busy in
bryngyng in the sayings and doings of noble persons, least the hearers should
think that he arrogateth to himself greater acquaintance with such, then in
deed he has: or else, least coming to their ears, they should mislike that
their inferiors should make them their talking stocks. Yet if he that shall
so introduce (by way of confirmation, ensample, or similitude) the sayyng of
his betters, be sure that it show his wisdom and praise, or at the least,
some pleasantness without any harm or disgrace to any other, he may well use
it in his talk: Provided that he speak it as by heresay, except he have it
in deed by his own knowledge. Also women and deformed persons, may be
pleasanted and iested with, if their wit be such as they delight in the
like, and can in good sport enterchaunge in the same manner. Provided that the
bounds of courtesy be observed (that is) that there be no cause of blusshyng
given.

Also, all men in sickness, prisonment, or poverty, be not miserable, for
they be only such that have an afflicted mind: for some can jest and scoff
at their own disgraces, thinking thereby to make them seem the less in
other men's eyes, while they appear no heuier, then such as themselves can
pleasantly bear: And such had rather be iested with, then pitied.

The fault therefore that can be committed in these persons, is the mocking
them beehinde their backs, or despisyng them, which no man ought to show to
any, except it be to them that be known to be impudent and shameless
persons, or else such as be known to be ouerwenyng fools in their own
conceyte, and be such as do the like by others. Of these a man may talk
his pleasure, as well of them, as with them, without any disgrace to himself:
Provided that if any quarrel rise thereby, he be as ready of courage to
maintain it with his hand, as of speech to utter it with his tongue.

Also a man may jest with his very famillier freinde, if he find him of
disposicion willing to bear it, and of wit sufficient to answer it. And it
skilles not what he lay to his charge, though it be dishonestie: provided
that it be not true that is imputed to him, or if it be true that the other
be so brason faced as he will not be ashamed of it.

I would not advise any man to jest mutche with his inferiors, unless they
be such as he knows, both can and will use a restraint of over malepartnes.
For if a gentilman should be saucely used by jest, by his inferior, he
cannot escape disgrace, whether he bear with it, or quarrel for it: but
bearyng it is best, and to shut it up rather with a pleasant nip, then any way
to seem angry, if the mirth be of his own beginning.

And thus mutch for a taste how a man may pass his talk among his betters
and equals, in a strange place, and in strange company.

Yet this admonition more I must add, that who so in his entertainments shall
endeavor to tell any tale to move laughter (specially in strange company)
had need to be sure that it carry that life or quickenesse with it, as he be
not so mutche deceived of his expectation, that he be feign himself to laugh
alone: for that will be so great a disgrace, as in steed of laughyng at the
table, they will smile in their sleeves at him: and therefore to shun that he
must beeware that he take not in hand to tell any thing for foolish, that is
not folly: nor for wise that has couller of folly: nor for a wonder that is
not wonderful: nor for rare, that is common: for want of experience may
deceive all these.

How a man shall beehaue himself in bad company, and among such roysters as
will offer familiarity with him will he or no: and first a guess of such
means as they will use thereto. The second Chapter.
THeir manner is lightly, if they find a young Gentleman that is to be of a
fair living, if they see him soverly given, after they have made their devise
among themselves, how every man shall play his part, that one of them shall
pretend great gravity with him, and he shall praise him to the clouds, and
beecome his counselor. Another shall tell wonders to his fellow, to see if
beetween them they can catch a woodcocke of him.

Another (if the first device serve not) will go about in scoffyng and
iollyinge sort, to see if by puttyng them out of countenance, they can make
him glad to be of their faction, and to further the same, an other shall seem
to reprove al them. And as though he were the plainest honest man in the
company, he will offer to quarrel with them in his behalf: and all will be
done with such oaths and sad looks as for all a man is warned (he shall
doubt) whither there be any that mean good faith or not. And it may be in
deed that some of these may mean honestly, and that may be the first and the
last, (for thither two bewray themselves) and therefore a man must use those
he doubts of in such sort, as he neither utterly reject them, meaning
well, nor show him so foolish, as at the first or upon small acquaintance to
credit every man that will profer him fair words. And therefore, for the
first man that upon some little acquaintance shall take upon him to praise or
advise him, let him consider what reputacin and countenance he is of, or if
they be such, as be of lyuinge, and withal can be contented to live within
the compass of his own, then there is the less suspicion to be had of him,
further then this: that every wise man will suspecte any man that too mutch
praises him (except it be his famillier and assured freinde) but for the more
suerty it shall be well to answer in this manner: not seriously, but somewhat
smyling and famillierly. Me thinks it very good that you and I were never
better acquainted: for by that means you may be kept in that good opinion
which now ye seem to conceive of me, either by heresay, or by your own
guess, least by too much conversation you be made to chainge your mind: but
in the mean time I thank you, both of your good lykinge, and of the good
advice you profer me: for I shall ever have need of good counsel: and if
there be any other thing (because I am unfurnished to requite you in the same)
wherein I may pleasure you as mutch, you shall find me as ready. And so to
shift him of and fall into some other talk, enquiring of this or that, him or
her, as the obiecte of the eye or mind shall lead.

Now for the wonder tellers, I find three or four sorts of them: the one
sort only upon pleasure to pass away the time, not lookinge to be believed of
any, but to be iolled within the like: With these the best way is merely to
take upon you to know it to be true, and to ad to it something that may make
it seem more unlikely. And though it should so fall out that the tale should
be true, that to another seems either unlike or impossible: yet is there no
harm done, in not seeming to believe it, while I know no reason to lead me
thereto: mary, if after the same with sad asseueracion and others be justified
to be true: a man must of courtesy seem to credit their others, but never the
more to confess it likely, except they can show so by reason.

The Other sort for that they would be taken for dooers or knowers of great
things, will for their own glory tell maruels, either of such things as
they have done, or such things as they have seen in strange Countries. And
will think in deed, what by his solemn countenance, what by swearing and
lyinge, either to be credited, or at least that no man shall seem to
discredit them: and if any go about it to quarrel with them. In this case I
would either say nothing, or if he should direct his tale to me, whereby I
must be drouen to say somethynge: I should be in surche sort as I would
seem to soothe him in words, but others such as I thought my freindes,
should perceive by my countenance I rather thought it pity to put him out of
his vain, then was of the mind to believe all he said. Yet that must be
done so conningly too, that if the teller or the hearers should, to pick a
thank, challenge me for the same: I would be able (if I list) without denyinge
any thing I said or did, or make the blame light on them that would go about
to distayne my meaning, as thus:

Can I not look on such a one, or speak so, but that I must mean as ye
would: it is you (me thinks) that go about to bring in question that which
no man else thought on, if I were as he, I would thank you for that etc.

The third, and the worst of these wonder tellers, is he that in very deed
makes it his art, of purpose to catch Woodcockes (as they term it) and they
will use it either so connyngly or so impudently, as they will make him, whom
they hunt after to be a wole in that point, or seem a fool: for they will so
mingle things like to be true, or at the least not impossible with things
merely, faulse and impossible: as if the hearer shall either receive all
indifferently, or reject all indifferently, he shall seem either too ignorant,
or too light of beeleif. And if he shall by judgment scan and sever the other
from the oother, and so condemn any part, though not the whole: then
swearyng, flowtyng and quarelynge, wilbee offered to justify the matter: and
this it is (will they say) to tell a tale to him that has never gone further
then his mother and nursery, to call for his pappe in a morning. etc. And then
must the last man that I first spoke of and is the fourth in this tragedy,
step forth and tell his fellow he offreth the young Gentleman too mutche
wrong, and he shall not take it at his hands, and himself will take his
part, and go into the field, either with him or for him.

To shift both these of, the best way (if any will rid it) is first to let the
other to tell all his lies, and to let him pass with a smile in the sleelie,
(as they will call it) rather then to use either admiration, affirmation, or
negation: but if he be urged to say his opinion, as he shall (if it be a
verse of course) then shortly to answer, thus: or the like:

I say no more, but it may be true for me: for there be many things that
seem impossible, and yet prove true. Matters of faith may not be reasoned on,
Or thus:

Me thinks it is a very good tale, I mean not to scan any further on the
matter. And these or the like words may be uttered with such a grace, as
the countenance may show the mind, and yet the speech keep them from
quarrel. But if they will needs prosecute it to the uttermost: then he that
shall seem to set the young Gentleman a gog, and offer to be his companion,
he must of courtesy seem to thank him, but not be so unwise as accept him.
For no wise man will accept into his company, at such a bargen, a stranger
if he have any of his friends to make account of, though he suspect no
practice at all, but yet he must be put of with good words, as thus:

I thank you, you shall not need to take the pain, for I have promised a
friend of mine, in these cases (if I take any body with me) it * There is a
difference between ruffa^ly phrases and such reprocheful words as express
the fowlenesse of the fact or the illness of the person.
must be he: I will quarrel with no body, but if any body have any quarrel to
me, I have business into such a place, such a day, at such an hour: I
will have but my self and my man, or but my self and my freinde, there he may
find me if he dare: and so asmutch as may be to forbear ruffainly words.
But if any man be called by any reprochefull names they must needs be
requited both in terms and deeds but after sundry manners according to the
person, the cause and the place.

For if a man's better, being a noble person If the noble man be not of
authority.
(not being of the counsel) shall in scornful words challenge his inferior
for any thing of offense toward him, the inferior ought by all means (not
abaceing himself too mutch) to escuse the matter. Or if it be a fault (such
as he can yield no reason for the committynge of it) to yield with request of
pardon. But if either the escuse will not be taken, or that the inferior had
just cause to commit the offense, and that thereupon the noble man break out
in terms of reproach, as knave, or lie: it may very well be answered thus:

My Lord, these terms be odious, and such as (assure your self) I would
not bear if you were my equal, neither peradventure would you offer them, but
I pray you leave them, for I cannot promise you still to temper my self so,
but that I may forget you be a noble man. And at the next pushe thus:

I neither am knave, nor lie any more then you, take it as you list, Or thus:

My Lord, I know you are a noble man, you may peradventure ouermatche me with
your train, and yet I must scamble as well as I can too: These terms be very
vnsittynge, you must either forbear them, or give me leave to think too, Or
thus:

Your ^^ may bestow these liueries on those that live by you, and cannot live
without you: it you will not have me forget you, forget not your self, for I
am mutche afeard I shall respect the villainy you offer me above the dignity
of your estate: But if a great personage shall reprove one for any fault,
then mediation of freindes, and humble words, as thus:

I am sorry your Lo. should grow to these terms: I neither am such, nor
deserve to be so called of you: howbeit you be to great a state for me to
contend with, but if the proudest he in this land being mine equal, or not
so mutch my better should use me so, if I did not my best to teach him better
manner, you might well publish me for such as you call me: but I will bear
all these and be glad of your Lo. favor if I may get it, if not I must live
like a poor man and do as I may, Or thus:

My Lord, these be very ill terms to offer to a Gentleman: and I must tell,
you offer them to him y^ would not bear them at many men's hands, but I must
bear them at yours. For I confess you be able to ouermatche me: your train
is longer then mine: if I had thought you would have used me thus, your
Lordship should have pardoned me for coming to you at that time.

Now it is to be considered that words all this while as they break no
boanes (so from one mutche a man's better) they be no great disgraces: and a
man may be compted the wiser to forbear, where he knows he shall by power
and rowtes of men or kindred, be over matched. But if the best under a
Counselor should give a blow, a man shall be ashamed, if he do not his best to
reach him another, whatsoever come of it.

Now if between equals, reprochefull words do rise, it must be distinguished
thus:

If I give one occasion of offense that touches but his profit, and he give
me reprochefull names for it, as the Lie, or knave: I must for my credit sake,
not only requite those words with like words, but count the wrong mine: The
best way to this is to lend him a blow.
and either offer the first blow (if the place serve for it) or else challenge
him into the field: unless I can (for policy sake) drive him to challenge me
to save my self from the danger of the law. For fighting quarrels never are
made for profit, but for honor: and therefore whatsoever hurt be done, not
touching credit, the quarrel must be his that receives y^ first reprocheful
words: so touching the cause, the right consyderation is this: If I offer the
first reproach, disdain, or dispite, the quarrel is the others: his part it
is to challenge, and I need not to my equal to make the challenge. But if the
other give me the first lie, or like disgrace, it is not enough to say he
lies again: but I must needs offer a blow, or challenge the feeild.

If an inferior offer his better ill speech, though the better began with
him: yet he must not do with him as with his equal: that is, to tarry till
he make the challenge: but he must account himself asmutch disgraced, that
his inferior has replied upon him, as though his equal had begone with him:
And therefore, if the place serve, he must reward that reply with a rap on the
face with a dagger.

But if his inferior be no Gentleman, he may choose without any imputation of
cowardice, whether he will either challenge him, or receive any challenge at his
hands: but turn one of his men to him, except that inferior be so well
esteemed for his valiancie, as the Gentleman may be thought, if he have not
otherwise tried himself to make refusal for fear. In this case, so that he
make show by words, that he is contented to abase himself, to reform the
pride of a malaperte knave, a man were better to take the quarrel himself,
then to rest condemned of the company, specially if the rest of the company
be of reputacion. Thus mutche for the person and the cause, touching the place
and the manner thus:

Within the Queens house (being she court) no man for any cause must give or
require any blow, if they do they lose their hand.

In the house of mutch a man's better, he may not offer a blow: but if any be
offered him, he must needs (if he can) requite it: at the least show his
endeavor theretoo.

In the house of his freeinde, I mean in the But yet the villainy may be such
as he may strain good mann^^.
dinyng place at the bourde, or where any assembly is a man may not offer a
blow; but if he have cause given him, he shall do well to make show in
words that he forbeareth the present occasion, respecting y^ disturbance of
the company.

In a man's own house, or his Fathers, he must not offer a stranger a blow to
breed the quarrel on: but y^ in those places, it will be thought his courage is
grounded upon hope of his freeindes and servants help, more then upon any
value: And it wilbee no disgrace to the other to forbear him, but rather taken
for wisdom, where he may be ouermatched. Therefore the manner that is to be
observed in those places, when provocation of quarrel is given by others is to
be vttred in words thus:

This is no place to grow in terms in, if it were you would not be so brave,
Or thus:

These be too great villainies to be borne, if it were not in mine own house,
where thou know I am able to eat thee up, Or thus:

If it were not for troublyng this company I would be your caruer of a piece
of my dagger: but doubt not but I shall find a time for you. Or thus:

No moo words, this matter shall be eased anon you shall see, Or thus:

I thank you sir, nay take your pleasure, I But al chalenges of poyntinge
places must be made in the care for danger of law. He that vanteth what he
has done or ^h^^^^neth what he will do shall be judged a m^ of many words and
few deeds.
could rail too, but then I should be like such a rascal as thy self, tell
me this soon if thou see I forget it: but if I do take me for such a
cowardly boy as I will take thee for, till thou meet me in such a place, Or
thus:

Away rascal with thy villainous words, I hear by thy great boaste I shall
pass my journey quietly at such an hour, in such a place. I know I shall
have cause to report thee for a good quiet fellow: I, no more a do, you know
my mind.

If any man be challenged, if he dare to meet an other in any place, he may
(provided that the challenged have received no villainy) very well answer thus:

What I dare do shall be seen, when the quarrel is mine, I have no matter to
you: if you be angry seek you the redress as you may: I mean not to balke
the hie way, nor step a stride But these words must be uttered with such a
gallant, pleasant, and somewhat scornful grace, y^ it may appear he desires
nothing more then that y^ other should meet him.
out of my way for you: you may easily find me at your pleasure: howbeit I
protest I would be loathe to have to do with any man: marie, if I be
interrupted of my walk, I must do as well as I can to keep my footyng. Or
thus:

If I dare not, you must hold me excused, I promise you in deed I dare make
no such set matches, but my buizenesse lies such away; if any go about to
hinder me of my journey, he may hap find that he angreth me: for in deed I
love not to be let of my purpose, but I will not quarrel with a goose, Or
thus:

Alas, alas, dare; it were a sorry goaste that durst not encounter such a
guest: but it would grieve one to be driven to forsake his country for
^^n^kyng a ditche with ^^^che a carren.

But to conclude in this, I shall advise y^ young If hearing of frayes a man
seem destrous to enquire of y^ cause and the manner, he shall get experience
without bewraying his ignorance, for it will be thought to proceed of delight
to here, rather then of necessity to learn.
Gentleman to inform himself before he have need by (...) at their hands,
that the experienced in y^ trade, that when he has need he may not only be
provided of courrage, but also of words, phrase and manner to it curragiously:
and in the stoutest and seemliest manner for all that I have written hithertoo
of this matter, has been rather to show that in every thing there is a mean to
be used, in one sort to inferiors: and in another sort to superiors and
equals: to the end to provoke him to learn the right manner, then of a meaning
to show any skill of mine in the same, beelonging nothing to my profession:
and therefore* I will now say somethyng how he shall take the iestyngs, the
praysynges, and the thanks of his superiors and equals, as things that are
both fitter for me to write, and shall of him be oftener and sooner put in
practice.

First I will discriue some sundry manner of iestyng. One is, when a man will
charge his famillier freinde (a man's famillier may be either his equal or his
better, that list of courtesy to become his equal, or one somewhat his
inferior to whom he list by like courtesy to make his equal) with some ill
matter that all the company knows to be untrue. In that kind there is no
difficulty to answer: but it is good to have varitie of phrase, and not to
answer still after one manner: to his mere equal thus:

You do well to exercise your tongue in matters of no troth* you may hap else
to be taken for a lie teller. Or thus:

Go too, you will have every body see what a lavish tongued fellow you be;
that cannot so mutche as keep counsel of that he knows not, what would he
do think you of that he knows? Or thus:

Nay I dare say you would feign have it believed, for it greeueth him that any
man should be taken for honester man than himself, Or thus:

Go too, you were best leave your tatlyng, least I fall a tellyng of true
tales, Or thus:

Nay tell on, for I am sure all is gospel that comes out of those lips of
yours, Or thus:

This is nothing finely handled of you, you should have said sumthynge that had
carried some likelyhoode with it, Or thus:

Go too, I will make you no more of my council seeing you be such a blad,
Or thus:

Is this the trust you perform with your freeindes, to tell all and more too?
Or thus:

Houlde thy peace fool, for my honesty is so well known, as no body here
will believe thee.

Now in the like case to a man's better must be other phrases, as thus:

You say truth sir I have been taken for a sore fellow at that, when I was a
yongeman, Or thus:

If my credit were not very good, this were enough to disgrace me quite, Or
thus:

It may be true that you say, but I warrant you I handle y^ matter so
cunnyngly, that there is no proof to be had of it, Or thus:

It were great pity any body should doubt of that matter, Or thus:

Thus a man's credit is put in danger by you if the hearers be not ye more
favorable, Or thus:

This is because my face is toward you: if I would turn my back I know ye
would tell a better tale for me, Or thus:

Some measure other men's trades by their own, but I would be loathe any body
should think I mean so by you.

An other kind of jesting with a man's friend is, when they charge him to
have said or done something of a third person, that only himself and his
freinde knows to be feigned: but yet it may be told with such a
resemblance of truth, as ye hearers may doubt whether it be true or no. In
this case also it is not good to make denial: but to use some such phrase or
countenance as she hearers may perceive he makes so little accounte of it, as
it needs no escuse or denial, as thus:

You have lost mutch good labor now, if you be not believed, Or thus:

You may sell this good cheap, seeing it is of your own making, Or thus:

I like you well, for I see you love to make the best of any thing, ever, when
you wot not how to make the woorst, Or thus:

I pray you believe him in this, and you shall see he will take such a pride
in it, that he will quoyne you new staff every day. Or to a man's better:
Uery well, you may say that and more too, if it please you, Or thus:

You must look with a sadder countenance when you wilbee believed.

An other kind is when they will touch one with somethyng which is true: and
though it be no great infamy, yet it may be somewhat that a man would be
loathe to confess, and yet as loathe to be taken for a denier of that which
is known to be true. In this case a man may answer thus:

You do but dream peradventure, when you wake you shall find it otherwise,
Or thus:

Lo, now you have heard say so: and being of a good faith, you beeleeued it
straight, Or thus:

Nay no doubt but it must needs be true, if you say it, Or thus:

Did I? you speak your pleasure, a good tale in deed if it were long inongh.
Or to your better thus:

This is but some malicious tongue, that has These and like speches with
altrynge only ye sou^de and countenance may serve in sport, or between sport
and ernest, if a man like not to be iested with.
sounded this in your ears, I am sure you do not beeleeue it, Or thus:

Nay you may say what pleases you, for I will do so mutch as confess it,
rather then you should not be beeleeued, Or thus:

I perceive you mind to make me beeholding to you for giving me so good
report, Or thus:

I know sir your good word is ever at hand for your freindes, and I perceive
by this that I am one of them, Or thus:

I am bound to you always, I trust to be able one way or other to make you
amends, Or thus:

No I warrant you, there shall no man be able to catch me in such a fault.
Or thus:

Well this you would do if a man's marriage lay on it, Or thus:

Well, when I lack one to speak well for me, I know where to find him at a
need. Or thus:

If you look so sadly, you will make them beeleue you in deed.

An other kind of iestinge is, when one praises another for well handlynge of
any matter, either in saying or dooynge, that in deed has not been well, or
not so well or wisely as it might have been: whereby the other knows he
speaks by contraries, this is to be answered diversely, as thus:

Now if another time you lack one to do such a thing finely, it is but
sending for me, and you shall be sped, Or thus:

It is a sign you have a good insight with you, for I may tell to you, and yet
I would be loathe to vaunt too: it was very excellently done in deed, Or thus:

Well, ye see I love not to brag, but when I do a thing very wisely, I
love such freeindes as will tell me of it, Or thus:

O nay, but if you had had the handlyng of it it would have been exquisitiuely
done. Or to a man's better thus:

Well, if a man chance to show all the wit he has in doing of a thing, were
it reason there should be any more required? Or thus:

I may tell to you, I did it withal the provision of wit I had at that tune in
store, Or thus:

Nay, I trust I shall never surfeit with dooyng too wisely, Or thus:

I love not to dissemble with my freeindes, I mean to show them all my wit at
once.

To conclude, in any thing yt may seem to carry some defect in the doing, if
the doer can himself either with wit turn it to some merry conceit, or else
help merely to mock him, himself for company: it will appear either no
defect, or else to dee committed rather by carelessness, then for want of wit.

Another kind of iestyng is to praise a man to his face of things that be
true in deed: as for his personage, his wit, his qualities, his good nature,
or his learning: and whether this he spoken in sport, or in earnest, it is
all one: for a man must ever take upon him as though all praises were spoken in
jest: by which means he may in sport arrogate them all to himself, with less
glory, then it with taking it in earnest he should endeavor to put them from
him. So as all such praises may be answered thus with a smiling grace.

Go too, you think now that I will do as mutche for you: and so I would if I
thought you as worthy of it as I: but you must bate me an ace of that, Or
thus:

In deed I must confess it is so: and you that want some of these rare gifts,
which I am endowed with must be contented too, Or thus:

You say true, there be many proper fellows of the name of us, if ye knew
them, Or thus: These things be but trifles with me, in comparison of that I
could do if I list, Or thus:

You need say no more, for I warrant you, I beeleeue all this to be true, and
mutche more. Or to a man's better thus:

I thank you for saying so, for I hope some body here will believe it, Or
thus:

Take heed sir, yt you make not me to beeleeue you herein, better then you
beeleeue your self: for I tell you, it will be hard to make me think the
contrary, Or thus:

Beware what you say, for it lies in you to bring me in as great an error
as this coms too, Or thus:

I know you will say nothing, but that you be sure is true: and therefore, I
mean both to beeleeue it my self, and also to persuade the audience to be
of a right faith.

How a man shall answer to the praise and thanks, and courtesies seriously
offered by his betters or equals. The third Chapter.
THe praise that any man shall give his freeindes to his face, proceedynge of
his own judgment, in earnest and freeindly wise, as one freeinde may in some
order (in vtteryng either his own affection, or to encourage the other without
touch of flatrerie) do to an other: it may be answered to his equal freeind,
Any praises or thanks require rather somewhat a smylyng grace then too solemn,
though it be to a man's better
dooyng it of good faith, in part as I have prescribed before toward his
better, in dooynge the like in mirthe. Or thus:

I may not take your praise for any thing, for the goodwill you bear me
blindes you. Or thus:

I pray you look better into me, and when you find how mutche you be
deceived, tell me of it, that I may amend it, Or thus:

If another should tell me so mutche, I should think he mockes me: but you
may mock me indeed, and pass unespied, for the goodwill I think you bear
me.

To a staunger, that shall praise him, or seem to conceive a good opinion of
him thus:

It were best (I think) never to be better acquainted with you, least I make
you of another opinion, Or thus:

I thank you for your good opinion, I would I could beguile every body so
conningly as to make them of the same mind. And to a man's better thus:

How mutche so ever I shall want in this, my readiness to be at your
commandment shall supply it, Or thus:

The good opinion, which rather my good hap, then my deserts has wrought in
you, causes you (I think) to beeleeue that to be in me, which you wish to
be in me. Or thus:

I account my hap good, that it pleases you, but to say thus mutche: for at
the least, I shall be ashamed of as mutche as I find wantynge hereof in my
self, Or thus:

I cannot but take this as a freindly curtesy, by policy to encourage me to
seek the attainment of that which I am borne in hand to have already. These
and like answers may be applied also to such as shall bring to his ears the
good reports of his freeindes given out of him behind his back (as they
term it.) Provided that he pike them out according to the distinction of
persons before described: and withal, as it is to be considered that all
things spoken in a show of mirth, though it seem to the hearer somewhat
sharp (and peradventure anger him) is yet to be dissembled and answered
merely. So whenever a man in any thing yt he may attribute truly to himself
is praised to his face, though it be spoken earnestly and of good meaning: In all other entertainements spoken seriously, a gladsome look is a better grace
then a flattering s^^le.
he ought also, in his foresaid manner of answers: to show such a smiling
grace, as it may appear he takes it as spoken rather of their courtesy, then
for any cause he finds in himself why they should so say: in speech (for
the most part) the countenance, the grace, and sound in the pronunciation is
able with one self sentence, without altringe word or syllable, to please or
displease others, to show himself wise, or make him for so mutche to seem
foolish.

SOLOMON affirms, that there is nothing that more tries the wit of man, then
the hearing of his own praise: for says he, the wise man is put too his
trial, when he is praised to his face. And therefore for this matter I
conclude, that for as mutche as many times it is hard to find who speaks of
flattery contrary to his thought: who by way of mockery, though he know he
say true, to try him, and who of good zeal to show affection, and to
encourage him: The surest way in this doubt is (except to those whose
freeindship by other means he has experience of) to use his answers so, as
he may make them earnest or sport at his pleasure, as he perceives their
asseueracion to provoke him.

How a man shall acquit himself toward noble persons, that shall either for
his freeindes sake, or his own, offer him courtesies: or assure him
offreeindship, willinge him in all chances to be bold with him. The. iiii.
Chapter.
IN this case as in all other of intertaimnents; the inferior must ^^^e in
what manner, whether seriously or familliarly, such courtesy or intertaynment
be offered him* and thereafter* to ch^^e out and shape out answers* agreeable
to each kind* for the first, if he be a stranger to him: but not to his
friends thus:

I know such, or such of my freeindes so mutche be holding to you too, as
has bin sufficient to bind me to honor and love you: and seeing it pleases
you to extend your courtesy also toward me, I can but wish my service, as
sufficient as my good will is: to assure you too, of my thankful mind, Or
thus:

My Lord, I can but acknowledge y^ debte for my self, which before I thought
to owe for others of my freeindes, that have tasted of your courtesy: but I am
glad that I may by this means show it, which your Lordship shall find me
ready to do, wherein soever I shall think my service may be acceptable, Or
thus:

As this your Lordships goodness rises of your courtesy without any deserts,
so must I confess my self ever unable to counterpeyse it: I can but
acknowledge my self too mutch bound to you for it: and double bound, if it
shall please you to command me to the uttermost of my power, Or thus:

I humbly thank your L. I can but requite it with my service, and that I
beeseeche you command, Or thus:

My humble thanks are but an unequal recompense, and therefore I shall desire
your L. to put my grateful mind in trial, by commaundynge my service, Or
shortly, thus:

If my service may any way be ought worth, if I may but understand it, it
shall not need to be commanded, Or thus:

I humbly thank^ your L. and I beeseeche you command me, as your servant, Or
thus:

I humbly thank your L. and I beseech you think that you vontchsafe this
courtesy on him that will be as ready to requite it with the uttermost of his
service, as he that is better stored of words. The use of long or short
sentences must be employed according as he sees the hearer at leisure.

How when the foresaid speeches be offered by a noble person plesantly, that
is of acquaintance which must be also pleasantly answered. The. v. Chapter.
MY Lord, you know I have no store of eloquence: but what mayme so ever you
find in my utterance, I can assure, you shall find none in my good will,
whenever I may do you any service, Or thus:

I humbly thank your L. I warrant you I make so sure recknynge thereof, as I
am more like to be boulde of your courtesy, then to request it: but I must pray
your Lordeship to think that shall be rather for want of power then of good
will, Or thus:

Your Lordeship must be content with my humble thanks for this time^ but I
would be very sorry to think your L. made not account of me, as of him whom
you may most command Or thus:

My Lord I have had to good experience of your former courtesies, both toward
me and other my freeindes, as I had need with my service to go about to
recompense some part of that, before I come in debt for any more: But the
less we can requite, the more we must stand bound.

How to an equal, or but little better being a freeind and familliar. The. vi.
Chapter.
TO our freeinde thus:

I am in your debt for so mutche already as if you lend me any more, you will
make me bankroute: and agree with you for the tenthe part, Or thus:

You offer me so mutche, and I can requite so little: as I see, you mean to
make me an ill debtor still, Or thus:

You know I have no curious words in stoare, but in plain terms, I thank
you, and will requite it if I can. Or seriously thus:

I pray you think, that though I use not many words with you, I think my
self so mutche beeholdynge to your ^^ wherein I may pleasure you, if you
command me not, I shall think, you love me not. Or to a stranger thus:

Sir I thank you of this courtesy, if it shall lie in me to requite it, I
pray you be as boulde with me, Or thus:

Sir I must be your debtor for this courtesy, till time and place serve to
requite it: but in the mean time I thank you, I pray you make the like
account of me.

How a man shall take thanks of a noble person. The. vii. Chapter.
IF thanks be offered in serious manner and for any weighty matter thus:

My Lord, it was my goodwill, as well as my duty, to have done it to your
best contentacion: but if there be any defect in it, I pray your Lordship,
impute it to mine unskillfulness. Or thus:

My Lord it is no reason that you thank him, whom you ought to command: and
specially me, that am unable to satisfy for the tenthe part of that dewtie
or goodwill I owe you: but if therebee ought done to your contentacion, or that
have pleased you, I am very well a paid and sufficiently thanked, Or if merely
thus:

I pray you keep your thanks for a thing more worthy them: for if your
Lordship beestow so many thanks for so small matters, you will make me look
for too many when I shall do you any better service.

To a man's equal freeinde, or but little his better thus:

Nay sir, you will mar me, if you give me too many thanks: for then you
will bring me more in debt for my thanks, that I am yours for this matter by
a great deal, Or thus:

Do freeindes use this curiosity in giuynge thanks, I am sure it is but to
teach me good manners against an other time, Or thus:

I pray you keep thanks for strangers, and let me know whether it were to
your likyng or not, Or thus:

You be at too mutche cost for so small a matter: I know now where to have
thanks another time when I deserve them.

How a man may give thanks to his betters and equals. The. viii. Chapter.
IF my humble thanks were a sufficient recompense to your Lordeship, I should
not rest so mutche in your debt as now I am bound to do, for such a
courtesy. etc. Or thus:

My Lord, I have humble thanks to render, for such a matter which did me
great pleasure: but they be so unequal a requital, as I were best to ad this
to the rest of your courtesies or goodness, and stand bound for the whole Or
thus:

I am so mutche bound to your Lordship, for such a thing, etc. As I must
think all the service I can do too little woorthe in respect of your
goodness showed therein.

To a man's freeinde thus:

I am too mutche in your debte, to give you thanks for such a thing. etc.
For till I can make some show in deeds, I will come upon the score with you in
words, Or thus:

Though thanks be not enough for this pleasure that you have done me: yet I
pray you allow of them till I be able to make better payment.

What manners be requisite at the Table, and what to be shunned: for, what is
to be considered in the washyng before Dinner, and in the sitting down, is
set forth in the beeginnyng of this Direction. The. ix. Chapter.
FIrst, to pawse when a man is set, and with leisure to unfold his Napkin,
wipe his knife, cut his bread, and there to stay till either his better
beegin, or make countenance to him to eat where he list: and then to This
ceremony is not to be used, but when a man sits at the upper mess with his
b^tters, or at ye second, when either the master of y^ house sits there, or
some ^^ble person.
beegin, not at the dish that shall stand right before his better, except it
be offered him: neither of the daintiest meats which (lightly) stand
lowest: but to choose some such dish to be dooyng on the while, till he see
whether his better will choose or refuse some other dish, that he had rather
eat on.

Item to have an eye to such as sit next beeneath him and cannot reach, and
peradventure for good manner (if they be any thing his inferiors) will not
speak: and if they eat not, to ask whether he shall be their Caruer. But I
would not have him to be any man's Caruer without askyng him first, except it
be to one so mutche his inferior, as he knows will be glad of the curtesy
he shows him, though he like not the meat. For as to Carue to a man's
better is a presumption, so to ones equal, except by asking first the
question, you know it wilbee welcome to him, wilbee taken for too mutche
fawnyng, except also that for the daintiness of the meat, or fine chusynge of
the best morsel, he offreth it to his very famillier friend, by way of a
courteous affection: for a man must for a general rule, take heed that in a
strange place he be not too busy in offryng service, or courtesies, though it
be to his betters: but in a man's own house or his Fathers, it cannot lightly
be too mutche.

Item if a man be in his own house, or his Fathers, where it beecometh him to
give countenance or entertainment, he may to his equal, and such as be
somewhat his inferiors, he may the oftener profer them this or that meat, and
drink to them, but not too mutche. For if a man every time he drinks, shall
drink to I^'s counted a foolish grace ever to drink to somebody, and
specially at the first draught
one or other, it wilbee seen, as though he did it for lack of countenance:
so that to use the salutacion of the Cup above twice in one meal, wilbee too
mutche, except the whole company fall to quaffynge. For wise men do rather
seek to satisfy their guests with some good speches, then with such dum
signs.

This kind of Cup greetyng ought not to be used but in one of these two
respects: either to make our inferior (to whom we mean not to use speech of
familliaritie) to think we will do them a courtesy: or else to our very
freeinde by way of congratulation. And therefore a man must never drink to his
better, except he be sure that by way of freeindship and familliaritie he
be content to beecome his equal, and that not with a solemn or sad
countenance, but with some smilyng grace, that the rest may know it proceeds
of familliaritie, and not of presumption: yet with reverent words and change
of phrase, as thus:

My Lord, if some young Nobleman:

Sir, or Madam, will it please you to give me leave. Or thus:

Shall I be so boulde as salute you with this Cup of Wine. Or thus:

By your leave sir, against it next please you. Or thus:

Will you give me leave to remember such a one? as some freeinde of his. Or
thus:

To pluck you out of your studies. Or thus:

Saving your tale sir.

Item, that above all things in a strange place, or in the presence of
strangers, he attend not so greedely, nor so continually to his feeding: but
that in modest wise, without either gazing too long in another man's face: or
yet hangyng his head continually on his trencher: he has both his eye and his
ear so ready, that nothing is said or done at the bourde, but he may
perceive it, for his learning, that good is to follow, that ill is to eschew.
And when he sees any thing uncomely, to examine himself, whether he have
not the same grace himself: and also to do the like, whenever he hears
any man dispraysed. For most men know what is comely or uncomely in another:
But many for lack of due observation in themselves, mock or disprayse in
another, the same which others mock in them: and the rather for their so
dooynge.

Item, that he pawfe between meat and meat and never to carue himself,
either of meat or bread, while his mouth is full: nor till he have swallowed
the last morsel.

Item, that he fill not his mouth so full of meat as he cannot hold his
lips together while he is chawyng: for otherwise, men shall look into his
mouth, and see the meat roll up and down while he is eating: which is a
foul sight, and loathesome: and for that cause a man must forbear to speak
with meat in his mouth, except he have so little as he be sure to hide it in
his mouth while he is speaking.

Item, while his better tells him any tale, to cease eating: ^o the while
he hears, and while he answers him.

Item, if he he provoked to laughe in the presence of his betters, to do the
same with as little noise as may be; and likewise in the company of
strangers,, for too loud a laughter, specially, for slender occasions, do
make wisemen counted foolish of such as know them not.

Item, when a man will tell a merry tale, let him tell it so as himself be not
the first that shall laughe at it. A smilyng sound to make men know he
speaks but in sport, is good: but a feigned laughter is ill beecommynge. A
hearty laughter (so the matter be worth it) is allowable.

Item he must beeware that while another tell a tale, or make iestures: that
his wits be not carried away, so as he gaze continually in his face, and make
the same countenances which he sees the other do: for that will make a man
counted doultishe.

Item if he be constrained to yawne, reach, belche, cough, sneese, cleanse the
nose, or spit either at the bourde, or in the presence of his betters or
strangers: he must suppress the sound, and shadow y^ sight, as mutche as he
may conveniently without making it to nice.

Item in caruyng himself or others, he must not embrew too many of his
fingers, nor his thombe: nor wallow his meat up and down too mutche in the
sauce, because in so dooynge a man shall wash his fingers in the sauce, which
others will loathe, specially strangers.

Now to conclude, though a man either at home or among his freeindes, may use
what manner he list, without observing all these ceremonies: yet it shall be
very good so ^ what to enure himself by daily custom* otherwise he shall in
presence forgette both them and himself.

How a man shall pacify his freeind, his better, or his equal: if he have
given him unwillingly any cause of offense. The. x. Chapter.
IF ^or a light cause, then merely thus:

I am sure you take it not in earnest, or think I meant otherwise then in the
best part: for if you do, you shall do me great wrong, Or thus:

By my truth I did, or said it to no such end, as you take it: and
therefore I pray you think of it, as I meant it. Or thus:

If I had thought it could have bin so mutch mistaken, I would have bin more
wary: but let it suffice you that I meant but well and freeindly, for otherwise
I did it not I assure you: Or earnestly for some greater matter, then thus:

My hap is ill, that of so good a meaning, should fall out so ill conceiuyng,
or so ill success: for that I did or said, was as I would have dooue to my
very freeinde, or would have had done to my self, it rests in your choice to
beeleue me: but if you do not, you shall wrong your, self as well as me,
in mistrustynge me without a cause, Or thus:

I can but tell you and assure you on my faith, I meant thus, Or thus:

If I have given you any cause to think otherwise, or if it have fallen out
contrary to mine expectation: I am not only soarie for it, but I will be
ready to make any recompense I can, Or to ones better thus:

Truly sir, it was not my intent to do herein any thing that might offend:
but I will yield, that it is fault enough that I used no more circumspection,
but that you may conceive ill of it: you need not to give me any penance, for
that my repentance is so mutche, Or thus:

If you knew my mind, you would put me in trust for reuengynge this fault:
for I shall be angry with my self this good while for it.

How a man shall shift of reproaches or tauntes offered beetweene sport and
earnest, by envious and scornful persons that will seem to do it so
cunningly as the other shall have the taunt, and yet at his own pleasure will
deny it. The. xi. Chapter.
THe best way is, if he can touch the same party as near, without seemyng
to be angry: but if he know nothing perticulerly to charge him or to mock
him withal, then to scorn ^^n beetweene sport and anger again, as thus:

Oh finely handled, were you borne so. Or thus:

Jesus who would have thought you could have thrown so hard to hit your
self, Or thus:

I dare say, you ween you have spoken very trimly now. Or thus:

You have made a great speak sir, Or thus:

That is quoth you, Or thus:

I thank you of your cost, Or thus:

It is but your good nature to take or expound it so. Or thus:

As I remember I desired you not to say that for me: but yet you shall find
me too kind hearted to die in your debt. Or thus:

Did any body teach you to say so, or coms it of your mother wit.

Now if they shall reply, and go about to make it seem they mean simply,
then thus:

I dare say you do, and therefore I thank you as heartily. Or thus:

Why I trust you think not that I doubt of that, Or thus:

Why I take it so, and therefore I commend you for it: and so turn it to
mirthe again, if the other will needs have it so. But if the other will
prosecute it with sharp tauntes, under* a ^leeryng or laughyng countenance,
then thus:

Nay I am not skilled in iesters art, tell me your mind in earnest, and you
shall find me ready to make you such sport as I d^^^. Or thus:

I will tell you, if you will needs beecome a Jester to make Gentlemen sport:
It were best to call some other to help countenance you, that is of your
faculty, for in faith I am nothing apt for you at this time.

FINIS.

