A TREATISE OF THE LORDS Supper, in two Sermons.

Imprinted at London by R. Field for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster row,
at the sign of the Talbot. 1591.

To the Reader.
IN the first sermon the adversary is confuted.

In the second sermon the Communicants are prepared.

In both are many observations, and the words of the text expounded.

Now labor for thy self as I have labored, for thee, I would have thee profit
somewhat more by this book; because it has weakened me more then all the
rest. Farewell.

A Treatise of the Lords Supper; in two Sermons.
The first Sermon.
1. Cor. 11. 23. 24. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took
bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my
body, which is broken for you: this days in remembrance of me.


THE Word and the Sacraments are the two breasts wherewith our mother does
nurse us. The two breasts of the Church.
Seeing every one receives, and few understand what they receive; I thought
it the necessariest doctrine to preach of the Sacrament; which is a witness of
Gods promises, a remembrance of Christ's death, and a seal of our adoption:
therefore Christ has not instituted this Sacrament for a fashion in his Church
to touch, and feel, and see, as we gaze upon pictures in the windows; but as
the woman which had the bloody issue, Matthew. 9. 20.
touching the hemme of Christ's garment, drew virtue from Christ himself
because she believed: So Christ would that we touching these signs, should
draw virtue from himself, that is, all the graces which these signs represent.
2. Chro. 35. 6.
Therefore as the Leuits under the Law, were bound to prepare their brethren
before they came to the Passover; so preachers of the Gospel should prepare
their brethren before they come to the Supper of the Lord. For which purpose I
have chosen this place to the Corinthians, which is the clearest and fullest
declaration of this Sacrament in all the scripture.

The Lord Jesus in the night, etc:

The sum of all these words is, The division
the institution, and use of the Lords Supper. First Paul shows the author of
it, The Lord Jesus; then the time when it was instituted, in the night that he
was betrayed; then the manner how he did institute it, he took bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto his Disciples, etc. then the
end why he did institute it, for a remembrance of his death.

Touching the author, The Author.
he which is signified by it, was the author of it. The Lord Jesus has bid us
to supper, John. 1. 27.
I am not worthy (says John) to loose his shoe; so we are not worthy to wait
at his trencher, and yet he will have us sit at his table. To him belongs the
power to ordain Sacraments in his Church, None but Christ may ordain
Sacraments.
because he fulfilled the Sacraments of the Law. When Christ came the Passover
ceased, because he is our Passover, that is, John. 1. 29.
the Lamb by whose blood we are saved. When Christ came, Circumcision ceased,
because he is our Circumcision, that is, the purifier and clenser of our
sins. Revel. 7. 14.
Now these two sacraments are fulfilled, he has appointed two other Sacraments
for them: in steed of the paschall Lamb, which the Jews did eat, John. 1. 29.
he has given us another Lamb to eat, which John calls the Lamb of God,
that is himself, upon whom all do feed, whosoever do receive this Sacrament
with an assured faith that Christ died to possess them of life. The breaking
of the bread, does signify the wounding of his body: the pouring of the wine
does signify the shedding of his blood. The eating of the bread, and drinking
of the wine, does signify that his flesh and blood do nourish in us life
eternal, as the bread and wine do nourish the life present.

In steed of Circumcision, Genesis 17. 10.
which began at Abraham, he has ordained Baptism, Who was therefore called
John the Baptist.
which began at John, a more lively representation of the true circumcision of
the heart, because it represents unto us the blood of Christ which washes our
souls, Matthew. 3. 1.
as the water in Baptism washes our bodies. Revel. 1. 5.
Revel. 22. 14.


Touching the time: Time.
In the night (says Paul) therefore this Sacrament is called The Lords Supper,
Verse. 23.
because it was instituted at night when they used to sup. But what night? even
that night (says Paul) when he was betrayed: that night which he should have
cursed, Job. 3. 3.
as Job did the day of his birth, if he had suffered against his will: that
night when he should have thought to destroy men, as men conspired to destroy
him, that night (says Paul) this Sacrament of grace, and peace, and life
began. Even that night when we betrayed him. Many nights did he spend in
watching, and praying for us; and is there a night now for us to kill and
betray him? That was a dark night, when men went about to put out the son
which brought them light. Who can but wonder, to see how Christ, and they for
whom Christ came, were occupied at one time? when they devised mischief against
him, and sought all means to destroy him, then he consulted how to save them,
and instituted the same night this blessed Sacrament, to convey all his graces
and blessings unto them, Even that night when they betrayed him.

The reason why this actio^ was deferred until night, Why this sacrament was
instituted at night.
is, because that was the time appointed by the Law to eat the Passover,
which was like a predecessor of this Sacrament. Why it was deferred till his
last night
The reason why he deferred until his last night, was, because the Passover
could not be ended, before the fullness of time, and the true Paschal Lamb
were come to be slain in stead of the other. Therefore how fitly did Christ
end the Passover, which was a sign of his suffering, so presently before his
suffering? And beside, how sweetly did he confirm his disciples faith, when as
they should see that the next day performed before their eyes, which ouernight
both in the Passover, and in the Sacrament was so lively resembled unto them?
If any from this do gather, Why we receive not the Lords supper at night.
that we ought to eat the Lords supper at night as Christ did, he must
understand that we have not the same cause to do so which Christ had, because
of the Passover. And therefore the Church which has discretion of times and
places, has altered both the time and the place, using the temples in stead of
the chamber, and the morning in stead of the evening: for indifferent things
are ruled by order and decency.

Touching the manner, Verse. 23. 24.
He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it unto
them. He would not eat it, nor break it, before he had given thanks to God.
What need he which was God, give thanks to God, but to show us what we should
do, when we eat our selves? 1. These. 5. 18.
In all things give thanks (says Paul) whereby we declare, that all things
come from God: Note.
but the wicked believe easier that God does take, than that he does give, and
therefore they never pray heartily unto him for any thing, nor feelinglie
thank him for it. For which the Lord complains, saying: I have loved you,
Mala. 1. 2.
yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us? Showing, that we are worse than the
Ox, Esaias. 1. 3.
which knows his feeder. And if we acknowledge all things from God, Gene. 19.
20.
yet we do like Lot, Is it not a little one (says he) when he craved to go
unto Zoar, as though it were not much which he asked: so we mince and extenuate
the gifts of God, before we receive them and after; like them which have a
grace for dinner, and none for breakfast, as though they had their dinners from
God, and breakfastes of their own. Our example did not so: Although it was but
bread which he received, yet he was more tha^kfull for bread, than many which
bury the fowls, and fishes, and beasts, in their belly: for if a count of all
were kept, for one that prays, Luke. 11. 3.
Give us this day our daily bread, a hundred take their bread, and meat, and
sleep to, which never pray for it.

After he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, and said, Take,
eat: for when he had given thanks to God, then it was sanctified, and
blessed, Note.
and lawful to eat. So when thou seruest God, then it is lawful for thee to
use Gods blessings, then thou may eat and drink as Christ did, but not
before, for these things were created to serve them which serve God; if thou
do not serve him for them, thou encrochest upon Gods blessings, and stealest
his creatures, which are no more thine, than thou art his, for the good God
created all things for good men, as the devils possessions are reserved for
evil men.

Therefore as Christ would not break the bread, before he had given thanks to
the founder; so know, that there is some thing to be done before thou receive
any benefit of God, and presume not to use his creatures with more liberty
than his Son did, which did not eat without giving thanks, nor rise again
without singing of a Psalm. Mat. 26. 30.


It follows, This is my body. Here is the fruit of his thanks before, he
prayed that the bread and wine might be blessed, Gene. 27.
and they were blessed. As Isaaks blessing showed it self upon Iaakob who^ he
blessed; so Christ's blessing appeared straight upon these mysteries: for it
could not be said before, This is my body, because it was mere bread; but now
it may be called his body, because his blessing has infused that virtue into
it, that it does not only represent his body, but convey his body, and
himself unto us. The efficacy of this blessing is in this Sacrament ever
since, sanctifying it unto us as well as it did to the Apostles, Luke. 22. 32.
even as Christ's prayer stayed Peter's faith after Christ was dead.

Now ye have heard the meaning of these words, He took bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave it: you shall see with what a mystical resemblance they
unite Christ and us. First, as Christ in the Supper took bread to feed us:
Heb. 2. 16.
so in his birth he took our flesh to save us. Secondly as Christ when he had
taken the bread, blessed the bread to make it a spiritual food: So Christ,
when he had taken our flesh, powered forth most rich and precious graces into
it, to make it food of life unto us. John. 17. 19.
Thirdly, as Christ when he had blessed the bread, brake the bread: so Christ
when he had filled his body with most precious graces, brake it up like a rich
treasure house, his hands by the nails, his back by the stripes, his head by
the thorns, 1. Pet. 2. 24.
his side by the spear; that out of every hole a river of grace and goodness
might issue and flow forth unto us. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Lastly, as Christ gave the bread when he had broken it: so Christ by a lively
faith co^municateth his body after he has crucified it. Hereby we are taught,
that when we see the Minister take the bread to feed us, we must conceive that
Christ being God from everlasting took our flesh to save us. When we see the
Minister bless the bread to a holy use, we must conceive that Christ by
uniting the Godhead unto it, sanctified his flesh for the work of our
redemption. When we see the Minister break the bread to sustain our bodies:
we must conceive that Christ in his death brake his body to refresh our souls.
When we see the Minister give the bread to our hands, we must conceive that
Christ as truly offers himself to our faith to be received of us.

Because upon these words the Papists ground their Transubstantiation, that
is, that the bread is changed into Christ's flesh, and the wine is turned into
Christ's blood, whereby we eat the same body which died upon the cross, and
drink the same blood which issued out of his side; that you may see the
blindness of this popish dream, I would have you but mark every word of this
Scripture how they make against Tra^substantiation, that you may see them
slain like Goliath with their own sword. 1. Sam. 17. 51.
Eue^ as god made Caiphas speak against himself; John. 18. 14.
so the Scriptures which heretics allege, do make against the^ selves, 1.
King. 18. 28.
like the Baalites which wounded their own flesh. Heretics allege scripture
like the devil.
I may liken their allegations to Satan's, when he tempted Christ in the
Wilderness, he alleged but one sentence of Scripture for himself, Matthew. 4.
4.
and that Psalm out of which he borrowed it, Psalm. 91. 11.
makes so plain against him, that he was feign to pick here a word, and there
a word, and leave out that which went before, and skip in the midst and omit
that which came after, or else he had marred his cause. The Scripture is so
holy and pure, and true, that no word, nor fillable thereof ca^ make for the
devil, or for sinners, or for heretics: yet as the devil alleged.
Scripture, though it made not for him, but against him; so do the libertines,
and Epicures, and heretics, as though they had learned at his school. Now
there is no sentence of the Scripture, which the wiser Papists allege boldly
for their Transubstantiation, but this, that Christ said, This is my body,
Matthew. 26. 26.
by which they may prove as well that Christ is a door, because he says,
John. 10. 7. 9.
I am the door: or a vine, because he says, John. 15. 1.
I am a Vine; for his sayings are like. Figurative speeches must not be
co^s^^ued literally, but this is heretics fashion. If you mark, you shall
see throughout, that all the testimonies which the Papists allege for their
heresies, Note.
are either tropes, or figures, or all gories, or parables, or allusions, or
dark speeches; which when they presume to expound allegoricallie, or
litterallie, without conference of other Scriptures, then they wander, and
stray from the mark, or else it is impossible that the truth should maintain
error, that is, that the Scripture should speak for heresy, if it were not
perverted: therefore we see that Eve never erred, Gene. 3. 3.
until she corrupted the text.

Now we will enter the lists with our adversaries, and see whether these words
do prove that the bread and wine are turned into Christ's body. Arguments
against Popish Tra^substantiation.
Paul says, Jesus took bread well the^, yet it is bread: when he had taken
it, then he blessed it; This is my body: what did he call his body? the bread
which they did eat; well then, yet it is bread. If it be bread all this while,
when he did take it, and bless it, and break it, and give it, and they did
eat it, when is it turned into his body? Matthew. 22. 34
here they stand like the Sadduces, as mute as fishes.

Now that ye may see that not we only say it is bread and wine after the
consecration; in the 27. Verse Christ himself does call it bread and wine
after he had given it, as he did before. And in Mark he says, Mar. 14. 25.
I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine. Here Christ says, that it
was the fruit of Vine which he drank, but his blood is not the fruit of
Vines, but Wine; therefore wine was his drink, and not blood.

Beside, if you would hear Paul expound 1. Cor. 10. 4.
for he says, They all did eat the same spiritual meat, and all drink the
same spiritual drink. Verse. 3. 4
Straight he says, that this meat and this drink was Christ. Verse. 4.
Mark that he says not only, They did eat the same meat that we eat, but
he says, that this meat was Christ: and not only so, but to show that Christ
is not a corporal meat, as the Papists say: he says, he is a spiritual
meat, as we say; therefore you see that we do not eat him corporally, no more
than our Fathers, but that as they did eat him spiritually, so do we; for
spiritual meat must be eaten spiritually, as corporal meat is eaten
corporally.

Paradise there was a very Tree for the sign, Gene. 2. 9.
and Christ the thing signified by it. Gen^. 17. 11.
In Circumcision there was a cutting off of the skin, and the cutting off of
sin. In the Passe-ouer there was a Lamb, Exodus 12. 3.
and Christ. In the Saboth there was a day of rest, Exodus 23. 11.
and eternal rest. In the Sacrifices there was an offering of some beast, Heb.
9. 13.
and the offering of Christ. In the Sanctuary there was the holy place, Exodus
30.
and heaven. Exodus 25. 24.
In the Propitiatory there was the golden covering* and Christ our cover. In
the Wilderness there was a Rock yielding water, Exodus 17. 16.
and Christ yielding his blood. Mat. 3. 16.
In the Apparition there was a a Dove, John. 6. 49.
and the holy Ghost. In the Manna there was Bread, and Christ. In Baptism
there is very water which washes us, John. 1. 33.
and Christ's blood washing us; so in the Supper of Christ there is very Bread
and Wine for the sign, 1. Cor. 11. 19.
and the body and blood of Christ for the thing signified, or else this
Sacrament is against the nature of all other Sacraments.

Again, there must be a proportion between the Pass over and the Lords
Supper, because this was figured by the other. Exodus 12.
Now, the Jews had in their Passover, Bread, and Wine, and a Lamb; so Christ
instituting his Supper, Mat. 16. 26.
left bread and wine, and a Lamb, which name is given to himself, John. 1. 29.
because he came like ^ Lamb, and died like a Lamb.

Again, if Christ's very body were a Sacrament, but a Sacrifice; which two
differ as much as giving, and taking: for in a Sacrifice we give, and in a
Sacrament we receive, and therefore we say our Sacrifice, and Christ's
Sacrament.

Exodus 27.
Now mark the wisdom of the holy Ghost, least we should take this for a
Sacrifice, he never names Altar when he speaks of it, but, The Table of the
Lord. Therefore it is no doubt but the devil has kept the name of Altar, that
we might think it a Sacrifice.





this whitenes, and hardness, and roundnesse, and coldness? None of them say
that it is the whiteness, and hardness, and roundnesse, and coldness of
Christ's body: therefore it must needs be the whiteness, and hardness, and
roundnesse, and coldness of the bread, or else qualities should stand without
substa^ces, which is, as if one should tell you of a house without a foundation.

Again, as Christ dwells in us, so Ephesians. 3. 17. Therefore he is eaten only
by faith.

Again, none can be saved, without

Again, Christ says not, this wine, this cup, and therefore by their
conclusion, not only the wine should be ^urned into blood, but the cup to.

Again, Paul says, They which receive unworthily, receive their own
damnation. But if it were the flesh of Christ, they should rather receive
salvation than damnation, John. 6. 54.
because Christ says, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life
everlasting.

Mat. 28.
He is risen, and is not here, as if he should say, his body is but in one
place at once, or else he might have been there, though he was risen.

Lift up your hearts, if they have all in their mouths? To end this
controversy: Here we may say as the Disciples said to Christ, John. 6. 68.
Whither shall we go from thee? I mean we need not to go to any other
expositor of Christ than Christ himself. Therefore mark what he says: John.
6. 60.
At first when Christ said, that he was the bread of life, and that all which
would live must eat him, they murmured until he expounded his words; and how
did he expound his words? John. 6. 35.
Thus, He that comes unto me has eaten, and he that believes in me has
drunk. After when he instituted this Sacrament, in like words they murmured
not, which they would as before, if he had not resolved the^ before, that to
eat his body, and to drink his blood, was nothing but to come to him, and
believe in him. After he had said so, they murmured not, because they did see
some reason in it. As it is plainly said, This is my body; John. 6. 63.
so it is plainly said, these words are spirit: that is, they must be
understood spiritually, and not literally. But if it be flesh indeed, why do
they not satisfy the simple people, how they may eat this flesh in Lent, when
they forbid the^ to eat any flesh, they must needs eat it doubtfully, and he
which doubts says James, receaueth nothing: therefore he which eats the
Mass receives nothing.

I did not allege the Fathers in my Sermon, but if any suspend his assent,
till they bring in their verdit, let him hear the^ make confession of their
belief. Augustine says, Aug. upon the 3. Psalm.
the Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave only a sign, or
Sacrament of his body.

Tertulian says, Tert. against Marcion the 4. book. 4. book 4. ca. of
Sacraments.
this is my body, that is, a sign of my body.

Ambrose says, the bread and wine remain still the same thing that they were.

Theodoret says, In his first Dialogue.
after the consecration, the mystical signs do not cast off their own nature,
but abide still in their first substance and form.

Origene says, Upon the 15. of Mat.
the bread that is sanctified with the word of God, as touching the material
substance thereof goes into the belly, and forth again like other meats.

Irenaeus says, Irenae. 4. book cap. 34. against Vale^tinus.
that it has two things in it, one earthly, and the other heavenly.

Cyrill says, Ad ob. Theod.
Our Sacraments avouch not the eating of a man. Anathematis.


Cyprian says, the Lord calls bread made of many grains, 1. book of Epi.
his body, and called wine made of many grapes, his blood.

Athanasius says, In that Gospel whosoever speaks a word, etc.
Christ made mention of his ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw his
disciples from corporal and fleshly eating.

Chrysostom says, Hom. 60. to the people of Antioch.
God gives us things spiritual under things visible and natural. To Caesarus
the Monk.
And again, being sanctified, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is
exalted to the name of the Lords body, although the nature of the bread still
remain.

And because they believe that the Pope cannot err, Against Eutiches the
Heretic.
Pope Gelasius sets to his hand, and says with the rest, Neither the
substance of the bread, nor nature of the wine cease to be, more tha^ they were
before.

Tell us, Papist, do not these Fathers speak as plain as we? Can thou
avouch. Transubstantiation more flatly than they deny it? How had this heresy
been chased, if the devil had hatched it in their time?

Thus the Scriptures on the one side, and the Fathers on the other side did so
trouble three arch papists, Biel, Tonstal, and Fisher, Upon the Canon lect. 40.
that Gabriel Biel says, how the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, is not
found in the canon of the Bible.

Tonstal says, 1. book of the Sacr. page 46.
It had been better to leave every man to his own conjecture, as they were
before the Council of Laterane, than to bring in such a question.

Fisher says, Against the captivity of Babylon made by M. Luther
No man can prove by the words of the gospel that any Priest in these days
does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ.

Here is fulfilled, Luke 19. 22.
Out of thine own mouth I will condemn thee. But we will not carry the matter
so, because a judge must have two ears, therefore now let them speak. The
Papists allegations for the real presence.
Because they cannot tell how the bread and wine should be turned into flesh
and blood, and yet appear bread and wine still, they say it is a miracle: but
how do they prove it? If they conte^d it is a miracle, they must show us a
sign, for every miracle may be seen, like all the miracles of Moses and
Christ, and the Apostles: and therefore a miracle is called a sign, Exo. 4. 8.
and 21
because it may be seen like a sign, and the word signifies a wonder, as
though we did see some thing to wonder. And the Jews craving a miracle, said,
Show us a miracle: Exodus 9.
as though they were taught to judge of miracles by sight. All which does show
that a miracle may be seen, but here no miracle is seen.

Again, a miracle (especially in the time of the Gospel) is an extraordinary
thing, but they make this an ordinary thing; for if the bread and wine be
turned into flesh and blood, then miracles are as common as Sacraments, and so
because they have Mass every day, they should work miracles every day.
Lastly, this seems strange, that Augustine, whom they so much honor, gathered
all the miracles which are written in the scripture, and yet amongst all,
speaks not of this; therefore then it was counted no miracle: but Paul speaks
of lying miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
and this is one of them.

If they say that Christ can turn Object.
bread and wine into his body, Object.
and therefore he does. Answer.
First they must prove that he will: for they can do many things themselves
which they do not, because they will not: therefore it is an old answer, that
from Can to Will, no argument follows. Mar. 1. 40.
The Leper did not say to Christ, If thou can, thou will; but, If thou will
thou can.

But the question which they think can not be answered, like their invincible
Nauies, Object.
is this. If the bread be not his body, why does he call it his body? Resolve
this knot and al is clear. Answer.
Mark then and we will loose it as well as we ca^: He says, This is my body,
as he says after, which is broken for you. Why? his body was not broken
before he suffered, how did he say then, which is broken, before it was broken?
There is no sense of it but this, the bread was broken, and signified that his
body should be broken. Now, as the breaking of the bread did signify the
breaking of his body, so the bread must needs signify his body: but as his
body was not broken indeed when the bread was broken, so the bread could not
be his body indeed: for then his body should have been broken when the bread
was broken: yet let them object what they can.

If (say they) the bread and wine be not changed into his body and blood,
Object.
why does he speak so darkly? he might have spoken plainer.

I answer, Answer.
though this seem dark to Papists, yet it was not dark to the Apostles, they
understood his meaning well enough, and all the rest for 1215. years after
Christ, before Transubsta^tiation was spoken of. If the Apostles had not
understood his meaning, they would not stick to ask him as their manner was,
until they were acquainted with Christ's phrase, whenever they doubted upon
any of his speeches, they were wont to come unto him, and say, Luke 8. 9.
master, what is the meaning? but they were used to such phrases: for it was
Christ's manner to teach by similitudes, showing one thing by another, which is
the plainest manner of teaching, and most used in holy Scripture, especially in
the types and shadows of this Sacrament. For example, Christ calls the Lamb
the Passover, Mat. 26. 17.
in place whereof this Sacrament succeeded, and therefore presently after they
had eaten the Passover, Christ instituted this Sacrament to be used for it.
Christ (I say) called the Lamb the Passover, and yet the Passover was this,
an Angel passed over the houses of the Israelites, and struck the Egyptians:
Exodus 12. 27.
this was not a Lamb, and yet because the Lamb was a sign of this Passover,
as the bread and wine is of Christ's body therefore Christ called the Lamb the
Passover, as he calls the bread and wine his body.

Again, Genesis 17. 13.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, and yet Circumcision was nothing but the
cutting away of a skin: but the Covenant is, In Abraham's seed all nations
shall be blessed, Genesis 12. 3.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people, I will defend and save them,
and they shall serve and worship me. This is not Circumcision, and yet as
though Circumcision were the Covenant it self, it is called the Covenant,
because it signified the Covenant, so bread and wine are called Christ's body,
because they signify Christ's body.

Again, Tit. 3. 5.
Baptism is called regeneration, and yet baptism is a dipping of our bodies
in water; but regeneration is the renewing of the mind, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
to the image wherein it was created: this is not Baptism, and yet as though
Baptism were regeneration it self, it is called regeneration, because it
signified regeneration: so the bread and wine are called Christ's body,
because they signify Christ's body.

Again, Luke 22. 20.
the Cup is called the new Testament, and yet the Cup is but a piece of
metal, filled with wine: but the new Testament is, John. 3. 36.
He which believes in the Son, shall be saved this is not a Cup, and yet as
though the Cup were the new Testament it self, it is called the new Testament,
because it signifies the new Testament: so the bread and wine are called
Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body. They which knew that the
Lamb is not the Passover, though Christ called it the Passover; that
Circumcision is not the Covenant, though God called it the Covenant; that
Baptism is not regeneration, though it be called regeneration; that the Cup is
not the new Testament, though Christ called it the new Testament; could they
not as well understand, that the bread and wine were not Christ's body, though
Christ called the^ his body? As they understood these speeches, so they
understood this speech; therefore they which say, that the bread and wine are
Christ's body, because Christ says, Matthew. 26. 26.
This is my body. may as well say, that the Lamb is the Passover, because
Christ calls it the Pass over, that Baptism is regeneration, because Paul
calls it regeneration, that the Cup is the new Testament, because Christ
calls it the new Testament.

If every Sacrament was called by the thing which it signified, and yet never
any Sacrament was taken for the thing it self, what reason have they to take
this Sacrament for the thing it self, more than all the rest? It is the consent
of all writers that a Sacrament is a sign, therefore not the thing signified:
no more then the bush at the door, is the wine in the seller. If I call the
Prince a Phoenix, the University a Fountain, the Court a Peacocke, the City a
Sea, the Country an Eremite, why can the Papists understand me, and not
understand Chrst? What a dark and strange, and intricate, and incredible
speech had this been for them to understand grossly, and literally? Would they
think, that they did eat Christ's body, when his body stood before them, and
he had told them before, that his body was like their body? Nay, this would
^aue required more words, and made them come again, with Master, what (...) the
meaning? Luke 9. 8.
for they were not so ^structed yet before the resurrection, ^o believe every
thing without que^^ioning, if it were contrary to sense and reason: but as
they asked, who had given him any meat, John 4. 33.
when he said that he had meat, and they could see none: so they would have
asked, what meat is this which we see not? How can every one of us eat his
body, and yet he has but one body, and that body is whole when we eat it?
Lo, he stands before us and says, that his body is like unto ours, and yet
he takes bread and breaks it, and gives it unto us to eat, and when we eat
it, Luke 24. 39.
he says This is my body: and yet his body stands before us still. If his
body be like ours (as he says) how can it be eaten and be there, for ours
cannot? Thus they would have questioned, if they had not been used to such
phrases: but as they could understand him when he called himself a stone, and
a rock, and a door, and a window, and a Vine, so they could pick out his
meaning, when he said that bread was his body: for he had told them before,
John 16. 5.
that he was the bread of eternal life.

Now the bread of eternal life is not eaten with teeth, for the body cannot
eat spiritually, no more then the soul can eat corporally, and therefore he
is such a bread as is eaten with faith, and so himself says in the Gospel of
John. John. 6. 35.
Mark this eating by faith, and all the strife is ended. Flesh and blood
indeed need not faith to chew them, for the teeth can chew the^ well enough.
Therefore if the bread and wine were the body of Christ, then we need not faith
to eat it, but all which have teeth might eat Christ's body, yea the Mice
might eat it as well as men, for they eat the same bread that we do, as well
after it is consecrated, as before.

If this be not enough to batter the ruins of this vpstart Heresy, I will
come to interrogatories, and see whether they have learned it by rote, or by
reason. If they ground their Transubstantiation upon these words of Christ,
Marth. 26. 26.
This is my body, which he spoke to his Disciples* I ask them, whether they
receive that body which was mortal, or that body which is glorified; Neither
Christ's mortal body, nor his immortal body, can be in the same.
because one of these bodies they must needs receive, either his mortal body,
or his glorified body. If they say, that it is his mortal body, the mortal
body will not profit them: for you see that mortal food is but for this
mortal life, neither has Christ a mortal body now to communicate unto them,
because it is changed to an immortal body, therefore they cannot receive the
mortal body, because Christ has not a mortal body to give them. If they
say that they receive his glorified body, then they must she from this Text,
for at that time Christ had no glorified body.

When this Sacrament was instituted, and Christ said This is my body, his
body was not glorified, because the Sacrament was instituted before his death,
and his body was glorified after his resurrection. Therefore if they receive
the same body which the Apostles received, as they say they do* they cannot
receive a glorified body, because then Christ had not a glorified body to
communicate unto them. Thus the rocks and sands are of both sides them, they
receive a body neither mortal, nor immortal: if Christ has any such body,
judge you. Here they stand like a fool, which cannot tell one his tale;
Nebucadnezar dreamed a dream and knew not what it meant. Dan. 4. 15.


Beside, I ask them to whom Christ spoke when he said, Mar. 14. 24.
This is my body. Mark says, he spoke to them, that is, to his Disciples:
well then, if these words, This is my body, were not spoken to the signs,
but to the persons, Christ spoke not to the bread and wine, but to his
disciples.
not to the bread and wine, but to the receivers: as the words which follow, Do
this in remembrance of me: if these words were not spoken to the bread and
wine, then it is plain that they do not change the nature of the bread and
wine. If the nature of them be not altered, then the substance remains, and
then we receive no other substance with them, because two substances cannot be
in one place.

What then, More in the Lords Supper than bread and wine.
is there nothing in the Sacrament but bread and wine, like a hungrey nunscion?
Nay we say not that the Sacrament is nothing but a bare sign, or that you
receive no more than you see: for Christ says, that it is his body, and Paul
says, that it is the Communion of Christ's body and blood. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Therefore there is more in Sacramental bread, than in common bread: though
the nature be not changed, yet the use is changed; it does not only nourish
the body as it did before, but it brings a bread with it which nourishes the
soul: for as sure as we receive bread, so sure we receive Christ: not only the
benefits of Christ, but Christ, although not in a Popish manner: yet we are so
joined unto him, as though we were but one body. A similitude
As the spouse does not marry with the lands and goods, but with the man
himself, and being partaker of him, is made partaker of them: so the faithful
do not only marry with Christ's benefits, but with Christ him self, and
being partakers of him, they are made partakers of his benefits: for Christ
may not be divided from his benefits, no more than the Sun from his light.
Romans 8. 32.
It is said, the Father gave us his son, and so the Son gives us him
self. As the bread is a sign of his body: so the giving of the bread is a
sign of the giving of his body. Thus he lies before us like a Pelican which
lets her young ones suck her blood: so that we may say, the Lord invited us
to Supper, and he himself was our meat. But if you ask how this is? I must
answer, it is a mystery: but if I could tell it, it were no mystery. Yet as
it is said, when three men walked in the midst of the furnace, Dan. 3. 25.
One like the Son of God walked amongst them: So, when the faithful receive
the Bread and Wine, one like the Son of God seems to come unto them, which
fills them with peace and joy, and grace, that they marvel what it was which
they received, besides bread and wine. A similitude
For example thou make a bargain with thy neighbor for house or land, and
receiuest in earnest a piece of gold, that which thou receiuest is but a piece
of gold, but now it is a sign of thy bargain, and if thou keep not touch with
him, happily it will claspe thee for all that thou art worth; so that which
thou receiuest is bread, but this bread is a sign of another matter, which
passes bread.

Again, Another similitude.
thou have an Obligation in thy hand, and I ask thee, what have thou there?
and thou say, I have here an hundredth pounds: why (say I) there is nothing
but paper, ynke, and wax: oh but by this say thou, I will recover an
hundredth pounds, that is as good. So beloved, this is as good, that under these
signs, you receive the virtue of Christ's body and blood by faith, as if you
did eat his body, and drink his blood indeed, which is horrible to think
that any should devour their god, thinking thereby to worship him: never any
Heretic nor Idolater conceived so grossly of their God, before the Papist. We
read of a people which did eat men, but never of any people which did eat
their God. All the Apostles say, that it was needful that Christ should take
our flesh but no Apostle says, that it is needful that we should take Christ's
flesh; for all the blessings of Christ are apprehended by faith, and nothing is
fit to apprehe^d him whom we see not but faith: and therefore one of their own
pillars said, Augustine.
Believe, and thou have eaten. Faith does more in Religion than the mouth, or
else we might say with the woman, Blessed are the breasts which gave thee suck,
Luke. 11. 27.
and so none should be blessed but Mary: but Mary was not blessed, because
Christ was in her body, but because Christ was in her heart, and least this
should seem incredible unto you, because Mary is called blessed among women.
When Christ heard the woman say, Luke. 8. 21.
Blessed are the breasts which gave thee suck, he replied unto her, Blessed are
they which hear the word of God, and keep it, these are my brethren, and
sisters and mother (says Christ) as though the rest were no kin to him in
heaven, though they were kin in earth. Thus if Christ were in thy body, and
thou should say as this woman, Blessed is the body which has thee in it,
nay would Christ say, Blessed is the heart which has me in it. If Mary were no
whit better for having Christ in her arms, nor for having him in her body,
how much better art thou, for having him in thy belly, where thou can not
see him? Note.
Must the Sun needs come to us, or else cannot his he^^^ and light profit
us, nay, it does us more good, because it is so far off: so this Sun is
gone from us, that he might give more light unto us, which made him say, John.
16. 7.
It is good for you that I go from you; therefore away with this carnal eating
of spiritual things. Prou. 31. 29.
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou (says Solomon surpassest the^
all. So, many heretics have spoken absurdly, but this surpasses the^ all,
that Christ must be applied like Physic, as though his blood could not profit
us, unless we did drink it, and swallow it as a potion. Is this the Papists
union with Christ? Is this the manner whereby we are made one flesh with
Christ, to eat his flesh? Nay, when he took our flesh unto him, and was made
man, then we were united to him in the flesh and not now. Christ took our
flesh, we take not his flesh, but believe that he took ours, therefore if you
would know whither Christ's body be in the Sacrament, A way to know whither
Christ's body be in the Sacrament.
I say unto you as Christ said unto Thomas, touch, feel, and see. In visible
things, God has appointed our eyes to be judges, for as the spirit discerns
spiritual obiectes, John. 20. 27.
so sense discerns of sensible obiectes. As Christ taught Thomas to judge of
his body, so may we and so should they: therefore if you cannot see his body,
nor feel his body, you may gather by Christ saying to Thomas, that he would
not have you believe that it is his body, for my body (says Christ) may be
seen, and felt. And thus Tra^substa^tiatio^ is found a liar.

Now if you ask me, Why Christ calls the bread his body.
why Christ calls the sign by the name of the thing it self I ask thee
again. May thou say* when thou see the picture of the Queen, this is the
Queen, and when thou see the picture of a Lyo^, this is a Lion: and may not
Christ say when he sees a thing like his body, This is my body?

I showed you before, that every Sacrament is called by the name of the thing
which it does signify, and therefore why should we stu^ble at this, more tha^
the rest? The reason why the signs have the name of the things, is to strike a
deeper reverence in us to receive this Sacrament of Christ reverently,
sincerely, and holilie, as if Christ were there present in body and blood
himself. And surely, as he which defaceth the Queens Seal, is co^uicted of
contempt and treason to her own person; so he which prophaneth these Seals of
Christ, does not worship Christ, but despise him, and that contempt shall be
required of him, as if he had contemned Christ him self. This is the reason,
why Christ calls the signs of his body, his body, to make us take this
Sacrament reverently, because we are apt to co^te^ne it, as the Jews did
their Manna.

It follows, Verse. 24.
Do this in remembrance of me, that is, these signs shall be a remembrance of
my death: when you break the bread you shall remember the wou^ding of my body;
and when you drink the wine, you shall remember the shedding of my blood. If
we must do this in remembrance of Christ's body, which was broken like the
bread, it is an argument that his body is not there, because remembrance is
not of things present, but of things absent; we remember not, but we see that
which is before us. This might put the Papists in remembrance that Christ is
not sacrificed now, when we do but remember his sacrifice: this is not Christ's
sacrifice, but a remembrance of his sacrifice; he was sacrificed before, and
now it is applied, least his sacrifice should be in vain. If Christ's body
were in the Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament but a sacrifice.
This was done once reallie, when he offered himself upon the Cross, therefore
that offering was called a sacrifice, because he was sacrificed indeed; but
this offering is called a Sacrament, because it is but a sign of his
sacrifice. If Christ in this Sacrament were offered indeed, then it should be
called a sacrifice as his once offering was: but because it is but a
remembrance of his sacrifice, therefore it is called a (...) This is not a
sacrifice of Christ, but a sacrifice of our selves. Least we should take it to
be a sacrifice of Christ, Christ himself calls it a remembrance of his
sacrifice, Do this in my remembrance. Here is our work; as Christ has done,
so must we do, so we minister, and so you receive we can give you nothing but
that which we have received from him, as Paul says. Therefore if Christ did
not give his mortal body which stood before them, and could not profit them,
nor his glorified body, which was not glorified the^, and when it was glorified
ascended up unto heaven, and there abides, how ca^ these iugling Priests make
their God again which made them? They can no more turn wine into blood, and
bread into flesh, than they can command a Gnat to become a Cammell: for it is
a greater work to make God, than to make the world. Mat. 24. 23.
Therefore as Christ says, When they tell you, here is Christ, and there is
Christ, believe them not: So when they tell you that Christ is in heaven, and
that Christ is in earth, in this place and that place, believe them not: for
Elias ascension was a figure of Christ's ascension, 2. King. 2. 17.
when Elias was ascended, yet some sought for his body upon earth: so though
Christ be ascended, yet many seek his body upon earth: but as they could not
find Elias body, so these can not find Christ's body, although they have
sought 300. years. But if his body were upon earth, as they say, should we
handle it and touch it, now it is glorified? After his resurrection he said to
Marie, John. 20. 17.
Touch me not, because his body was glorified, that is, not to be touched with
fingers any more, but with faith. Therefore we read of none which touched his
body after it was risen, but only Thomas, to settle his faith. Thus you see
we need to suborne no witnesses; for every word in this text which they allege
for Tra^substantiatio^, does make against Tra^substantiatio^, whereby if
Antichrist does signify the^ which are against Christ, you see who may be
called Antichrist. There is no question in Popery (except Purgatory the Popes
Publica^ and tasker) about which the Papists are at such civil wars among
themselves, as about this transubsta^tiatio^. They cannot tell when the change
begins, nor what manner of change it is, nor how long the change continues,
some hang one way, and some another, like the Midianites which fought one
against another. Judge. 7. 22.
And no marvel though their consciences stagger about it: for to show you the
right father of it, it was one of the dreams of Innocentius the 3. in the
year of our Lord* 1215. A monster of his age.
so many years passed before Tra^substa^tiation was named, and the^ a Pope set
it first on foot so it came out of Rome the gra^dame of all heresies, and for
want of Scriptures, has been defended with fire, and sword, and swallowed more
Martirs, than all the gulfes of the Papal sea beside.

Now, when the doctrines of men go for Scripture, Eight absurdities which
follow Tra^substantiation.
you shall see how many errors rush into the Church: for grant but this to
Innocentius, as the Papists do, that the bread and wine are changed into
Christ's body. First, it will follow, Acts. 19. 11.
which says, He is ascended into heaven or if he be ascended, and descended
again, another Article will be falsified, Romans 8. 34.
which says, that he sits at the right hand of his Father, Acts. 3. 21.
that is as Peter says, he abides in heaven. Secondly, it that the wicked and
profane, and reprobate, may receive Christ as well as the godly, because they
have a mouth Heb. 9. 28. and 10. 12.
that Christ's sacrifice once for all was not sufficient, because we must
sacrifice him again, and break his body and shed his blood, as the Jews
crucified

Thus when men devise articles of their own, while they strike upon the
handuill, the sparks fly in their face; and they are like the man which began
to build and could not finish it. When I see the Papist in so many absurdities
for intertaining one error, me thinks he seems like a Collier which is grimed
with his own coals. Therefore as in manners we should think of Peter's saying,
Act. 5. 29.
Whether is it meet to obey God or men? So in doctrines we should think,
whether it be meet to believe God or men. Thus you have heard the author of
this Sacrament, Conclusion.
the Lord Jesus; the time when it was instituted, in the night that he was
betrayed; the manner how it was instituted, after thanks giving; the end why it
was instituted for a remembrance of his death; and the discovery of
Transubstantiation, one of the last heresies which Babylon hatched. Now they
which have been Patrons of it before, should do like the father and mother of
an Idolatrer, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and 9.
that is, lay the first hand upon him to shorten his life. Thus I end. Think
what account ye shall give of that ye have heard.

The end of the first Sermon.
A TREATISE OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
The second Sermon.
1. Cor. 11. verse. 25. 26. 27. 28. 25 After the same manner also he took the
cup, when he had supped, saying. This cup is the New Testament in my blood:
this do as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

26 For as often as ye shall eat this bread; and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come.

27 Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

28 Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup.


HEre I am to speak of the second service (as it were) at the Lords Table,
and of that preparation which is like the Wedding garment, that every man must
bring unto this banquet. These words are diversely repeated of the
Evangelists. Here it is said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. Mat.
26. 28.
In Matthew and in Mark, Mar. 14. 24.
it is said. This Cup is my blood of the New Testament. This is the first
mention which Christ makes of a Testament, as though now his promises deserved
the name of a Testament, because the seal is set unto them, which before this
Sacrament was not sealed, but like a bare writing, without a signet. This word
Testament, does implie a promise, and therefore teaches us, that the Sacrament
does confirm and stre^gthen, and nourish our faith, because it seals the
promise which we should believe.

Here is to be noted, that Christ does not only speak of a Testament but he
calls it a New Testament, which words never met together before, as though
the Law were for the old man to mortify him, and the Gospel for the new man
to comfort him again: or, as if the old Testament had so washed her face, and
changed her apparel at Christ's coming, that one would not think it the
same, but a New Testament, because eue^ now she was shadowed with a thousand
Ceremonies, and now they are gone from her, like a mist at the Sun rising.
John. 13. 34.
As Christ calls love a New Commandment, because he renewed it like a Law
worn out of memory, so he calls the promise of salvation a New Testament.
Because as it was renewed to Sem, and after renewed to Abraham, and after
renewed to David, so now he renewed it again: which should be always new and
fresh unto us. Every Testament is confirmed with blood; the old Testament was
confirmed by the blood of Goats, Heb. 9. 18.
and Bullockes, and Rams, but the New Testament is confirmed by the blood of
Christ, Mat. 26. 28.
My blood (says Christ) is the blood of the New Testament: nay This Cup (says
Christ) is the New Testament. Luke. 22. 20.
You may see the^ that they may gather as well out of Christ's words, that the
Cup is the New Testament, as that the Wine is his blood. For Christ says, This
Cup is the New Testament, as well as he says, This Wine is my blood, or This
bread is my body. Beside, when Christ speaks of a New Testament, Heb. 8. 13.
he implies, that the old Testament is fulfilled, the Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies of the Law, did signify Christ before he came, therefore they are
fulfilled in his coming, no mo Sacrifices, no mo For types and figures.
Ceremonies, for the truth is come. Sacrifices and Ceremonies are honorably
buried with the Priesthood of Aaron, let them rest, it is not lawful to
violate the Sepulchers of the dead, and take their bodies out of the earth, as
the Witch would raise Samuel out of his grave. 1. Sam. 28. 14.
Therefore they which retain Ceremonies, which should be abrogated, relics of
Iudaisme, or relics of Papisme, may be said to violate the sepulchers of the
dead, and disturb the deceased, like the Witch, which presumed to raise
Samuel out of his grave.

This Testament is called a Testament in blood, because the Testament and will
of a man is confirmed, when the man is dead; so Christ confirmed his Testament
by his death. Moses says, that life is in the blood, Leuit. 17. 11.
so the blood of Christ is the life of this Testament. If Christ's blood had
not been shed, this Testament made unto us had been unprofitable, as the
Testament of a Father is to his Son, if the Father should not dye but live.
Heb. 9. 22.
Therefore the Apostle says, without shedding of blood there is no remission
of sins. Therefore the Testament or covenant of the remission of our sins,
is called the Testament in blood; the blood of Christ is the seal of the
Testament, which we have to show unto God for the remission of our sins, and
the two Sacraments are a feale of that blood, to witness that it was shed.

Again, this is a matter regarded in Testaments and Wills; to the Testament
of him that is dead, no man adds or detracteth, but as the Testator made it,
so it stands without alteration: so should this Testament of Christ, and this
Sacrament of Christ, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
no man should alter it now he is dead: Revel. 22. 18.
for he which adds or detracteth has a curse in Gods book. Therefore
Christ when he instituted this Sacrament, commanded, do this, that is, do as I
do, least they should swerve one whit from his own manner: yet how many gaudes
have the Papists added to it, that he which had heard Christ say, Do this in
remembrance of me, and should see how they handle the matter in their Mass,
could see nothing to remember Christ by, The popish receiving under one kind
confuted.
but a veil to hide Christ from him. Therefore this commandment was repeated
again when he gave the wine, Do this, etc. as he commanded them to eat the
bread in remembrance of him, so he commands them to drink the wine in
remembrance of him: nay, he speaks more precisely of the wine than of the
bread; Matthew. 26. 27.
for he says of the wine, Drink you all of this, which he says not of the
bread. Surely Christ did foresee that some proud Heretics would do otherwise
after him, even as it is come to pass: for the Papist does break this
Commandment of Christ, as flatly as Saul brake the commandment of Samuel. 1.
Sam. 15. 9.
Samuel commanded him to kill the fat and the lean: Saul killed the lean, but
not the fat; so Christ commands to receive bread and wine, they teach to
receive bread, but not wine: Christ says, Drink you all of this, they say
drink not all of this: Christ gave the bread and wine to all, they give the
bread to all, and the wine to some: their Priests receive all, but the people
must content themselves with half: the Priest eats and drinks, but the people
must not drink for spilling on their clothes. Is this the Church which cannot
err? Do they think to hemme Christ in their Mass, and shut his ordinance out
of their Mass? Matthew. 27. 35.
The Soldiers divided Christ's coat, but these divide his body, and separate
the bread and wine which Christ has joined. Paul speaks of heretics which
taught, Colos. 2. 21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not: so these say, touch not, taste not, handle
not, when they should say, Touch, How the Popish Priests do iniure the people.
and taste, and handle, Of all Heresies either old or new, there is none so
injurious to the common people, as the pasture of shauelings Popery, for they
may not read the scriptures; they There is no charity in the Papists
Sacrament, Act. 5. 2.
because like Anantas, the Priests keep back that which they should
distribute, and mangle the Sacrifice as though Ely his Sons had left their
hook to the Massing Friars. Thus that ye may know who succeed the Pharisees,
1. Sam. 2. 13.
they have fulfilled that which the Pharisees did, that is, By their own
Commandments they have made the Commandment of God of no effect. Mar. 7. 13.
For whereas the purpose of Christ was to tie our faith wholly to himself,
that we should not seek for any thing without him, knowing that the maintenance
of this life has need both of meat and drink, to teach us that all
sufficiency is in himself, by bread and wine he shows, that he is in stead
both of meat and drink, that is, in stead of al: which signification is taken
away where the wine is not given as well as the bread. Therefore as it is said
of a horrible and odious crime, Judge. 19. 30.
Consider the matter and give sentence: so I wish all to consider this
Innovation, and give sentence of it. Can there be any clearer contradiction to
the Word, or bolder check to Christ, than when he says, Drink you all of
this: to say; drink not all of this? It is even as when God said, Genesis 2. 17.
Ye shall die, the devil said, ye shall not die. Shall we go now to a
Counsel, or a Father, or a Doctor to inquire whether this doctrine be like
Christ doctrine? I do verily think that none here is so simple but that he
sees, that if any thing can be contrary to Christ's speech, this is contrary
to it. But this is only their detraction from the Sacrament.

Now you shall hear their additions to the Sacrament, look upon their
vestures, and their gestures, and their Altars, and their pix, and their
incense, and their beckes, and their nods, and their turnings, all this is more
then Christ did, and therefore the Prophet may say again, Esai. 1. 12.
Who has required this of you? Did Christ command you to do more then he did,
and not do as he did? Therefore let them which have eyes to see, be thankful
for their light, when they hear how blind they were, whom God gave over to be
seduced.

The fruit of this Sacrament is noted in these words, Verse. 24.
Which is broken for you, which is shed for you, that is (as Matthew
interprets) shed for the remission of sins. Matthew. 26. 28.
As al was made for us, Genesis 1.
so al which Christ spoke, he spoke for us, and all which Christ did, 2. Cor.
4. 15.
he did for us, and all which Christ suffered, he suffered for us, that the
sins of men might be forgiven, and yet so few apprehend this benefit, that
the way to heaven is called a narrow way, Matthew. 7. 13.
as though all these pains did ransom but a small number, and certain order of
men. All are not saved by Christ death, but all which are saved, are saved by
Christ's death: his death is sufficient to save all, as the sun is sufficient to
lighten all: but if any man wink, the Sun will not give him light: so, if
any man contemn, and will not receive, Christ will not thrust him into Heaven,
but every man shall have that which he chooses (as David says) Blessing to
him that loves blessing, Psalm. 119. 17.
and cursing to him which loves cursing. There wants not a hand to give, but a
hand to take. I would (says Christ) but you would not. Matthew. 23. 37.
Stretch forth thy hand, and here is Christ's hand, which takes (...) make thee
quake and tremble if thou should see but another so disme^bred before thy
face? Thou have no comfort now but this, when I have suffered I shall be free;
before to morrow at this time all my pain will be past, though my shame
continue and my children be beggars. What grace, what favor, what mercy, now,
to pardon thee all this, and save thy life, and set thee at liberty, as though
thou had never offended? So I and thou, and every one here had committed
reason against the King of Kings, and stood condemned for it, not to suffer and
then to be free, like them which break the laws of men, but to suffer and
suffer, and ever to suffer all that the devils would heap upon us. Then came
the mercy of GOD for Christ which shed his blood, like an vmpire between God
and us, and said as Esaiah said to Hezekiah, His words are not so, but the
effect of his words. 2. King. 20. 5. Luke 7. 15.
Thou shall not die but live, loose him, let him go, for he is mine. So we were
stayed like the widows son when he was carried to his grave. This is the
benefit of Christ's death, and this Sacrament is the remembrance of it, and
therefore whenever we receive it, this addition comes with it, which is
shed for the remission of sins: Matthew. 26. 28.
our fault was so heinous and grievous, that no ransom could counteruaile it,
unless GOD himself had suffered for us. Being in this extremity, neither
man, nor Angel offered his life for us, but the Prince himself, which should
have crucified us, came to be crucified of us, for us, that we might say with
steadfast faith, The merciful Article.
I believe the remission of sins, not the satisfaction of sins, but the
remission of sins. Mark this distinction against Popish merits of works, or
penance, Christ has satisfied and not we; we are remitted and not Christ:
therefore we say in our Confession, I believe the remission of sins, which I may
call the merciful Article, because it is the quintessence and sweetness of all
the twelve. Therefore who but Antichrist durst deprave it? If there be a
satisfaction for our sins by our works, or by our Pilgrimages, or by our
Masses, or by our penance, let Christ never be called a forgiuer, but an
exchanger like the Pope, which sells his pardons. Wretched creatures which
will not receive the Lord when he comes to their door. Revel. 21. 6.
Christ says, take for nothing and they say no, we will not take, but buy.
Vile base miserable men disdain to take grace of God without satisfaction, but
they will cope with the Lord, and give him so many Pilgrimages, fast so many
days, hear so many Masses, and pay so many works for it, until they have
done as much good as they have done evil. Our sins are infinite, and God is
infinite, but our works are finite, in number and measure, how can they
answer then to that which exceeds number and measure? Therefore be content
with Joseph's brethren to take your money again, and say that you have corn for
nothing, Genesis 42. 25.
that is, you are saved for nothing, or else when you say, I believe the
remission of sins, you lie unto God, because you do not believe the remission
of sins, but satisfaction for sins, like the Papists.

It follows, Verse. 26.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the
Lords death till he come. Here are three invincible arguments against Popish
Transubstantiation, Three arguments against Transubsta^tiatio^ in one verse.
like the three witnesses under which every word does stand First we are said
to eat bread; then it is not flesh but bread. Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
Secondly, we are said to show the Lords death; then it is but a show or
representation of his death. Thirdly, it is said, until he come; if he be to
come, then he is not come; if he be come, how can we say, until he come. The
effect of this verse was showed in these words, Do this in remembrance of me:
for to say, Do this in remembrance of me, and to say, so often as you do this,
you show my death, is much at one: so that if you call this Sacrament a show of
Christ's death, as it is called here, then it is not Christ, or if you call it
a remembrance of Christ, as it is called there, yet it is not Christ, but a
show, or remembrance of Christ: but this is such a show, and remembrance, that
the next verse says, Verse. 27.
Whosoever receives it unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Will ye know who receives unworthily: What it is to receive unworthily.
In verse 29. Paul says, he discerns not the Lords body: that is, which
puts no difference between this bread and other, but eats like a child,
the meat which he knows not: and after the bread seems stones to him, and
the wine poison, because his conscience tells him, I have received
unworthily, before I could say like David, John. 10. 27.
My heart is prepared. My sheep (says Christ) know my voice: as they discern
Christ's words, so they discern Christ's body, and therefore so often as they
come to the Lords Table, they seem to come into the Lords presence: there they
greet and kiss and embrace one another with affections, which none ca^ know,
Luke 1. 41.
but they that feel, like John, which leaped in the womb, so soon as Christ
came near him?

Will ye know beside, what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ? How receivers may be guilty of Christ's death.
even as Judas was guilty for betraying him, and Pilate for delivering him,
and the Jews for crucifying him; so they are guilty which receive this
Sacrament unworthily, Mar. 14. 44.
as Pilate and Caiphas and Judas were. Mark. 15. 15.
If they be guilty of Christ's death, Mark. 15. 25.
they are guilty of their own death to, as if they had committed two murders:
and therefore Paul says after, Verse. 30.
that many of the Corinthians died only for the unworthy receiving of this
Sacrament. As the word is the savor of death to them which receive it
unworthily, so the Sacrament is the savor of death to the^ which receive it
unworthily: 1. Cor. 2. 16.
it never goes into their mouth, but they are Traitors ipso facto, and may say
to Hell, this day I have taken possession of thee, because I am guilty of
Christ's blood. Therefore it follows immediately, How we should be prepared
before we come to the Lords Table.
Let a man examine himself before he eat of this bread, or drink of this
wine, as if he should say, if he which receives this Sacrament unworthily, be
guilty of Christ's death, like Judas which hanged himself: if these signs be
received to salvation or damnation like the word, the next lesson is, to
examine your selves before you receive, least you receive like the son of
perdition, Ioh. 13. 27.
which swallowed the bread and the devil together. Therefore, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat: that is, let him examine first, and receive
after: 1. Sam. 9. 13.
for if we should receive the bread of the earth reuere^tly, how should we
receive the bread of heaven? When Iehonadab came to Iehu his chariot, he said,
2. King. 10. 15.
Is thy heart upright as my heart is toward thee? So when we come to the Lords
Table, he would have our hearts upright to him, as his heart is to us, for who
feasteth his enemies and mockers? The golden Ring sits highest at our table,
James. 2. 2.
but the wedding garment sits highest at this Table. It is safer eating with
unwashed hands, than with an unwashed heart. The Jews were taught to choose the
Lamb of the Passover on the tenth day of the first month, in which month
they ca^e out of Egypt: and on the fourteenth day after, Exodus 12. 3. and 6.
they were taught to eat him, so they had four days respit between the
choosing, and the killing, to prepare and sanctify themselves for the
Passover, which was a sign of the Lords Supper. This admonished them, that
the matter now to be performed, was very weighty, and therefore they were
deeply to consider it, for now was the action, and sum of all salvation in
handling: if they did prepare themselves so before they did receive the figure
of this Sacrament, how should we be prepared before we receive the Sacrament it
self? Therefore as Josiah commanded the Levites to prepare the people: 12.
Chro. 35. 6.
so Paul advises the people to prepare themselves, that is, to examine whether
they have faith, and love, and repentance, before they come to this feast. By
this al may see, first that Paul would have every lay man so skillful in the
scripture, Al are bound to know the Scriptures.
that he be able to examine himself by it; for this admonition is not to the^
which minister the sacrament, but to al which receive the sacrament. And the
rule by which we must examine ourselves, is the law which we should obey:
therefore if the rule be unknown, the examination must be undone. Our doctrine
must be examined by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; Act. 17. 11.
our prayers must be examined by the six petitions of Christ's prayer; Note.
our belief must be examined by the 12. Articles of faith; our life must be
examined by the ten Commandments of the Law. Exodus 20. 1. etc.
Now, he which has his Touchstone may try gold from copper, but he which has
it not, takes one for the other. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Therefore, before Paul's Examine, you had need to learn Christ's Search, John.
5. 39.
Search the Scriptures and they will lighten you to search your selves. This is
the doctrine with which I will end, and the necessary point for which I choose
this text, to teach you (if I could) that Christian Art how to examine your
selves.

Let a man examine himself before he eat. Verse. 28.
Here is first an examination. The division.
Secondly, an examination of our selves, Thirdly, an examination before we
come to the Sacrament. Touching the first, here Paul says, Examine your
selves, but in 2. Cor. 13. he doubleth his charge, Prove your selves, and
again at next word, Examine your selves; as if he should say, this work must
be done when it is done, because it is never thoroughly done, and therefore we
must double our examination, as Paul doubleth his counsel. If a man suspect
his enemy, he will try him with a question, if that will not search him, he
will put forth another; if that be spied, he will move another, like one which
puts diverse keys into a lock until it open. So he which examineth, must
try and try, prove and prove, search and search, for the Angel of darkness is
like an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11. 14.
and we have no way to discover him, 1. John. 4. 1.
but that of John, Try the spirits. God examineth with trials, the devil
examineth with temptations, the world examineth with persecutions: we which are
thus examined, had need to examine to. If any man skill not what Examining
means, the very word. Examine, is so pregnant, that it prompteth us how we
should examine; for it signifies to put our selves unto the Touchstone, as if
we would try Gold from Copper. Therefore one says, that Examination is the eye
of the soul, A description of true examination.
whereby she sees her self, and her safety, and her danger, and her way
which she walks, and her pace which she holds, and the end to which she
tends: she looks into her glass, and spieth every spot in her face, how
all her graces are stained, then she takes the water of life, and washes her
blots away. After, she looks again, and beholds all her gifts, her faith,
fear, love, patience, meekness, and marketh how every one does flourish, or
wither. If they fade and decay; that she feels a consumption, then she takes
preservatives, and restoratiues of prayer, and counsel, and repentance, before
the sickness grow: thus every day she lets down a bucket into her heart,
to see what water it brings up, least she should corrupt within, and perish
suddenly.

To hear, and read, pray, and fast, and communicate, is a work of many, but
to examine those works, is the fashion of few, Iere. 8. 6.
and therefore Jeremy co^plaineth, No man says, what have I done? as if he
should say, no man examineth himself: and therefore in all the Scripture it is
said but of one, Job. 9. 28.
that he feared all his works, as though he durst not think, nor speak, nor
do any thing before he had examined what it was, from whence it came, and
whether it went: Mat. 13. 44.
so the more precious treasure is deeper hid in the ground.

The second point is, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
to Examine our selves, Paul says, Try all things, much more should we try
our selves. The good sower does sow his own ground, Mat. 13. 25.
but the bad sower does sow another man's ground, as the devil did. The
Disciples of Christ said, Mat. 26. 22.
Master, is it I? not Master, is it he? The Disciples of John asked, Luke. 3.
10.
Master, what shall we do? not Master, what shall they do? we must obey some,
and hear others, and admonish others, and love all, but examine our selves.
That which we apply unto others, the Apostle applies unto our selves; for
when we speak of an examiner, we intend one which examineth other: when we
speak of an accuser, we inte^d one which accuses other: when we speak of a
Judge, we mean one which judges others, but the Scripture cries, Examine thy
self, 1. Cor. 11. 13.
accuse thy self, judge thy self, that is, be not curious to search a mote in
thy brothers eye, Mat. 7. 3.
but pull out the beam which is in thy own eye. This does show that they
which sit in Gods chair to judge others, commonly have greater faults
themselves, than they whom they use to judge: and therefore Christ calls their
fault a beam, and the others a mote. Psalm. 4. 4.
This made David say, Examine thy heart, thy heart is thy own heart, therefore
thou must examine whether thou pray, whether thou watch, whether thou fast; and
not whether he pray, whether he watch, as the Pharisie examined the Publica,
Luke. 18. 11.
least thou have Peter's check: when he examined what John should do, Christ
said, What is that to thee? John. 21. 22.
follow thou me. Thou art a private man, and have a private examination,
therefore let thy question be, What have I done? and make thy Anatomy of thy
self.

See beloved, we may not believe our selves before we have examined our selves:
for we are false hearted; and the notablest cosiner that deceives most, for
one time that he deceives others, ten times deceives himself. Because the
flesh is a wily servant, and will lie like Gehezi to his own master, 2. King.
5. 25.
and face him that it has not sinned, when it comes from sin: 2. King. 5.
26.
therefore as Elisha examined his servant, so the soul must examine her
servant, that is, man must be ielous of himself, and take himself for a liar,
for a flatterer, for a dissembler, until he be thoroughly acquainted with
himself: for no man is so often beguiled, as by himself, by trusting his
double heart, and taking his own word without further trial. If Paul had bid
us examine others, Luke. 22. 31.
we would have sifted the^ like Satan Satan has desired to fifth thee, says
Christ to Peter, so we have a desire to sift others: even Peter which was
sifted of Satan, longed to sift John, and know what he should do, before he
karkened to his own charge. Therefore the help of examination is a needful
preservative, although we were as sound as Peter. They which are suspected of
crime do not examine themselves, but are examined of others, least they should
be partial: but a Christian must examine himself of his crime, and be his own
judge, his own accuser, and his own condemner: for no man knows the spirit of
man but the spirit which is in man, 1. Cor. 2. 11.
which will condemn him if he be guilty, and tell him all that he has done,
and with what mind he did it, and what he deserves for it. This is the
private araignement, or close Sessions, when Conscience sits in her chair to
examine, and accuse, and judge, and condemn her self, because she will not be
condemned of God.

Thus holy men have kept their Sessions at home, and made their hearts the
foreman of the Jury, and examined themselves as we examine others, the fear of
the Lord stood at the door of their souls, to examine every thought before it
went in, and at the door of their lips, to examine every word before it went
out, whereby they escaped a thousand sins which we commit, as though we had
no other work. So thou should sit in judgment of thy self, and call thy
thoughts, and speeches and actions to give in evidence against thee, whether
thou be a Christian, or an Infidel, a son or a bastard, a servant or a
rebel, a Protestant or an hypocrit; if thou find not faith, nor fear, nor
love, nor zeal, when thou examinest thy self, let no man make thee believe
that thou art holy, that thou art sanctified, that thou art a Christian, that
thou art a believer, that thou art a Gospeller, because thou art worse than
thou seem thy self; for every man is partial to himself when he is most
humbled. Therefore if my heart tell me that I do love God, whom shall I believe
before my self? Prou. 25. 3.
As Solomon faith, No man ca^ search the heart of the king: so Paul says; No
man knows the spirit of any man, 1. Cor. 2. 11.
but the spirit which is in man, that is, no man feels the heart of man so
well as him self. And yet himself, although he have lived with it ever since
he was borne, does not know his own heart unless he examine it narrowly, no
more than he knows his own bones, or his veins, or his sinews, or his
arteries, or his muskles, how many are in his body, or where they lie, or what
they do. This seems strange that a man should not know his own heart, yet it
is true that the best of us al does not know his own heart, though he have
dwelt with it from his mothers womb. For Christ says to his disciples, Luke.
9. 55.
even to his disciples, You know not of what spirit you are, that is, you
think better of your selves tha^ you are, and know not what the clock strikes
within. There is a zeal without knowledge, and there is a knowledge without
zeal; there is a faith without obedience, and there is an obedience without
faith; there is a love without fear, and there is a fear with love, and both
are hypocrites. Therefore as Dalilah searched where Sampsons strength lay,
Judge. 16. 6.
so let every man search where his weakness lies, and always be filling the
empty gap.

Paul shows what we should do before we receive the Sacrament, Let a man
examine himself. But some will come before they examine themselves, and
therefore as the Priests of the Law, had authority to put by lame and blind
sacrifices, so the Ministers of the Gospel have power to put by lame and blind
receivers, and he which does not so, gives a sword into their hands to kill
them selves. If the Pastor would use this examination duly, it were the only
way to make every one examine himself, least he be put by like Non
proficients. As liphtah discerned the Ephramites, because when they should
pronounce Shibboleth, they pronounced Sibboleth: so all which cannot pronounce
Christ, that is give a reason of their faith, are to be thrust from this Table.

There is hearing, Luke. 8. 18.
and a preparatiue before hearing. There is a praying, and a preparatiue before
praying. There is a receiving, Eccle. 4. 17.
and a preparatiue before receiving; which if it be wanting, the receauer
receaueth vncomfortablie, the prayer prays idly, the hearer hears
vnfruitefullie, like those which eat before hunger, and drink before thirst.

This preparatiue before hearing and praying, and receiving, does signify,
that there is a kind of Physic in these three, for preparatiues are
ministre^ (...) ways before Physic, and as the prepa^^tiue which goes
before, makes way to the Physic, or else it would do no good, but hurt: so
unless examination go before the Sacrament, we seal up the threatenings which
are written against us, in stead of the promises which are made unto us, for
the Sacrament is a seal, and therefore seals good or evil, as every other
seal does.

The preparatiue before we receive, is to Examine. Luke. 1. 76.
As John was the forerunner of Christ, The second examination.
so examination is the forerunner of the Sacrament, like the harbinger, which
rides before to prepare the rowme. Job. 1. 5.
For, if Job commanded his sons to sanctify themselves before they did come
to his sacrifice, how should we sanctify our selves before we come to Christ's
Sacrament, wherein we are commanded to do as the Lord him self did which
instituted it? It is said, that the Chamber wherein Christ did institute this
Sacrament, Luke. 22. 12.
was trimmed; the Chamber wherein the Apostles received this Sacrament was
trimmed: If Judas Chamber, his inner Chamber had been trimmed so to, he had
received this Sacrament with as much comfort as the other Disciples did: but
because his heart was not trimmed, therefore he was the first which was
condemned for the unworthy receiving of this Sacrament. Gene. 3. 6.
Adam did not think that death had been in an Apple, so you would not think
that death should be in bread: but as a coal has fire in it beside the coal
it self, which fire does either warm or burn; so this meat has another
meat in it beside that which is seen, which does either save or destroy:
therefore he which comes to this spiritual meat, must examine whether he
have a spiritual mouth, as well as a carnal mouth, or else he shall receive
no more than he sees, and that which he sees not shall destroy him. Mar. 2.
22.
No man (says Christ) puts new wine into old vessels, least the vessels
break and the wine leake. This Wine is new Wine, therefore put it into new
vessels, holy vessels, sanctified vessels, or else it will leake forth and
break the vessel, and thou shall have no more taste of it, than while the
relish of bread is in thy mouth. When Christ comes to our house, shall we not
look whether our Chamber be trimmed, as the Chamber was trimmed against his
coming to the Passe-ouer? But how shall we trim it?

When a man takes an office, he examineth his substance: when he takes a
trade, he examineth his skill: when he goes to fight, he examineth his
strength, but these wants are no wants when he goes to the Sacrament. Will thou know now upon what articles thou must inquire at that time, that is, how
thou should examine thy self?

As some prayer may be at all times, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
and some rejoicing may be at all times; so some examination is at all times.
Thus Job examined himself every day, Job. 9. 28.
nay, every hour, because he scanned all that he did.

But there is a special examination before the Sacrament, because it is the
bread which is received to salvation, or damnation; 1. Cor. 11. 29.
because it is the feast, to which whosoever comes without his wedding
garment, Mat. 22. 11.
shall be cast into utter darkness, because it is a seal which seals a curse
or a blessing. Therefore having observed that examination is the necessariest
lesson in Christianity, and less known than other, I have studied since my
Sermon to lay down three examinations which you should use at all times, and a
special examination, for the Communicants Catechism, which leads immediately
to the Sacrament as a guest is handed to the Table. In the first examination I
will show thee a rule how thou shall try others spirits, and how thou shall
try thine own.

Thou shall try strange spirits by The first examination upon the marks of
true spirits and the false, in our selves or other.
plainly, or doubtfullie, boldly, or fearefullie, therefore we read that the
oracles of the heathen had a double meaning, and that the false Prophets never
spoke boldly, but where their patrons were ready to flesh them. 1. King. 22.
11


By the proportion of faith: for every

By the event of their speeches: for Deuteronomy. 18. 22.
as it is said in the 18. of Deuteronomy. and therefore they are called false
Prophets. Mat. 7. 15.


By their fruits: for none of the false Mat. 7. 16.


By their success: for if they be not of Arians and Manichees and Pelagians
are vanished, as if they had never been, so time shall wear out every
doctrine that is not truth. This is thy rule to try others spirits.

To the clean all things are clean, Romans 14. 14.
and so, to the unclean nothing is clean; Titus. 1. 15.
that is, they defile themselves with every thing.

Mat. 6. 21.
Where a man's treasure is, there will be his heart, for lightly, the beginning
is a picture of the end, and the act is like the thought which set it a work.

Thirdly, by the manner of thy consolation

Fourthly, whether it bring to Christ, The 2. examination upon the differences
between the wicked and the godly.


It must needs be, that they which walk to contrary ends, should go diverse
ways: therefore there be mo differences between the children of God, And the
children of the world, than there be between men and beasts.

Will: for the wicked strive to bring Gods will to their will, Number. 22. 19.
like Balaam, which when he had an answer, stayed for another: but the
faithful labor to bring their will to Gods will, like Christ, which said,
Matthew. 26. 39.
not as I will, but as thou will.

Faith. All men have not faith (says Paul) but the just live by faith: 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
as if he should say, Romans 1. 17.
the just believe, and the unjust believe not. The just believe, and apply
that they believe to themselves. Iam 2. 19.
The wicked may believe like the devils, but their faith is like a gadding hen,
which carries her eggs to other, and never lays at home, so they believe that
other shall be saved, but not themselves.

Hope, for because the wicked hope not for any mends of God, therefore they
never defer their reward, but if they do any good, Matthew. 6. 2.
they are trumpets of it themselves, for fear it should not be blased enough,
and therefore Christ said, that the Pharisees had their reward already, because
they were boasters of their works; 2. Tim. 3. 2.
and if they do no good but evil, yet they would be magnified as much for
evil, as other are for good. But the faithful are likened to handmaides, Psalm.
123. 2.
which wait their reward, Matthew. 6. 3.
their left hand sees not when their right hand does well, and they are afraid
to take honor of men, for losing their honor with God, John. 1. 21.
like John Baptist; which made his virtues meaner than they were, and debased
himself, when he might have got a name above his Lord.

They are distinguished in obedience, by their fruits as an infallible rule:
Matthew. 7. 17.
for the evil tree will bring forth evil fruit, and the good tree good fruit,
and neither can change his property, although the evil fruit is sometimes
beautiful, and the good fruit sometimes blasted. All slip, but in the wicked,
one sin teaches another, and in the faithful, one sin preuenteth another.

They are distinguished in Repentance, sins past, but the godly purpose to
sin no more: Exodus 10. 16.
so Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas said, 1. Sam. 15. 30.
I have sinned, but Shadrach, Meshach, Matthew. 27. 4.
and Abednego said, Dan. 3. 18.
We will not sin: therefore the heart of the godly is called a contrite
heart, Psalm. 51. 17.
but the heart of the wicked is called a heart that cannot repent. Romans 2. 5.
Beside, as Christ cast out a legion of devils at once, Luke 8 30.
so the godly would be purged of all their sins together, but the wicked
never consent to leave all, but as Naaman said, Let the Lord spare me in this:
2. King. 5. 18.
so ever he excepteth one sin, which is his beloved sin, like Herod, Matthew. 14.
3.
which reformed many things, and yet would not leave his brothers wife.

Charity, for ye shall never see the wicked love their enemies: and therefore
when the Pharisees could not love their enemies, they taught that men might hate
their enemies: Matthew. 5. 43.
and Christ speaking of Publicans and sinners, Luke 6. 32.
exhorts his disciples not to love like them, because they loved none but
their friends.

Prayer, for the wicked cannot pray, therefore David says, Psalm. 14. 4.
they call not upon the Lord, as if they had not the spirit of prayer, Zach.
12. 10.
and therefore Christ calls their prayers babbling, Romans 8. 16.
for they think not of God when they speak unto him. Matthew. 6. 7.


They are distinguished in Patience; Caine, Genesis 4. 13.
It is heauyer than I can suffer; Act. 16. 25.
but Paul and Silas sing in prison, for a faithful man would have something to
humble him, and rejoices to bear his masters marks, Gal. 6. 17.
because the wounds of a lover are sweet.

They are distinguished in the use of adversity for this is a proper and
peculiar mark of Gods children, to profit by affliction: and therefore we
read not in all the punishments of the wicked, that one of them said like
David, Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

They are distinguished in Humility, Exodus 8. 8. 15.
like Pharao that never sorowed, but when he suffered: but the Apostles learned
humility of their master before their persecution came. Mat. 11. 29.


judgment of the word, for to the wicked it seems the hardest and simplest,
and vnpleasantest book that is, and therefore Paul says, 1. Cor. 1. 18.
that it is foolishness unto the^. But to the godly, it seems the wisest,
and eloque^test, and sweetest, and easiest book of all other, as though God
did suddenly bring the understanding of it to them, Genesis 27. 20.
as Jacob said of his veneson, according to that, John. 7. 17.
He that will do his will shall know his doctrine.

judgment of God. The wicked are persuaded now and then of Gods mercy for the
present time while they feel it, as the Jews praised him always when he did
as they would have him: Exodus 15. 20.
but they cannot persuade themselves, that God will be merciful to them still,
like Job, Job. 13. 15.
which said, Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him: therefore the
hope of the righteous is called, Prou. 14. 32.
hope in death. Beside, Prou. 23. 18.
if the wicked love God, it is but for his benefits, 1. Sam. 10. 6.
as Saul loved him for his kingdom. And this is always to be noted, that in the
wicked, the fear of hell is greater than their hope of heaven, but in the
faithful the hope of heaven is greater than their fear of hell.

They are distinguished in their delights: for the sport of the ungodly is
folly, Dan. 5. 4.
like Belshazzars: and therefore when they are sick, or troubled, they never
run to the Word for comfort, as though Gods promises pertained not to the^,
but to feasts, or tables, or tales, or music, 1. Sam. 16. 23.
as Saul did to the harp: but all the delights of the godly are like David's
dance about the Arc, 2. Sam. 6. 14.
they are never merry, but when they are doing well, not at peace, but when
their prayers have overcome God, Genesis 32. 28.
like Jacob.

They are distinguished in their opinions of death: for the faithful long to
be dissolved, Phil. 1. 23.
and although they might live ever in continual prosperity, yet they would
not stay so long out of heaven: Luke 2. 29.
but the wicked would never be dissolved; because death comes always unto the^
like a Iayler to hale unto prison, 1. King. 22. 8.
as Ahab said to Micaiah, that he never prophesied good to him. Hereby a man
shall know whether he have faith; for if he believe the promises, he will be glad
to receive them.

sense of sin. Wicked men feel the lothsomnes of their vices, but none but
the faithful feel the defects of their righteousness. The natural man never
complains of his good works, but vaunteth of them: but a godly man finds
fault with his prayers, and his alms, and his watches, Esaias. 64. 6.
like Isaiah that said, his righteousness was like a menstruous Cloth. Psalm.
16. 2.
As Christ met the te^pter in the wilderness, Mat. 4. 1. and 2
a place of prayer, and fasting, and meditation; so a godly man meets the
tempter in his prayers, and in his fastes, and in his meditatio^s, that is, he
finds some let or spot, or want in all his devotions. Therefore, unless thy
righteousness mislike thee, as well as thy profaneness, know that yet thou art no
further than the wicked.

ends: for the children of God propose the glory of God, and level all their
thoughts, speeches and actions, as if they were messengers sent to carry him
presents of honor. Thus did David, Psalm. 103. 1.
when he said, All that is within me, praise the Lord: as though himself had
rather be without praise, than his master: but the children of the world set up
their own glory for their mark; like Nebuchadnezzar which said, Dan. 4. 27.
for the honor of my majesty. Therefore they speak, and look, and walk, as
if they did say to their tongue, and eyes, and feet, and apparel, as Saul said
to Samuel, 1. Sam. 15. 30. 17
Honor me before this people.

Lastly, they are distinguished in perseverance: Exodus 32. 8.
and therefore God says, They are soon turned out of the way: but the zeal of
the faithful was represented by the fire of the temple which never went out.
Leuit. 6. 12.
By these differences thou may see how much thou do differ from the
wicked, or whether thou be of their band.

Then come to the third examination, The third examinati^^
As the devil tempts thee to see what thou will do for him, Matthew. 4. 9.
so thou must tempt thy self, and get of thy soul what it would do for God,
and what it would do for God, and what it would suffer for him, which has
suffered death for it. Therefore here we will set down certain intergatories
whereof thou shall examine it.

First, whether thou have the heart of Joshua, Josh. 24. 15.
to worship God as boldly as thou do, though all the world did renounce him,
and every one did mock thee, as they did Noah while he built the Arc?

Whether thou would not deny Christ as Peter did, Math. 26. 70.
if thou were in Peter's straights, and nothing to succor thee but thy policy?

Whether thou would not steal, if thou did see a booty as fit as Achan,
Josh. 7. 21.
which thou might catch up, and no man spy thee?

Whether thou would refuse a bribe like Elisha, 2. King. 5. 16.
if thou did meet with one which were as willing and able to give it as
Naaman?

Whether thou would not deceive, Luke 16. 6.
if thou were in such an office as the false Steward, Although this is a
parable, yet it carries the signification of an history
whose master referred all unto him, and knew not when he kept any thing back?

Whether thou would not fulfill thy lust as David did, 2. Sam. 11. 4.
if thou had his opportunity and allurement, and might do it without
danger of law like a King, as David might?

Whether thou would not tell a lie as Abraham did, Genesis 12. 13.
if it stood upon thy life, which made him twice dissemble that his wife was
his sister, Genesis 20. 2.
least he should die for her beauty?

Finally, if it should be said unto thee as the devil said to Christ, Matthew.
4. 9.
All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, that is no
more, but if thou will sin, whether thou would yield or no.

If thou have sinned thus and thus before, I will not say therefore the Lord
will not hear thee, Psalm. 66. 18
but David says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me, that is, if for any cause a man purpose and carry a mind to sin when he
is tempted, the Lord is so far from helping him, that he will stand like Ball,
^. King. 18. 26.
as though he did not hear him; for he has a Traitors mind as deep as any,
which thinks, for a dukedom I would betray my Prince, though he never play the
Traitor in his life Thus ye have heard how to try spirits and how to discern
a Christian from an hypocrite, and how to oppose your hearts, that ye may be
sure to judge rightly what ye are.

Now we come to that examination, The fourth examination
which is the epitome or abridgment of all these; for memory is short, and all
are not of one strength, but some run, and some go, and some creep, and all
do well, so long as they strive to perfection. Heb. 6. 1.
The matters whereof principally the mind should be examined before the
Sacrament, The receivers articles.
are these.

Esai. 59. 20.
for as the scripture calls him a Redeemer, Job. 19. 25.
so Job calls him his Redeemer.

the^ which love thee, but whether thou love them which hate thee: for Christ
commands us to love our enemies. Matthew. 5. 44.


The third article is, whether thou Matthew. 12. 36.
that we must give account for every idle word.

The fourth article is, whether thou Alpha, Revel. 22. 13.
and Omega, both the beginning, and the end, as well in our living, as in our
being, which has made no promise to them which begin, Revel. 2. 10.
but to them which persevere.

The last article is, whether thou can Luke 12. 38.
to show how we should obey; and we are called soldiers, 2. Tim. 2. 3. and 4.
to show, how we should suffer.

These are the receivers articles, whereof his conscience must be examined,
before he receive this Sacrament: happy is he which can say, Matthew. 19. 20.
All these have I kept: Genesis 8. 11.
for the Dove was not so welcome to Noah, as this man is to Christ. But if thou
find not these affections within, but a nest of vices, leave thine offering at
the Altar, Matthew. 5. 24.
and return to thine examination again, for thou art not a fit guest to sup
with the Lord, until thou have on this Wedding garment. Matthew. 22. 11.
How is it then that some regard their other garments more than this? The
preparation of cu^trie folk before they receive.
Paul says, Examine your selves, and they examine their apparel, if they
have new clothes in the country, then they are ready to receive. I have
known many kept from the Sacrament a whole year together by their masters,
for nothing but for want of a new suit to set them forth with their fellows.

Others respect whether it be a fair day, that they may walk after service,
making that day upon which they receive, like a Scholars Thurseday, which


