The History of TITHES That is, The Practice of PAYMENT of them. The Positive
LAWS made for them. The OPINIONS touching the Right of them.


A REVIEW of it. Is also annexed, which both Confirms it and directs in the Use
of it.

By I. SELDOM.

Nec partis studijs agimur. Sed sumsimus arma
Consilijs inimica tuis, IGNAVIA fallax!
M.DC.XVIII.

To the most honored Sr ROBERT COTTON of Connington. Knight and Baronet.
Noble Sir;
Justice, no less then Observance, vrges me to inscribe this History of
Tithes to your name. So great a part of it, was lent me by your most ready
Courtesy and able Direction, that I restore it rather then give it you. And it
cannot but receive an increase of estimation from your interest thus seen in
it. For to have borowd your help, or vsd that your inestimable Library (which
lives in you) assures a curious Diligence in search after the inmost, least
known and most useful parts of Historical Truth both of Past and Present
Ages. For such is that Truth which your Humanity liberally dispenses; and such
is that which by conference is learned from you. such indeed, as if it were, by
your example, more sought after; so much headlong Error, so many ridiculous
impostures would not be thrust on the too credulous, by those which stumble on
in the Rode, but never with any care look on each side or behind them. that
is, those which keep their Understandings always in a weak Minority that
ever wants the Authority and Admonition of a Tutor. For, as on the one side, it
cannot be doubted but that the too studious Affectation of bare and sterile
Antiquity, which is nothing else but to be exceeding busy about nothing, may
soon descend to a Dotage; so on the other, the Neglect or only vulgar regard of
the fruitful and precious part of it, which gives necessary light to the
Present in matter of State, Law, History, and the understanding of good
Autors, is but preferring that kind of Ignorant Infancy, which our short life
alone allows us, before the many ages of former Experience and Observation,
which may so accumulat years to us as if we had liud even from the beginning of
Time. But you best know this; in whom that useful part is so fully eminent,
that the most learned through Europe willingly acknowledge it* and so open has
your courtesy ever made the plentious store of it to me, that I could not but
thus offer you whatsoever is in This of mine own also, as a symbol of some
thankfulness. It was at first destind to you. And howeuer through the hasty
fortune that (I know not why) it sufferd at the Press, some pieces of it have
been dispersed without the Honor that your Name might add to them; I shall be
yet ever so ambitious of that Honor, that the whole shall never (for so much as
I can prevent) be communicated without this prefixed testimony of Duty to you.
Receive it favorably, Noble Sir; and continue to me that Happiness which I
enjoy in that you neither repute me unworthy of your Love, nor permit me in
Ignorance when I come to learn of you.

From the Inner Temple, April. IV. M.DC.XVIII.
THE PREFACE.
IT has even so happend with not a few of the Malicious (what through lazy
Ignorance, what through peevish Jealousy) at their first sight or hearing of
the name of this History of Tithes, as it was wont with those raw Nouices,
that, upon their first admission to the sacred Mysteries of the Gentiles,
troubled and frighted themselves with a world Proclu^ in Platoni^* ^heolog.
lib. 1. ca^. 3 and lib. 4. cap. 1^.
of false apparitions while they thought of what they should see in the inmost
Sanctuary at the unknown presence of their Deity. And doubtless, the Priest
had not a little work to persuade them that what they should there meet with,
was not an unlucky Empusa, not a formidable Mormo, not a wanton Cobalus, not a
mischievous Fury, not indeed any thing that their idle brains, being such mere
strangers to the abstrusest parts of Truth, had fashiond out. The many fancies
that Malice, Ignorance, and Jealousy have framd to themselves touching this of
Mine, have been no less ridiculous; and some equally fearful, but equally
false. And I must here first play the Priest also, and so clear, if it were
possible, those Fancies, by protesting that it is not written to prove that
Tithes are not due by the Law of God; not written to prove that the Laity may
detain them, not to prove that Lay hands may still enjoy Appropriations; in
sum, not at all against the maintenance of the Clergy. Neither is it any
thing else but it self, that is, a mere Narration, and the History of Tithes.
Nor is the law of God, whence Tithes are commonly deriud, more disputed of in
it, then the Divine Law, whence all Creatures have their continuing
subsistence, is inquired after in Aristotle's history of living Creatures, in
Plinies Natural history, or in Theophrastus his history of Plants; or then
the Justice of the old Courts of Rome, is examind in Brodaeus his history of
them, or the conuenience of the Civil and Canon Laws in that of Riuallius. Nor
was any thing, that belonged to the Title, purposely omitted. Nor was any piece
of it stolen from any other man's notes. That as the rest also has been most
maliciously imputed by some that so impudently dare conjecture (though they be
far enough from being either -- art aut scientia Diuini) and as iudiciously
censure it or me, as those in Lucian, could Euripides, that were weekly stark
mad in Rhyme till Winter, by reason of what they had heard of his Tragedies in
Summer, and could neither judge at all of what they said nor yet possibly hold
their peace. But they know there are never wanting long ears ready stretched
out to base detraction; and that animates them. I know not how otherwise to
confirm these protestations then by sending him, that beleeus me not here, to
the view of the whole. He may be there further satisfied. and shall then see
also that it is not of the Pitch of the Doctrine of the Breuiarie, or within
the compass of Pocket-learning. Nor will it, I think, look like what were
patcht up out of Postils, Polyantheas, common place books or any of the rest of
such excellent Instruments for the advancement of Ignorance and Laziness. Nor
is any end in it, to teach any Innovation by an imperfit pattern had from the
mustie Relics of former time. Neither is Antiquity related in it to show
barely what has been (for the sterile part of Antiquity which shows that only
and to no further purpose, I value even as slightly as dull Ignorance does the
most precious and useful part of it) but to give other light to the Practice
and doubts of the present. Light, that is clear and necessary. nor could such
as have searched in the Subject see at all often, for want of such Light. But
illos non peto, piscem peto. Neither has it at all wanted the most approving
censures of such as are of choicest Learning, ablest Judgment, and truly
Decumatissimi as well in worth as Title. Nor is it at all material what any one
shall cast on it through his secure confidence only, in any of those old
Isidor. P^^ufiota lib. 1. Epi^t. 92.
ensigns of dissembled Ignorance or Gravity, the Beard, the Habit, and Title.
It is for such to learn by, not at all to censure. And none of the Ingenuous
and Learned, that read it, will be backward, I think, to allow it for Truth, as
he did that first licenced it for the Press with Ita est and subscription of
his Name.

But we leave this preposterous Admonition in Negatiues (yet by reason of the
headlong importunity of such as have in great number already misconceiud it,
they were necessary and could not elsewhere have had so fit place) and shortly
thus delineat what it is by the end and purpose of writing it; by the Argument
of it; by the Course of composing it; and by the sum of performance in it in
behalf of the Clergy.

For the first; we find that in the frequent Disputations about Tithes, not
only Arguments out of holy Writ for proof of a Divine right to them, but
matter also of Fact, that is, Practice and Story, is very often used; as the
kinds of payment of them among the Ebrews, among the Gentiles, the Maintenance
of the Church in the Primitive times, the Arbitrarie Consecrations,
Appropriations and Infeodations of them in the middle times, the Payment of them
at this day in the several States of Christendom, together with the various
Opinions and positive Laws touching them. For, Opinions and Laws, as they are
related only and fall under the Question of what and whence they were, are
merely of Fact. And proofs are hence often drawn to confirm sundry occurrences
in inquiry for the truth on either side. That of the Divine right of them is
so wholly a point of Divinity and handled so fully by diverse Schoolmen, so
imperiously by most of the Canonists, and so confidently by some of our late
Divines, that what ever could be said touching that only, by inference out of
the holy Text (which must be the sole trial of it) would but seem taken from
some of them which have so purposely disputed it. Neither were that so fit to
be meddled with by any as by a professed Divine. But for that other part which
falls under History, there is not one of them all which having boldness enough
to adventure on it (which he disputes withal of the divine right) shows not
also too much either Ignorance or Negligence in talking of it, being usually
deceiud and deceiving in it those most of Readers that give their Historical
faith captive to bare Names and common reputation. And as in that old AElian*
(...). lib. 13. cap. 22.
picture of Homer the rest of the following Poets greedily swallowd what ever
he had vomited forth; so among these, one so rashly receives herein error from
another, and so increases it, that there was never found a better example of
the old proverb Sardi Venales, or worse and worse, then in most of their
multiplied pamphlets of it. which of them relates toward what is fit to be
known touching the payment among the Ebrews? among the Gentiles? among
Christians of former time? nay, which of them seem to know or to have heard of
the chief human positive Laws made for Tithes? yet would they gladly use them
if they had them. where is there among them an ingenuous discovery of the
various Opinions of past Ages that belong hither? who of them once touches the
right ancient course of settling Tithes at first in Monasteries, Colleges, or
other such Corporations, by Appropriations and Consecrations of them? who of
them tells us other then mere fables, while he talks of the original of
Infeodations? and with what patience can you read those which as great Doctors
talk of Exemptions, and pretend themselves to the world for such as discover
the most secret curiosities, or cornicum oculos configere, tell us of four
Orders exempted, and make the Hospitalers and those of S. John's of Jerusalem to
be two of them, with other such most gross and ridiculous absurdities? and it
is a common, but most deceiving argument among them, affirmatively to conclude
Fact or Practice of Tithing from what they see ordaind for Tithes in any old
Canon of the Church. as if every thing so ordaind, necessarily had also a
following use. it being indeed frequent enough to find Canons directly
contrary to following Practice; and that even in the proceedings of the Canon
Law, which (as the body of it is) was never received wholly into practice in
any State, but has been ever made subject in whatsoever touches the
temporalties or maintenance of the Church (which come from Lay men) to the
variety of the secular Laws of every State, or to National customs that
cross it. Is it enough to prove that Parish Churches, in England, were
regularly ever to be repaird by the Parsons, because the general Extr. tit. de
Eccl^s. adi^i^. c. 4. de his.
Canon Law is so? or that a Clergy man might not have bequeathd any chattels
wherein he had right in respect of his Church, because also by that Extr. tit.
de offi^. iudicis Ordinari^ c. 4 cum (...).
Law he might not? In England, general customs of the contrary in both cases
still Li^dwood. ^. Nullus, tit. de consu^tudine. and tit. de officio
Archidiac^n^ c. Archid^^con^. verb. ^eparatione. and de Testamentis. c. vt
Clerk* calis, verb. l^g^ti^a
held, and in many other as you see in Lindwood, who knew both the general
practice here and the Canons, and often also teaches their differences in other
cases. very many like may be found in other States, by comparing their
immemoriall customs and old ordinances that are against the Canons, and that
both in the Eastern and Western Churches. and for the Eastern Canon Law;
passages are found to this purpose in Zonaras Videsis vtrosque in C^^. Conc.
Chalced. 12. and 6. in Trull^ 38. and 55. and Balsam. in Chalced. Can. 15. and
28. praeter id quod de Agapio and Gabadi^ Episcopatum Bostrensem petentibus,
subiungitur Concilio Carthaginiensi.
and Balsamon, the two chief and ancient Canonists of that part. The Laity at
pleasure commonly limited the Canon Law especially where it touched their
dignities or possessions (and that as well before Luther so derogated from the
authority of it by burning it at Sleiden. Commentar. lib. 2.
Witteberg in a public assembly, in despite of the Pope, as after) which
might be manifested by a world of examples. but it is most clear to all that
know History. To argue therefore from affirmative Canons only to Practice, is
equal in not a few things (and especially in this of Tithing) to the proving
of the Practice of a custom from some consonant Law of Plato's common wealth,
of Lucians men in the Moon, or of Aristophanes his City of Cuckoes in the
clouds. To supply therefore the want of a full and faithful collection of the
Historical part, was the end and purpose why this was composd which might
remain as a furnished Armorie for such as inquire about this Ecclesiastique
Revenue, and preferring Truth before what dulling custom has too deeply rooted
in them, are not unwilling to change their old akorns for better meat.

As touching the Argument of it; the whole being XIV. Chapters, the first VII.
are thus filled. the first has what is, in best authority of the ancients,
belonging to those Tithes paid before the Leuiticall Law. the second the
several kinds paid by the Jews under the Law. and this from Ebrew Lawiers. The
third shows the Practice of the Romans, Graecians, and some other Gentiles, in
paying or vowing them. Then the whole time of Christianity being
quadripartitly divided (with allowance of about XX. years more or less to
every part) takes up the next Four Chapters, in which the Practice of payment
of Tithes, Arbitrarie Consecrations, Appropriations, Infeodations and
Exemptions of them, establishment of Parochial right in them, as also the Laws
both Secular and Ecclesiastique, with the Opinions of Divines and Canonists
touching them, are in their several times manifested; but so only, that
whatsoever is proper to this Kingdom of England either in Laws or Practice,
either of Payment or of Arbitrarie Consecrations,, Appropriations, or
Infeodations, or establishment of Parochial right, together with a Corollarie
of the ancient Jurisdiction whereto they have been here subject, is reserud all
by it self to the next Seven Chapters. But every of the XIV have their
Arguments prefixed, which may discharge me of further declaration in this place.
By this time, I trust, you conceive what the name of History in the Title
pretends. and the Tithes spoken of purposely in it (for perhaps it is needful
to admonish that also) are only such as either have been paid, vowed, or
dedicated to holy uses, or else give light to the consideration of the
performance or omission of such payment. Neither the Decimae Saladinae, nor the
Decimae Papales (which were wont to be imposd) nor the Decima litium in the
Imperials, nor the old ratio Decimarum upon the Lex Pappia, have had place
here, nor the like, which are no more to this subject then the Tithes paid to
the Crown by our Clergy, or by those of the Boroughs by grant in Parliament, or
the Terrages in Tenths reserud by Lessors often in France and Spain, or the
Tenths anciently paid in some places, as Impost upon Merchandise, or that old
custom of England, in paying the Aurum Reginae, that is a Tenth part of as much
money to De ea re consulas si plura velis, Ioscelinum de Bark^ land, c^p. 24.
Ms. in Bibl. Cottoniana and Codicem illum Geruaesii T^lburie^sis dictum in
Sca^carij Archiuu.
her as was given at any time to the King, or other such. Nor had the Tithes of
houses in London, place here Chap. 8.. ^9.
otherwise then as they occur in those Acts of Parliament and the Decree under
Henry the eight, that mentions the Ministers maintenance by the name of
Tithes. For before that Decree, howeuer the LII. farthings paid on Sundaies
only were near the just Tithe of every Xs. Rent (that is about 1/9.) and were
perhaps thought on by that name (as may be collected out of Lindwood) yet these
ioind with the other Offerings of great Festival days, made up indeed only a
certain competencie of maintenance, but could not properly be reputed among
Tithes. neither in regard of their Value, nor (as compard with the ancient
institution of Tithes among the Jews) in respect of their Nature. For their
value came to much more then a Tithe, as also that does which has the name of
Tithe at this day in London. neither is there reason enough why the LII.
farthings that were offered on Sundaies should be severally, and as divided from
the other Offerings, thought on to this purpose. And for their Nature before
these Acts and the Decree; I here offer only what I find in a short discourse,
titled, A Devise how the Curats of London may be provided of sufficient
livings, written under Henry the eight, and remaining yet among the Records of
the Exchequer. the Author of it first shows that all Ministers of Gods word
should give freely their labors in the Church, and be maintaind of the Tithe
of the free gifts of the earth; as of Cattle, Corn and Fruit; which he
supposes is as freely given them by the Almighty, through the labor of the
people, as the preaching of the Word and administration of Sacraments is to the
people through the labor of the Ministers. But he permits not that any money or
other profit, being not living gifts, as he calls them, is by the Law of God
Titheable. so that where no such living gifts and increase are, there no Tithes
(as Tithes) are paiable to them, as he concludes. Nor indeed is any mention of
other Tithes in the Leuiticall Law, then of the increase of the earth in Fruit
and Cattle, that is of the gain only out of those more natural Trades (which
Polit. (...). cap. (...).
Aristotle elegantly styles (...)) of tilling the Earth and breeding of
Cattle. and that which holy Writ calls (...) Theboah, that is, increase or
revenue, where the Law of prediall Tithing is iterated, is understood by the
Jewish Doctors of the fruits and increase, given us out of the soil; and is
well Paraphrased by the Septtuagint when they turn it (...), that is, the
increase of the earth. and in the vulgar it is expressed by fruges. But then,
It is to se by what Law Curats of Churches in London can have (so are the very
syllables of that discourse) any living of the people otherwise but like as the
people by their own consents will give them for there Office doing. In very
dedde they must have leuyngs to keep them out of necessite. and thereby it is
to se how in London they cannot receive there leuyngs of Godd by no lively gifts
of grace, like as in the Country. But in London they must receive their
leuings of men's gifts; that is money which is every man's own, for their office
doing. The Pope by his Law nor by his Bulls cannot compel no man te giffe his
own good to them for their office doing more then people will consent to giff
them. for Christ says that their leuing is freely given them of Godd, if they
do there office to see all people work. Therefore that if the people have not
labors and leuings, they ought to have none nor can make no Law whereby to axe
no man's good. Therefore that leuing which they have had in London has been by
the consents of the people which has long time given them xivd. of every noble
rated by the rents of houses which has been rich leuings: wherewith they not
content but over that has procured of the people money so many weys by
casualties of Beryalls, Crystnings, Weddings, Obits, and Offerings, yhe and
secretly rifelyth men's consciences taking privy Tithes of whatsoever they can
get, be it out of evil gotten goods. howsoever they can get it, they call it
there dewtie. and thence he says some Benefices were worth Cli. some LXXXli.
some C. marks, others Lli. and then he shortly aduises how the Ministers
maintenance should be otherwise there limited and levied. But who sees not
enough now that what is called Tithes of houses in London, is rather called so
only then is at all so? yet because the name of Tithes in those Acts of
Parliament, is given to the Ministers maintenance there, it had been perhaps
reputed negligence to have omitted the remembrance of them, in the course of
composing it. The Testimonies were chosen by weight, not by number. taken only
thence whither the margin directs, never at second hand. Neither affected I to
muster up many petie and late names for proof of what is had wholly by all
from ancient Fountains. The Fountains only and what best cleared them,
satisfied me. and I supposd every judicious Reader would be so best satisfied
also. For in mere matter of elder story, what credit can Nauclerus, Cario,
Cuspinian, or the numerous rest of later time, add to the testimonies of those
Ancients yet extant, from whom they borrowed what ever they have new dressed of
preceding ages? Petrus Comestor, or Ludolphus de Saxonia may as well increase
the credit of holy Writ, as those other may the truth of such Histories as
instructed them in common with the rest of posterity. Neither at all wish I
that this of mine should gain any strength of Truth from my Name alone, but
from those autorities which I have designed and brought, both for Elder, Late
and Present times, out of such both Printed and Manuscript Annalls, Histories,
Councels, Chartularies, Laws, Lawiers, and Records only as were to be vsd in
the most accurat way of search that might furnish for the subject. yet also I
have not neglected the able judgments of such of the learned of later time, as
give light to former ages. but I so preferred the choicest and most able, that I
have wholly abstaind from any mention or use here of those many Ignorants that
(while they write) rather instruct us in their own wants of ability, then
direct to any thing that may satisfy. If through ignorance I have omitted any
thing in the History or the Reuiew, that deserved place in them; who ever
shall admonish me of it shall have a most willing acknowledgment of his
learning and courtesy* But all the bad Titles that are ever due to abuse of
the holiest obtestation, be always my companions, if I have purposely omitted
any good authority of ancient or late time, that I saw necessary, or could
think might give further or other light to any Position or part of it! For I
sought only Truth; and was never so far engaged in this or aught else as to
torture my brains or venture my credit to make or creat Premises for a chosen
Conclusion, that I rather would then could prove. My Premises made what
Conclusions or Conjectures I have, and were not bred by them. And although Both
of them here not a little sometimes vary from what is vulgarly receiud; yet that
happend not at all from any desire to differ from common Opinion, but from
another course of disquisition then is commonly used; that is, by Examination
of the truth of those Suppositions which patient Idleness too easily takes for
clear and granted. For the old Sceptiques that never would profess that they
had found a Truth, showed yet the best way to search for any, when they doubted
as well of what those of the Dogmaticall sects too credulously receiud for
infallible Principles, as they did of the newst Conclusions. they were indeed
questionless too nice, and deceiud themselves with the nimblenesse of their
own Sophismes that permitted no kind of established Truth. But plainly, he that
auoids their disputing Leuitie, yet, being able, takes to himself their
Liberty of Inquiry, is in the only way that in all kinds of studies leads and
lies open even to the Sanctuary of Truth, while others, that are servile to
common Opinion and vulgar suppositions, can rarely hope to be admitted nearer
then into the base court of her Temple which too speciously often counterfaits
her inmost Sanctuary. and to this purpose also is that of Instit. Orator. lib.
^2. cap. 8.
Quintilian, most worthy of memory, Optimus est in discendo, patronus
incredulus.

For the Sum of the Performance in behalf of the Clergy; I dare confidently
affirm, that never before was there toward so much Humane Law positive for
the payment of whole Tithes, observed to public view as is here discovered;
and that especially in the VIII. chapter for the Clergy of England. And
plainly he that talks of Tithes without reference to such positive Law, makes
the object of his discourse rather what he would have should be, then any thing
that indeed is at all. For what State is in all Christendom wherein Tithes are
paid de facto, otherwise then according to Human Law positive? that is, as
subject to some Customs, to Statuts, to all civil disposition. If they be in
truth due Iure Diuino (which Divines must determine of) they remain equally so
as well after as before Human Laws made touching them. But that is a question
daily controuerted; and among the Clergy. Now, who ever disputes it and relyes
only on Ius Diuinum, or the holy Scripture for the right of Tithes, does but
make way for him whom he cannot persuade that they are due by the Law of God,
to think that they are no way due. Which questionless was the original cause
of the Opinions of such as falsely taught them not at all payable, but
arbitrarily as Alms even since Parochial right in them established. I mean
the Dominican and Franciscan Friars, and those other of a far different
stamp, Wicliffe, Erasmus, and the like. Had they sufficiently thought of the
Constitutions and Practice of Christian States, whereby Tithes had been
variously dedicated for the maintenance of the Evangelical Priesthood, and
settled for other holy uses either by continuance of time, by the owne^s
conueyance, or by any such other civil Title (the strength whereof is
immediately founded in human Law) what color could they have had to think that
they had been only Alms? for what ever is lawfully established by a civil
Title, is clearly debitum Iustitiae, not Charitatis. what brain then except one
bewitched can think that Human positive Law and common Prac^^ce which usually
either declares or makes also a positive Law, are not most carefully to be
sought after in inquiries touching this sacred Revenue, which is no otherwise
enjoyed in any State then as that Law has ordaind and permits. And let Human
Laws, Practice, and Opinions be as their Autors will; yet whatsoever argument
may be found in the law of God for the right of Tithes, remains still as
untouched and equally of his former power, as the heat and light of heaven ever
did, notwithstanding the use of Fire had upon earth. And the truth is that
diverse of them that writ, with more will then judgment, for Tithes, fall often
from their Ius Diuinum, before they are aware, and talk of them as supposd due
also by Human positive Law of Practice. But they are far enough from showing
what or where that Law or Practice is. what do they else when they confound
Tithes and consecrated lands together? and apply that to Tithes which is
equally to be spoken of lands given to the Church? I trust they mean not that
the Church had an original Title also Iure Diuino, to lands arbitrarily
consecrated to it. Let not then either the purpose or conuenience of th^^
History be valued, from what distemperd Malice, Ignorance, or Jealousy have
cried it down with in corners. The learned Friar Bacons most noble Studies
being out of the rode of the lazy Clergy of his time, were vehemently at
first suspected for such as might prejudice the Church. Reuchlin and Bude, the
one for his Ebrew, the other for his Greek, were exceedingly hated because they
learned and taught what the Friars and Monks were mere strangers to. Others
about their time had like fortune. Neither was any one thing in the beginning
of the Reformation so unwillingly receiud or more opposd by such as labourd
that Ignorance might still continue in her triumph, then that singular light to
the clearing of error, the Geek Text of the New Testament, first published in
print by Erasmus* and it was ordaind (as he says) under great penalty in I
know not what College of Cambridge, that no Fellow of the house should be so
impious as bring it within the gates. For the World has never wanted store of
such blocks laid in the way of Learning, as willingly endure not any part of
curious diligence that seeks or teaches whatsoever is beyond their commonly
receiud Nihil vltra. But there are others that both can judge and do wish for
all light to Truth. such they were that even while Ignorance yet held her
declining Empire, defended those Worthies, Bacon, Bude, Reuchlin, Erasmus and
the rest that so sufferd. and to doubt whether this of mine shall find such
also, were but to question w^ether every man were yet a malicious Rebel to
Truth, and wholly without Ingenuity that performs even as much in fostering
her, as Time does in breeding her.

But neither is the Work alone taxt by mistaking of the subject, but also in
regard of the Author. what has a Common Lawyer to do (so they murmur) with
writing of Tithes. for by that name it pleases them to style me. and I must
confess, I have long labourd to make my self worthy of it. But I would their
discretions also would design out to whom it belongs more to write the
History of Tithes, then to a Common Lawyer. I expect not such a sottishness,
as that they should so much as dream it to be more proper to any of the other
single professions of this Kingdom; except to a Divine, or a Ciuilian; under
which name, because those which practice the Canon Laws here (according as the
Common Laws permit) take their Degrees, in the Civil Law, I comprehend also
the Canonist. and use has here made the name of Civil Law, to denote Alberic.
G^ntil^^ de potestate Regi^ absoluta, Seu d^sput. 1.
both Civil and Canon. For the Divine; what is there in the course of his
Study restraind to his profession, that can near enough instruct him in the
Laws and Practice, especially of the Christian times. Nor is the Practice or
Laws of Tithes among the Jews, as they are deliuerd and interpreted by their
Doctors, more indeed restraind to the course of Divinity, then of Law and
History. But should a Ciuilian rather have dealt with it? if he; then either
(according to what we understand by that name in England) as a Ciuilian, or as
a Canonist. if as a Ciuilian; he should the^ have made that proper to himself
touching which, in the whole body of his Law (though he take in also
Theodosius his Code, the Basilica and the Nouels of the later Eastern
Emperors) not the least mention is found of Tithes belonging to the Church.
Indeed, a case is put by Vlpian of L. 2. Siquis ff. de ^ollicitat.
vowing of Tithes, which some old ignorant and barbarous Doctors understand of
Tithes among Christians. but they were long since laughed at for it by him that
Budau^ ibid. and in l. quicunque ff. de Institor. action^.
first happily labourd in the restoring to that Profession, the lost neatness
and elegancie of the Text. That was clearly spoken of the Roman use only, and
of vowing to Hercules or the like. But should the Ciuilian as a Canonist have
done it? what in all his Decrees, Decretals, and Extrauagants, though he join
many armies of his Doctors, directs him to the Practice of the Jews, Gentiles
or Christians? where shall the Canonist or the Ciuilian, or the Divine, in the
courses of their proper study, find the many Secular Laws made in behalf of
the Clergy for Tithes? where the ancient practice of payment? If it be clear
then (as I hope none has the impudence to deny it) that neither the Divine,
nor Ciuilian, nor Canonist, by the course of their own appropried Studies, can
come to what is necessary in the knowledge of the History of Tithes, it will
be as clear that none of them could challenge the meddling with it as a right
specially belonging to any of their Professions. But neither indeed is it
proper to any one alone of those that are commonly made Professions. The truth
is, both it and not a few other enquiries of subjects too much unknown, fall
only under a far more general Study; that is, of true Philologie the only
fit Wife that could be found for the most learned of the Gods. She being well
attended in her (...) or daily services of Inquiry, by her two Handmaids
Curious Diligence and Watchful Industry, discouers to us often from her
raised Tower of Judgment, many hidden Truths, that, on the deuell of any one
restraind Profession, can never be discerned. and every Profession takes from
her to it self (as was long since Apud Ma^t. Capellam llb. 2. de Nuptti^
Philologia and Merc^ri^. and de Philologes al^quot veris consulas, Qui^tilia^,
Instit. Orator. lib. 12. cap. vl^.
obserud) some necessary part not elsewhere to be sought for. not much otherwise
then as the Subaltern sciences do from their Superiors, or as they all do from
that Universality or First Philosophy, which is but the more real part of
true Philologie, and establishes principles to every Faculty that could not of
it self alone know how to get them. But is not the company of this great Lady
of Learning with her attendants, as fit for a Student of the Common Laws of
England, as for any other pretending what faculty soever? I never heard that
she was engaged alone to any beside Mercury. No^ find I any conditions in the
Marriage twixt her and Mercury, that she should favor any one particular
Profession more then another. I know there have been and are many common
Lawiers of other States (for every State in Christendom is governed by its own
Common Laws and Customs, and has truly its common Lawiers as is further showed
toward the end of the Reuiew) so far from being strangers to Her that they
are all to be reputed of her chiefest Darlings; and some of them are hardly
equalled among any other Professors. witness in France those ever honored
names, Bude, Cuiacius, Brisson, Tiraquell, Pithou, Pasquier, Le Thou, Aerault,
Berterie, Sauaron, and others; in the Empire, Gruter, Freher, Ritterhuse; in
the united Provinces, Groot, Heuter, and the like elsewhere. For these all were
or are practicers of the various common or secular Laws of their own Nations,
although they studied the Imperialls and Canons in the University. and who of
the learned knows not what light these have given out of their studies of
Philologie, both to their own and other Professions? and that in rectifying of
Story, in explication of good Autors, in vindicating from the injury of time
both what belongs as well to sacred as prophan studies? why then may not equally
a common Lawier of England use this Philologie? and by consequent be a fit
Author of this History of Tithes, as of a proper issue of Philologie? it being
indeed much more proper also to Philologie in a common Lawier, then in one of
any other Profession. For the two chief parts of it (that is, Practice of
payment and the Laws of Tithing, that either are in force or ever were receiud
touching them in any State) were always and are part of the proper Object of
his Studies. and what ever Divines or Canonists conclude of them; it is the
Secular or Common Laws only that according to Customs, and various Ordinances
permit or restrain the Canons in legal exaction of them, and that in other
States as well as in England. for howsoever it be affirmd by Bodi^* de Repub*
lib. 5. cap. 2.
some which enough accuratly think not of it, that the Clergy every where in
the Western Church, being scarce a hundredth part of the People, are inricht
with whole Tithes of Fruits of the Earth and of Cattle; yet it is certain that
in no State of that Church, whole Tithes are universally paid. But frequently
Customs, not only of a Modus but de non decimando are by force of secular Law
practiced. witness for the Empire, is in that Diet of Commit. Norimberg. 1522.
Grauamine 45.
Norimberg under Charles the fifth, where the lay Princes of the Empire
complain against the Church for offering to put their Canons for Tithes in
practice; Etsi Laici per multa annorum curricula de certis eorum praedijs,
neque maiores neque exiguas, vt vocant, praestiterint Decimas etc. As much for
Spain is in Varia^. Resolu^. lib. 1 Cap. 17. and Practic. qu^st. 35.
Gouaruuias; for Italy, D^ officio and potestate Episcopo part 1. cap. 9.
in Vgolin, Ad 22. D.Th. q. 87.
Caietan, others; for France, in Papon on the customs of Burbon, Boerius on
those of Berry, de Grassalio, beside the many Arrests of Parliament that are
adjudged against the Canons. But these things are more particularly showed in
the Seventh Chapter, wherein (as in the rest) we have affected rather what is
Authority enough, then what is various. Who now can show color why this was
not a work proper enough for a Common Lawier? But this whole Premonition, I
think, is as well more then is necessary to the truly judicious, as it may
perhaps seem less then what satisfies to the numerous Pretenders, that neither
know any way that lies out of their beaten Rode, nor value books but as
Stationers do, nor admit willingly of any other kind of Studies then such as
are more like sordid Occupations then Liberal Professions. But I stay you too
long here, Reader. Try now how I have performd my promise; spare not to try
with your most censorious examination; -- sed magis acri
Iudicio perpende; and si tibi Vera videtur,
Deed manus; aut, si Falsa est, accingere contra.


THE CONTENTS.
CAP. I. Of Tithes before the Law. I. Melkizedek had Tithes only of the spoils
of War given him by Abraham. (...) denotes spoils of War, and perhaps also
profits taken from the ground, or Ruta caesa. II. Jacobs vow and payment of
Tithes* Both Abraham and Jacob were Priets when they paid Tithes. In whom the
Priesthood was before the Law. III. Whether any certain Quantity were
observed in the Offerings of Cain and Abel. IV. A Cabalistique operation in
numbers by which Tithes and the first Fruits, offered by Abel, might have a
mystical identity. Such operations were amongst old Christians also, but
merely vain.
CAP. II. How among the Jews, Tithes were paid or thought due. I. First fruits,
and Heave offering (that is sixtieth parts at least) first were paid out of the
fruits of the earth II. The first Tithe was paid to the Levites (who out of
that paid a Tithe to the Priests) and then the second Tithe. III. The error of
them that make a third Tithe. The second Tithe of every third year spent on
the poor. what they take the year of Tithing to signify in Deuteronomy. IV.
Above a sixth part was yearly paid by the Husbandman: but no Tithe by him to the
Priests. V. How their Cattle were tithed. VI. A discontinuance of payment
among them. Honester Ouer-seers chosen for the true payment. Demai, that is,
things doubtful, whether Tithes were paid of them or no. Passages in
Epiphanius and S. Chrysostom, of their Tithing. VII. Their Tithing of every
herb. what their Canonists hold Titheable. VIII. Their Law of Tithing (after
the destruction of their second Temple) ceased, by the doctrine of their
Canonists. which teaches also that they are not to pay elsewhtre then in the
Land of Israel, and some adjacent Countries. Presbyteratus Iudaeorum totius
Angliae anciently granted by the English Kings.
CAP. III. Tithes how paid, or due among the Gentiles I. Some Romans paid to
some Deities, and sometimes only, a Tenth of spoils; of proceed of merchandise;
of their estates; but usually also by vow, which bound the Heir or Executor.
II. Festus is falsely cited for a general custom of payment of Tithes among the
Ancients. III. Examples of Tithes paid among the Graecians. IV. How the
assertions of a general* use of giving Tithe to the Gods among the Graecians,
are to be understood; and why (...) that is, to Tithe, signifies also to
Consecrate. V. A Tithe paid to Hercules of Tire, and Sabis an Arabian Deity,
the same with Jupiter Sabazius.
CAP. IV. In the first four hundred years after Christ. I. No use of Tithes
occures till about the end of this four hundred years. Offerings and Monthly
pay for maintenance of the Church in the primitive times. Diuisiones Mensurnae.
Sportulae. II. Payment of Tithes of Mines and Quarries to Christian Emperors.
The wealth of the Church envied. III. The opinion of Origin touching Tithes.
IV. Constitutions of those times, that mention them, are of no credit.
CAP. V. From about the year CCCC. till DCCC. I. Tithes were now paid in diverse
places, to Abbots, to the Poor, to the Clergy. II. Some Consecrations were
then made in perpetual right, at the pleasure of the Owner. III. That story
of Charles Martell his taking away Tithes, and making them feodall, cannot be
justified. IV. The opinions of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and S.
Chrysostom. the first two teach, the Tenth due by Gods Law; the other two
persuade only that a less part should not be offered. V. Of Canons, for the
payment of Tithes, that are attributed to this Age.
CAP. VI^ Between about the year D.CCC. and near M.CC. I. Payment of Tithes,
how performed. II. Arbitrarie Consecrations of them alone (like Grants of
Rents-charge) at the Lay-owners choice, to any Church or Monastery, were
frequent; and sometimes Laymen sold them to the Church. Redimere Decimas. III.
Appropriations of them with Churches; wherein they passed as by themselves, from
the Patron severally and directly in point of interest. The beginning of Parish
Churches. Disposition of the Offerings received there. Lay-foundations of Parish
Churches. The interest that Patrons claymed. Right of Aduowson. The ceremony
of putting a Cloth or Robe upon the Patron, at the consecration of the Church.
The use of Inuestitures, by which (as by liuerie of Seisin) Lay Patrons gave
their Churches. Commendatio Ecclesiae. Benefice. None anciently received the
character of Orders, but when also the ordination was for the title of some
Church. Thence came the later use of Episcopal Institution. Whence some
Patrons came to have most part of the Tithes. Canonica portio. The Clergy and
Councels against Inuestitures. Their continuance till toward M.CC. when
Institution (as it is at this day) upon presentation grew common. How
Appropriations were in those times made. The ancient Episcopal right to Tiths,
especially in Germany, and the Northern parts. How Monks justified their
possession of Tithes and Parish-Churches. The right of Tithes generally denied
in Turingia, to the Archbishop of Mentz. IV. Of Infeodations of Tithes into
Lay-hands, both from the Clergy and Laity; and of their Original. V. Of
Exemptions granted by the Pope. Templars and Hospitalars accounted no part of
the Clergy. VI. The general opinion was, that they are due iure diuino. but
this, indifferently thought on, seems to have denoted rather Ecclesiastique or
Positive Law (by the doctrine and practice of the Clergy) then Divine Moral
Law. VII. Laws Imperial, and Canons Synodall and Pontificiall, for the payment
of Tenths. The gross error of some that mistake Nona and Decima in the
Capitularies. The first General Council that mentions Tithes.
CAP. VII. Of the time from M.CC. or near thereabouts, till this day. I. The
Canons of General Counsels, and Decretalls, for Parochial right in Tithes
(not formerly otherwise conveyed) which now became more established. II. The
opinion of the Canonists, in the question of what immediate Law Tithes are due
by, is, that they are payable iure diuino. III. How the same question is
determined by the opinion of the Schoolmen. IV. Of those that held them mere
Alms. V. The opinion in Divinity, that concludes them due iure diuino. With a
Determination of the University of Oxford touching Personal Tithes. VI. Laws,
Customs, and Practice of France, in exaction of them. Of their feudall Tithes
at this day. VII. Laws, Customs, and Practice in Spain, touching the general
payment of Tithes. Tithes there, in Lay men's hands. VIII. Customs and
Infeudations in Italy; Payment in Venice; in Germany: Of the Hungarians,
Polacks, Swethians, and others, touching the duty and possession of Tithes.
IX. Of Tithes in Scotland. With an Example of an Appropriation of Churches and
Tithes there, by Robert de Brus. And something of Tithes in Ireland.
CAP. VIII. The Laws of England made in the Saxon mycel synodes or itenagemotes
in Parliaments, and in the Councils here held either National or Prouincial, or
by the Pope, for the due payment or discharge of Tithes in this Kingdom.
Petitions or Bills in Parliament touching them, are inserted, all in their
course of time. CAP. IX. I. Of Parishes in the Primitive Church of the Britons.
II. Parishes in the Primitive Church of the English Saxons. first limited only
in regard of the Ministers function, not of Parochial profits. all the profits
of every whole Diocese, first, made a common treasure to be disposed of by the
Bishop and his Clergy, of the same Diocese. Residence of the Bishop and
Clergy in those times. The great regard then had to every Clergy man. III. Of
division of our Parishes. whether Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury first
divided them. Parochia or Paroecia diversely taken. IV. Lay-foundations of
Parish Churches; from whence chiefly came Parochial limits in regard of the
profits receiud to the singular use of the Incumbents. Limitation of Tithes by
King Edgar to the Mother Parish Church or Monastery. Monasteries preferred
before other Churches for burial. Mortuaries. (...). a third part of Tithes
(according to King Edgars Law) must be given to a new built Church that had
right of Sepulture by the Founder. Sepultura and Baptisterium. Capella
Parochialis. a Parish commanded to be made (out of another that was too large)
by the Pope. one Parish joined to another by the King.
CAP. X. I. The Practice of Tithing. Of King Cedwalla's Tithing, being no
Christian. the custom of the German-Saxons, in sacrificing their tenth captive
to Neptune. Decima used for a less part also in ancient moniments. II. The
Practice of Tithing in the Christian times of our Ancestors. the tale of
Augustine and the Lord of Cometon touching non payment of them. the Tithe of
every dying Bishops substance to be given to the poor, by an old Provincial
Synod. Tithes how mentiond in Domesday. Testimonies of payment of them. Henry
the thirds grant of the payment of tithe of Hay and Mills out of all his
demesnes. The beginning of Parochial payment of Tithes in common and
established practice in England. How that common assertion; that every man
might have disposed his Tithes at his pleasure, before the Council of Lateran,
is true and to be understood.
CAP. XI. I. Arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes (before about the time of the
most known Council of Lateran) by conueiance from the owner of all or part to
any Church or Monastery at his pleasure, in examples selected out of moniments
of infallible credit. II. A Writ in the Register intelligible only from those
arbitrarie Consecrations. a like example to it out of the book of Osney. III.
The liberty of the Baronage anciently challenged to build Churches in their
Territories. Parochial right to Tithes settled in Practice. IV. Of Tithes of
increase in lands not limited to any Parish. How by the common Law they are to
be disposed of.
CAP. XII. I. Appropriations and Collations of Tithes with Churches. The
Corporations to which the Appropriations were made, presented, for the most
part, Vicars. Thence the most of perpetual Vicarages. II. How Churches and
Tithes by Appropriation were anciently conveyed from Lay-Patrons. The use of
Inuestitures, practiced by Lay-Patrons. III. Grants of Rents or Annuities by
Patrons only, out of their Churches. Of the Bishops assent. More of
Inuestitures. A Writ to the Archdeacon anciently sometime sent upon recovery
of a Presentment. IV. Of hereditarie succession in Churches. V. Laps upon
default of Presentation grounded upon the general Council of Lateran, held in
25. Hen. 2. What Praesentare ad Ecclesiam is originally. Donatio Ecclesiae.
CAP. XIII. I. Infeodations here into Lay hands since the Statuts of
Dissolutions. Of Infeodations before that time in England. somewhat more of the
original of Lay men's practice in arbitrarie Consecrations or Infeodations. II.
Exemptions or discharges of payment originally by Privileges, Prescriptions,
Unity, Grants or Compositions, and by the Statuts of Dissolutions.
CAP. XIV. I. The jurisdiction of Ecclesiastique causes, in the Saxon times,
exercised by the Shrife and the Bishop in the County Court. and among them
that of Tithes also was then to have been there determind. The Bishops
Consistory severed from the County Court by William the first. II. After the
Normans, Original suits for Tithes, were as well in the Temporal Courts as in
the Spiritual. and that continued till Henry the second or about King John.
III. Of the time since about King John or Henry the second. Of the Indicauit
and the Writ of right of Aduowson of Tithes. What the Law was in an Indicauit
before that Statut of Westminster. 2. A touch of ancient Prohibitions, De non
Decimando. IV. Writs of Scire facias for Tithes. Enquests taken upon Commission
to enquire of the right of Tithes. V. Fines levied of Tithes (in the time of
Richard the first, of King John, and Henry the third) upon Writs of right of
Aduowson. VI. Scire facias by the Patentees against the pernor of Tithes
granted by the King. VII. Command of payment by the Kings Writ. And of Tithes
in Forests. Trial of the right of Tithes incident in some issues.

The History of TITHES.
CAP. I. Of Tithes before the Law.
I. Melkizedek had Tithes only of the spoils of War given him by Abraham.
(...) denotes spoils of War, and perhaps also profits taken from the ground,
or Ruta caesa.

II. Jacobs vow and payment of Tithes. Both Abraham and Jacob were Priests when
they paid Tithes. In whom the Priesthood was before the Law.

III. Whether any certain Quantity were observed in the Offerings of Cain and
Abel.

IV. A Cabalistique operation in numbers by which Tithes and the first Fruits,
offered by Abel, might have a mystical identitie. Such operations were amongst
old Christians also, but merely vain.

I.
ABraham, in his return from redeeming his nephew Lot with his substance, and
all the substance of Sodom and Gomorrah, was blessed by Melkizedek King of
Salem and Priest of the most high God; and gave him Tithe of all. So is the
holy Writ. But what that all was, is not clearly agreed upon. it is taken to be
(...) miccol aghsher lo, that is, of all that he had, as the ordinary Gloss
of Solomon ^archi there interprets. and expressly so are the Syriaque and
Arabique translations of the new Epist. ad Heb. 7.2
Testament, where this is spoken of. But it is hard to conceive it of any other
all that he had, than all the substance, or all the spoils that he had by that
expedition. The holy Context so points it out. So did the old Jews understand
it. otherwise never had so great and worthy an Author, Arch^olog. a. cap. 1 a.
Flauius Josephus a Jew, confidently written the Tithe there given to be (...),
the Tithe of what was gotten by the War. He knew a received opinion in his
Nation, to be so, or else had not been so forward to deliver it. The same is
confirmed by the Targum, attributed to Jonathan Ben-Vziel. there, of all, is
interpreted by (...) miccal mah datheib, that is, of all that he brought back.
And, to free it from doubt, the holy Aut^^ of the Epistle to the Ebrews, first
using the Text of Genesis in those words, (...), the Tithe of all, after a few
words interposed, explains it by (...), the tithe of the spoils; as if he had
said (...), the Tithe of all the spoils. In that place, the Syriaque has
Tithe (...)
and first fruits, and the Arabique, Tithe (...) ^l^^mosyn^ n. (...) sapius
(...) in Alcorano, quod monuit (...) ta^ humanitate quam doctrina singulari
Guil. Bedw^llus linguarum inpromis Orientali^^ call^^tisi^mu^. Vid^ Azoar.
22.34. and 92.
and Alms. indeed (...) signifies also first fruits, or the chiefest parts,
sacred to the gods among the Gentiles; and (...) has, in that sense, been
turned there, by de praecipuis, in the vulgar. But those Eastern translations
suppose, it seems, as if the Greek should be (...). But we must not take the
old text to have been so different from what we now read. And for that, de
Praecipuis, in the vulgar; can it be thought that he gave Tithe of the best
parts only? How stands that with giving Tithe of. al? It must therefore be
interpreted of the spoils. So St. Chrysostom In Epist. ad Ebr^^s. (...). 1 ^.
understands the Text. (...), says he, (...), that is, the spoils are called
(...), whereof, as he notes also, Abraham made Melkizedek a partaker, by so
giving him the first fruits of his martial performance. Accordingly does
Sulpitius Histor. 1.
Seuerus, in his story of Abraham, call his tenth decimam praedae, which is
also expressly justified by S. Hierome, often stiling it decimas spoliorum,
praedae and victoriae; who well withal confesses, that, were it not for the
holy exposition in that Epistle to the Ebrews, the relation in Genesis might
as well be understood, that, on the other side, Melkizedek, as a bounteous
Ancestor, had given to Abraham the tenth part of his estate; the Text indeed
being both in the Ebrew and Septuagints so, that, no name immediately preceding
the mention of the gift, it sufficiently thence appears not, who was the giver.
Vtrunque (says In Epist. ad E^^grium, t^m. ^.
S. Hierome) intelligi potest and iuxta Ebraicum, and iuxta Septuaginta
interpretes, quod and ipse acceperit decimas spoliorum, and Abrahae dederit
decimas substantiae suae; quanquam Apostolus in Epistola sua ad Ebraeos
apertissime definiat, non Abraham suscepiste a Melchisedek decimas diuitiarum
eius, sed de spolijs hostium partem accepisse Pontificem. Neither is this
interpretation of (...) dissonant from ancient use among the Greeks. Indeed it
elsewhere rarely occurres in this sense; but clearly in that old proverb,
(...), To put an armor, taken from a Pygmie, on a Colossus his back, it denotes
nothing else but (...), Philostrat* in vit. S^phist in Nic^te. Vnde emendes
opo^te^ deprauatos Su^dae Copices in (...).
or (...), that is, spoils taken from dead or living, according whereto both
Hesychius and Suidas have expounded it. From which sense, I guess, it has
also been brought to signify those kind of profits, taken (as spoils) from
the Land, which the Ciuilians call Ruta caesa, that is, Vlpian* ff. de
actionib* e^pt. and vendit. l. 17.. 6.
trees cut down, coals, sand, or chalk dug up, or the like, which we style
things severed from the freehold, and turned into chattels, according as the
Greek Lawyers Vett. Glossa v^rb. Iuris in (...).
named them (...), Things that were taken from the ground, or freehold. for so
it agrees with our phrase. That, which first bred me this conjecture, was a
corrupted place in an old Glossar. vet^. Graecelat. edit. ab H. Stephan^.
Glossarie, where (...) is interpreted by Ruticilia. what can Ruticilia there
signify? I conceiud it to be depraud for Ruta caesa, which is often read as
one word. and no man can deny but that Ruta caesa may easily be styled spolia
or exuuiae villae, and by an easy metaphore be expressed in a word that
signifies spoils of war. many corruptions much further off from the true
originals, are obuious in the same Glossarie.

II.
The next passage of Tithes is in Jacobs vow. This stone, says Genes. 28.22.
he, which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house. and all that thou
shall give me, I will Tithe and give the Tenth to thee. which ( Josephus says)
upon his return, being after XX. years, he Ios. Arch^^log. ^. c. 1 th.
performed, offering the Tithe of all his substance, or (...), the Tithe of all
he had gotten. Into whose hands he gave his Tithes, appears not* But the
chiefest Priest of that time was his father Isaac. For before Aaron, the Jews
say, the Priesthood was wholly annexed to the first born of families. Which
Exodus c. 13.1.
agrees well with the sanctifying of the first born, commanded in Egypt. Hence
it comes that Melkizedek is commonly reputed to be Sem, the eldest son of
Noah (for so in this declaration he may be clearly admitted; although no small
controversy be whether he or Iapheth were the eldest) and Noah, Abraham, and
Job and the like are accounted, Origin. lib. 1. in Job.
by this right, Priests of that time. and as Abraham, being in a right line X.
degrees from Sem, gave tithes to him being the eldest Ancestor of the house, or
firstborn, and so a Priest in Salem; so it may be thought, that Jacob paid his
vow into the hands of Isaac the chief of the family then living as a
firstborn, and a Priest also. But remember withal, that Jacob, although the
younger Son, is reputed also to have had this Priesthood by the sale made to
him of his elder brother Esau's birthright, to which a Pristhood was incident.
So was the ancient opinion of the Jews, as Saint Hierome In Epist. ad E^agrium.
relates it. Simul and hoc tradunt, says he, quod vsque ad sacerdotium Aaron
omnes primo geniti, ex stirpe Noe, fuerint sacerdotes and Deo victimas
immolarint, and hac esse primogenita quae Esau fratri suo vendiderit Jacob. And
express mention is of his exercising this holy function in Genesis c. 32.54.
sacrifices, during his fathers life. For, having gotten the right of
primogeniture, and being long severed from his fathers house, and having a
distinct family and posterity in his own power, notwithstanding his father
were then living, yet had he that kind of Priesthood in him. For if this holy
right came not to any till he had been the eldest of the family as well as the
first born, how could Abraham be accounted for a Priest? as expressly Origin and
others reckon him; which the form of his offering his son Isaac also
iustifies. He was never both firstborn and eldest of his family. For Sem lived
after him about XL. years, and kept that title from him; but a firstborn he
was, and divided also from his fathers household at the time of his tithes given
him. whence observe by the way that both Abraham and Jacob, according to this
right of that time, must be Priests also, when they paid these tithes. No other
express mention is of tithes before Moses his time; unless, with th Jews, you
dream, that the Leuiticall Law was written before the Creation.

III.
Let the ancients seem to have observed a respect had to the quantity of what
was, as a part of the yearly increase, consecrated in those times to the Lord;
and that even in the first memory of sacrifice. Cain's offering was not
regarded, they Tertull. lib aduers. Iudaos. alij item (...).
say, because, quod offerebat non recte diuidebat, he did not well divide what
he offered: which seems to design out a defect in the quantity; as if
specially some quota pars were at that time required. But this reason was from
no other cause then the mistranslation of the text in the Story of Cain. For,
where the Gen 4.7.
original is thus, Why is thy Countenance cast down? if thou do well, is
there not remission? if thou do ill, sin lies at the door; they read it
far otherwise, and thus; quoniam, nonne, si recte quidem offeras; non recte
autem diuidas, peccasti? ^quiesce: which is all one with the Septuagints text,
that in the Primitive times was chiefly in use, (...), say they there, (...).
If thou offer well, but deuidest not well, have thou not sinned? be quiet. And
this passage of well dividing, did Julian, that witty Apostata, take, for a
special question to oppose a Bishop in his time. But most agreeable to that
translation, and not dissonant from the original, is, that he gave with a
grudging mind, and Cyrill. aduers. Julian. lib. 10.
not of the best and first of his fruit, as he ought to have done, and as the
Heathen ever did, or by their Pontisiciall Laws ought to have done in their
Praemessum, that is, the first fruits of their Corn, or their Calpar or vinum
inferium, which was the richest of their wine. And it is expressly said, that
Abel brought of his first fruits, but Cain only of his fruit of the ground; the
one giving the Lord a portion of the best, the other not regarding of what
time, what worth it were, so it were of his fruit. So, here is not any quota
pars, or certain quantity noted, but Ita D. Chrysostom. in Genes. (...). in. D.
Ambros. lib. 1. de Cain and Abel* cap. 7. and lib. 2. c. 6. vide Epist ad
H^bra^s. cap. 11.4.
(...), or the mind only of him that offered, and the quality of the oblation.

IV.
Yet to, if some Cabalistique and doting curiosities were of value, there might
be some identitie, or at lest some affinity between the first fruits of Abel,
and the tenth part. The first fruits are in the text called (...) becoroth, the
tithe (...) maighsher. Now the Jews make great and hidden correspondencies
twixt things denoted by any two words, whose several numbers made out of their
letters, are equal; their letters, as the Greek, being all numerall. and two
kinds of this Arithmetique they have: the one in greater numbers, which is
frequent with them; the other in less. their practice Archangel. in Dogmat.
Cabalisti ^. 19.
in the second kind is thus: Out of every Centenarie and Decad of the letters
of a word they take a unity, and add these to the rest, that is, the less
numbers; by which operation, if two words agree in sum, they think forsooth
some great mystery, of mutual relation, twixt the things signified, is
discovered. Those two of the first fruits, and tithes, by this way, are equal.
For example. Dispose the letters and their numbers thus. in the first, out of
400.200. and 20. take 4.2. and 2. that is a unity out of every Centenarie and
Decad; and the sum is 8. which, added to the less numbers, make 16. Likewise
in the second, out of 200. 300.70. and 40. take 2.3.7. and 4. (there being no
less numbers) and you have the same sum as in the other, that is 16. But
take this only as a taste of such impious liberty as these kind of vanities
give (among the Jews) to make any thing have mystical reference to every
thing. Yet neither were Christians without the very like in the primitive
times. Witness the Marcosian and Colabarsian heresies in their a. and o. made
the same with (...), and diverse other like by agreement in number. They indeed
went so far in this ridiculous kind, that they determined Tertull. lib. de
Har^s. id genus plurim^ habes apud Epiphanium. Tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. and
Irenaeum lib. 1. cap. 10.
totam plenitudinem and perfectionem veritatis in istis literis (numeralibus)
esse dispositam. witness the Basdidians god, Abraxas. Nay some Fathers of those
times so much regarded this arithmeticall way of search, that in this very
story of Abraham's success with his company of 318. and of his recovering the
goods, the women, and people, they deliver that the mystery Clem. Alex.
Stromat. 9.
of our Lord crucified, was denoted. that number 318. is in Greek thus, tie.
For they reckond out of Greek, as the Jews out of Ebrew. in the 300. figured by
t. they supposd the Cross foretold; as otherwise it is usually obserud upon
that of Ezechiel, cap. IX. 4. And (...). they took for the two first letters of
our Saviors name ie or Jesus. Whereupon Prudentius In Pr^sat. ad (...).
relating the victory, says, we should be very rich, as Abraham in his
spoils, Si quid trecenti, bis nouenis additis,
Possint, figura nouerimus mystica.
where, for bis, some Copies, without sense, have his. but who sees not the
vanity of such mysteries? Although too, the unlimited liberty of our times,
in so confidently daring to tell us the mystery of the number of the Apoc.
cap. 13.1^
Beast, would make a man give the more regard to these collections out of
numbers. Every great Clerk, that deals with it, has, for the most part, his
several word to make up 666. Some for us; some against us. And no doubt is
(that one old one may be added) but he, which, long before Luther, made Sir
John Old-Castles name to fulfill that prophecy, thought he had been as near
truth as the best of them. Out of JOHN OLD-CASTEL in numerals Thomas El^ham
Prior L^nt^n in Chr^nic. H^n. 5. in Biblioth. Bodleiana.
he makes 701. and thence subtracts the year of his age, wherein he so
charitably and stoutly took part with Lollards, and was condemned for heresy,
that is, 35. and the rest being 666. notes him out (says he) with the
Character of the Beast. risum teneatis? this in most miserable verse he
expresses. Nor has this dream of his, place here otherwise than as an old
pattern of trifling boldness, used in the later Arithmetique of many on that
passage in S. John: in whom are Hieron. Epist* ad Paulinum.
tot Sacramenta, quot verba; and of whom the answer given by that great Doctor,
Calvin, was as judicious as modest. he, being demanded his opinion, what he
thought of the Revelation, Bodin. Method. hist. cap. 7.
answered ingenuously, he knew not at all what so obscure a Writer meant. he
might best have spoken it on this particular of the number; to which, found by
arbitrarie collection, who ever gives much credit, might unhappily perchance be
induced to believe some mutual respect twixt Abels Offering, and Abraham's
Tithes.

How, among the Jews, Tithes were paid or thought due. CAP. II.
I. First fruits, and Heave offering (that is, sixtieth parts at least) first
were paid out of the fruits of the earth.

II. The first Tithe was paid to the Levites (who out of that paid a Tithe to
the Priests) and then the second Tithe.

III. The error of them that make a third Tithe. The second Tithe of every
third year spent on the poor. what they take the year of Tithing to signify
in Deuteronomie.

IV. Above a sixth part was yearly paid by the. husbandman: but no Tithe by him
to the Priests.

V. How their Cattle were tithed.

VI. A discontinuance of payment among them. Honester Ouer-seers chosen for the
true payment. Demai, that is, things doubtful, whether Tithes were paid of
them or no. Passages in Epiphanius and S. Chrysostom, of their Tithing.

VII. Their Tithing of every herb. what their Canonists hold Titheable.

VIII. Their Law of Tithing (after the destruction of their second Temple)
ceased, by the doctrine of their Canonists. which teaches also that they are
not to pay elsewhere then in the Land of Israel, and some adjacent Countries.
Presbyteratus Iudaeorum totius Angliae anciently granted by the English Kings.

I.
THe yearly increase being either fruits of the ground or Cattle; In the Law,
of fruits of the ground, first, the first of the forwardest Exodus 23.19. Leuit.
23.10. Number. 15.20.
were offered to the Priest in ears of Wheat and Barley, Figs, Grapes, Olives,
Pomegranats and Dates. And, of these seven only, the first fruits In Talmu^. in
Seder Zeraim, Mass hotli Bicerim. atque inde re^centiores little iurispe^iu.
were paid in what quantity the owner would. next, the Therumah or heave
Offering, or first Fruits of Corn, Wine* Oil, Fleece, and the like, were also
Deuteronomy. ^8.4.
given to the Priests. But it being not determined by Moses of what quantity
this heave Offering should be; the Jews anciently assest it to be enough at the
Solomon Iarchi ^d ^ict. locum. (...)* and D. ^ieronymus ad (...). cap. 45. and
Cas^^anus colla^. 21. (...). 3.
fiftieth part; but so, that no necessity was that every one should pay so
much. he that paid a sixtieth part was discharged; and many of the better
devotion offered a fortieth. The fiftieth part they call (...), that is, an
indifferent or competent Therumah, or heave offering, which they namd also
(...), that is, the great heave Offering. the fortieth they style (...), that
is, a Therumah of a fair eye, or liberally given; and the sixtieth (...)* that
is, a Therumah of an Hanc loquendi ^rmulam habes ^pud D. Matthae^^, cap. 20.15.
ill eye, or an niggards gift. But you may observe too, that this, which they
called a niggards gift, was not beneath the quantity of the Therumah appointed
in Ezekiel. cap. 45.13.11.
Ezekiel, where the words are; This is the Therumah that ye shall offer; the
sixth part of an Ephah of an Homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of
an Ephah of an Homer of Barley. it is the same as if he had said, ye shall
offer a Therumah of the sixtieth part of every Homer. for an Ephah (being the
same measure with a Bath; that is, near our common Bushel) was the tenth part
of an Homer; therefore the sixth part of an Ephah, the sixtieth of an Homer.
After the Therumahs offered to the Priests (every kind being given in season)
out of the rest were taken the Tithes. which are best divided into the first
and second Tithe.

II.
The first Tithe was Number. 18.21.
paid, out of the remainder, to the Levites at Jerusalem by that name it is
every where Iudaei passim, and Joseph. Arch. lib. 4. cap 7. To ^it. cap. 1.
con. m. 7.
titled. and, out of this Tenth received by the Levites, another Tenth they
Number. 18.28.
paid to the Priests; as a heave Offering out of their Tenth, which they called
also the Tithe of the Tithe. For the Priests received no Tithes of the
Husbandmen: only the Levites received Tenths from them, and paid their Tenth to
the Priests; being (as Epist. ad Fabi^lam, de vest Sacerdotali.
S. Hierome says) tanto illis minores, quanto ipsi maiores populo. So Clergy
men, by that example, have paid Tithes to the Pope; and so by a Stat. 26. H^n.
8. cap. 3.
late Law they do in this Kingdom to the Crown. Neither might the Leuits
spend, to their own use, any part of theirs, till this Tenth of the Tenth were
paid. Afterward it might be employed for their maintenance generally
wheresoever. This first Tenth paid; the nine parts remaining, were B^n-Maimon
i^ Iad. Chazeka, part. 3. massec de Decimi^. c. 8.
accounted (...), that is, profane, or for common use; yet not to be spent by
the Possessor, till he had taken out of those nine Deuteronomy. 14.23.
another Tithe, which he was, the first two year, to carry to Jerusalem in
kind, or if the way were too far, to turn it into money (adding a fifth
Iarchi ad eund. lotum.
part of the value: for to this Tithe do the Jews apply that of Leuit.
XXVII.30, and 31.) and spend it there at the Temple in Feasts, which were near
like to the old Christians Agapae or Loue-dayes. and every third year the same
he was to spend upon the poor and Leuits within his own gates. After those
Tenths thus disposed of, the remnant of that years increase they called (...),
that is, as if you should say, every way prepared or fit for common use, or
absolutely Lay Chattels; the first nine parts being so only respectively. This
other Tithe they styled their second Tithe, or Tithe for Feasts, that is,
^^ephus lib. 41. Arch. cap. 7.
(...).

III.
Some make a third Tithe; as Tobit. 1.7.
Tobit; expressly using the name of (...), a third Tithe. (...) (says he)
(...), And the third Tithe I have given to whom it was meet. But he means only
the Tithe of the third year, that is, the Tithe which every third year (after
the first Tithe paid) was to be laid up by the husbandman in his own gates for
the Leuite that is within his gates, the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow. Which Archaol. 4. c. 7.
Josephus also names (...), a third Tithe to be bestowed every third year. and
this the Rabbis call (...), that is, the poor man's Tithe. And it is also
titled a third; but falls better under the second of our Division, and need not
to made a third, nor is it. Nor, by the great D^atrib de de^imu Iudaorum.
Scaligers leave, can it be accounted the first, nor does it at all answer to
that. For the first Tithe was paid every year, saving the Sabbaticall.
otherwise, whence should the Leuits and Priests have their liuelode of that
year? and so expressly affirm the great Mos. Miko^zi in Mitzu^th, c. 135. ^en
K^ttun. pr^c. 473. alij.
Doctors of the Jews; and that according to their Talmud or Canon Law; that the
first year first they paid the first Tithe, then the second, so in the second
year; and that, in the rhird year, after the first Tithe paid, they paid the
(...), that is, the poor man's Tithe. and that year (...), that is, the second
ceased, or was not paid. In Misnah Torah part. 3. de decima secunda, cap. 1.
Ben-Maimons words are, that in the third and sixth years the poor man's Tithe
was (...), that is, in stead of the second Tithe. Neither can that in Tobit,
touching the payment of the second Tithe every year (wherein both the Greek
and Ebrew of him agree, although in other things they much differ) be otherwise
well understood, then for every of the two years, unless that text be wholly
contrary to the known practice of the Jews Canons. So then every third year
the Leuits at the Temple mist their second Tithe for their Feasts and
Loue-dayes; the same being charitably, and by divine Ordinance, spent at home
in the gates of the husbandman. Neither does the second and this poor man's
Tithe differ in substance, but only in circumstance. The division of both, is
exactly the same, and the persons appointed for the eating, are upon the matter
so to. For as the Leuits, ministering in their course at the Temple, were to
have part in the Feasts made of the second, so were the Leuits and the poor in
the country entertained with this of the third year. The place, where the
bestowing was, makes their difference; substantially they are the same, and
fitly go under one name. which is fully to me confirmed by the Septuagints
translation of that place in Deuteronomy, which we Deuteronomy. 26.12.
read according to the Ebrew thus: When thou have made an end of Tithing, all
the Tithe of thine increase in the third year (which is the year of Tithing)
thou shall give to the Leuits, strangers, fatherless, and the widow, that they
may eat within thy gates, and be filled. They there translate it. (...) (...):
and that is, When thou have ended the Tithing of all the fruits of thy ground,
in the third year; the second Tithe thou shall give to the Leuit and the
stranger etc. as in the common text. Where plainly, you see, the poor man's
Tithe is expressly called the second Tithe, which iustifies our Division.
Doubtless, they there in stead of (...) shenath hamaigsher, that is; the year
of Tithing (as the text is) found in their Ebrew Copies, (...) shenith
hamaigsher, which they took for the second Tithe, knowing that in truth that
place meant no other. Diverse passages in their translations are upon such
differences; and they oftentimes give thence a kind of commentary as well as a
translation. Neither is it ill context, that shenith of the foeminin gender
should be ioind to maigsher of the masculin. it is not without frequent example
in holy Writ. That their word (...) (not very usual for Tithe) was most
proper, and has no worse original then Xenoph. hist. Graec* a.
Athens it self, where by that name, the Tenth of Mulcts and Goods confiscat,
was sacred to Minerua. But this place of the year of Tithing, is interpreted by
the common Gloss Solomon Iarchi ad dict. loc. Deuteronomy.
of the Jews by the year of one Tithe, as if the text had been (...), that is,
the year of one Tithe, or of paying only one Tithe. Which in substance exactly
agrees also with the meaning of the Septuagint. For in the third year, says
Iarchi, there was only one Tithe paid of the two commonly spoken of, that is,
of the first and second. The first was only paid to the Leuits. The second, by
that name, was not: but the poor man's Tithe in stead of it: and he so expounds
it, that he takes the mention of the Leuits there to design out the first
Tithe of that third year paid at Jerusalem, which plainly also confirms what
is here before declared. The second then, and the Tithe of the third year are
the same in substance. The payment of all appears in this example.

IV.
After the first fruits paid in ears, admit The increase 6000. Ephahs; the
heave Offering at least must be 100. The remainder 5900. The first Tithe, 590.
and out of this 59. to the Priests. The remainder 5310. Out of this, the second
Tithe, 531. which every two years the Leuits had at Jerusalem, and every
third year was spent in the gates of the husbandmen. The rest being 4779. was
kept for the husbandman. So that of 6000. Ephahs, the Leuits and poor had in
all 1063. whole to themselves, the Priests 159. and the husbandman only 4779.
He yearly thus paid more then a sixth part of his increase, beside
first fruits; almost a fifth. Many of no small name, grossly slip in reckoning
and dividing these kinds of their Tithes. But this here delivered, is from the
holy text and the Jewish Lawiers.

V.
Of their Cattle; the first borne were Exodus 13.^.
the Lords. paid to the Priest of clean beasts in kind; of unclean in money,
with a fifth part added. Of the increase of them, one Tithe only was paid, and
that to the Leuits. Every Tithe of Bullock and of Sheep of all that goes under
the Rod, the Tenth shall be holy to the Lord, says holy Leuit. 27.26. and 32.
Writ. Thence at the Tithing they used to shut the Lambs (for example) in a
sheepcote, where the straitness of the door might permit but one at once to
come out. Then, opening the door, either gently to hunt them out, or by placing
the Ewes bleating near them without, so to cause them run forth one by one,
while a servant standing at the door with a rod colored with oker, solemnly
told to the Tenth; which with his rod he marked. so they Iarchi ad Leuit. cap.
27. and Rambam in Massech. deprimogenitis, c. 7.
understand going under the Rod. that so marked, what ever it were, male or
female, worst or best, was the Tithe, and might not be changed.

VI.
How the payment of these Tenths was either observed or discontinued, partly
appears in holy 2. Paralip. 31. Malach. 3. and Nehem. cap* 13.
Writ, partly in their institution of more trusty Ouer-seers (whom they called
(...)) for the true payment of them. For after the new dedication of the Temple
by Judas Machabaeus, until his fourth successor Rambam de decimi^* cap. 9.
Ioannes Hyrcanus (being near thirty years) all duly paid their first fruits
and Therumahs, but the first or second Tithe few or none justly; and that
through the corruption of those Ouer-seers* Whereupon their great Sanedrim, or
Court of seventy Elders (that is, the (...), that is, the greatest Court, that
determined also, as a Parliament, of matters of State) enacted, that the
Ouer-seers should be chosen of honester men; and withal, that of such things,
whereof, by such corruption, or otherwise, it was indifferently doubtful,
whether Tithe were justly paid or no (of which kind, almost all increase, at
the time of this act made, was) a heave Offering or Therumah of the Tenth of
all, that is, a hundredth part, should be given to the Priests, and then the
second Tithe at the Temple should be paid. but no first Tithe or poor man's
Tithe was paid of any such things. These kind of goods they called (...) Demai,
whereof a special Massecheth or treatise is in the Talmud, in the Seder Zeraim
From that act of the Sanedrim, to the last destruction of the Temple, it seems,
the just payment of Tithes continued; and thereof testimony is (for the time
near the destruction) in Ep ad Hebr* cap. 7.9.
holy Writ. But in Tithing and offering Therumahs, the Pharisees were most
curious and devout. they gave perhaps Tithe after both the Legal Tithes paid,
beside fiftieth parts, and sometime thirtiths for their Therumahs. So may be
understood that of them, Epiphan. lib. 1. har^s. 16. Vide, si placet, Casaub^^.
aduers. Baron. page 63. and 64.
(...), which you may interpret, they tithed what was already tithed, they
gave first fruits, thirtith parts and fiftith parts. but I dare not justify
the translation. neither do I believe, that Epiphanius there sufficiently
understood what they did in their Tithing, nor is his meaning easily, I doubt,
apprehended. The like may be, with modesty enough to, said of S. In sermon, 103.
(...), tom. 6. page 897. and (...). in Epist. ad Philippenses. tom. 4. page 54.
editione Sauiliana.
Chrysostom, speaking of the Jewish Legal liberality to the Leuits. (...),
says he, (...). Observe but how much the Jews gave (to their Leuits and
Priests) as Tenths, first Fruits, then Tenths again, then other Tenths, and
again other thirteenths, and the Exodus 30.12.
Sicle, and yet no man said they eat (or had) too much. so are his words in two
places of his works exactly the same; saving only that in one the variety of
reading has (...) for thirteenths. I confess I equally am ignorant of both.
neither is his enumeration consonant with what the Moniments of the Jews or the
holy Text will warrant. Conjectures upon it, I leave to others. some probable
enough might here be brought, but I willingly abstain.

VII.
That tithing of Luc. ^1.42. Matthew 2^.23.
(...), every herb, which is spoken of in the Gospel, (and observed by the
Scribes and Pharisees) was never commanded in Scripture, nor by their Canon Law
requisite, according to the opinion of their Doctors, who restrain the payment
of Tithes to that Deuteronomy. 16.12.
(...), that is, thy increase, spoken of by Moses; and comprehend not herbs
under that name. They deliver indeed that by tradition from their fathers, all
things growing out of the earth, and fit for man's meat, are titheable, which
their Ramb. part. 3. tract. de Th^rum^th cap. 2 and Mikotzi in praecept. 145.
Lawyers thus regularly express, (...)* that is, Every thing that is kept as
man's meat, and has his growth from the earth, must pay the heave Offering, and
likewise Tithe; Whence they make such herbs as are man's meat, titheable, but
all such as are not man's meat, they discharge of Tithes. and out of that rule
also they except whatsoever was gleaned Leuit. 19.9, and 10.
either out of ears of Corn, or Grapes, or had out of the corners of the
field left in harvest. But, it seems, that for this payment of Herbs, the
Pharisees were of the truer side. Our Savior likes well their payment, and
expressly says, they ought not omit it, which admonition of his was to them
while yet the Mosaicall Laws were not all expired by the consummatum est.

VIII.
After the second Temple destroyed, and dispersion of the Jews, their Law of
first fruits, Therumahs and Tithes, with them ceased. For their Doctors
determine that regularly no inhabitants, but of the land of Israel, were to pay
any; although also among them be a wise exception for the lands of Senaar,
Moab, Ammon, and Egypt, because the first is near their land of Israel, and
many Israelites went thither and dwelt there, and the other three are round
adjoining their land of Israel. But they deliver that who so of them took the
profits of land among the Cutheans or Samaritans, their old enemies (or
elsewhere in Aram; and so, it seems, by consequent in any other land, saving
which they except) was not to pay any. touching which point many special cases
are put by In lad Chaz^ka tract. de Therumah, c. 1. and Mik^tzi^^ Pracept. 133.
Rabbi Ben Maimon. At this day by their Law they pay none; Those that live in
their land of Israel, for want of their Priesthood and Temple; those that live
dispersed in other Countries, both for that reason, as also for the other which
restrain the payment of them to Canaan. and herein they all agree. But the
great Joseph Scaliger says, he asked some of them whether, if they might again
build their Temple (as after the captivity they did) their Laws of Sacrifices,
first Fruits, and Tithes, would be then reuiud; and their answer was, that to
build it again were to no purpose, because they had no lawful Priesthood,
there being not one of them that can prove himself a Leuit, though many
pretend to be so, and some bear also the office of a kind of Priesthood amongst
them. And (for example herein amongst our own Ancestors) when the Jews lived
here they had, it seems, one general or high Priest over them, usually
confirmd at least, if not constituted, by the King, for life; as appears by
Record, proving that both Richard the first and King John did by their Patents
grant the same. the Copy of it being a most rare example and not from this
purpose, Rot. Cart 1. Reg. Io^. part. 1. minib. 28. Cart. 171.
take here transcribed. Rex omnibus fidelibus suis, and omnibus and Iudaeis,
and Anglis salutem* Sciatis nos concessisse, and praesenti Charta nostra
confirmasse Iacobo Iudaeo de Londonijs Presbytero Iudaeorum, Presbyteratum
omnium Iudaeorum totius Angliae, habendum and tenendum quamdiu vixerit, libere,
and quiet, and honorifice, and integre, ita quod nemo ei super hoc molestiam
aliquam, aut grauamen infer praesumat. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus
quod eidem Iacobo quoad vixerit Presbyteratum Iudaeorum per totam Angliam,
garantetis, manuteneatis and pacifice defendatis; and si quis ei super eo
forisfacere praesumserit, id ei sine dilatione (salua nobis emenda nostra) de
forisfactura nostra emendari faciatis, tanquam Dominico Iudaeo nostro quem
specialiter in seruitio nostro r^tinuimus. Prohibemus etiam ne de aliquo ad se
pertinente ponatur in placitum, nisi coram nobis aut coram Capitali Iustitia
nostra, sicut Carta Regis Richardi fratris nostri testatur. Test S.
Bathoniensi Episcopo etc. Dat. per manus H. Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi
Cancellarij nostri apud Rothomagum XXXI. die Iulij anno Regni nostri primo. Its
true that Presbyteratus might denote as well some Lay eldership. but as unlikely
it is that in that age the Clergy men that were officers of the Chancerie, and
most commonly drew the Patents, at least judged of the language, would
transfer their name of Presbyteratus to any such signification; so also I
suppose that any such Lay or Civil Officer among them could not have escaped
often mention in the Records of Iudaisme, yet remaynig. Many of them I have
perused, but never met with the name elsewhere then in this Roll. But to this
Priest Jacob or other like him among them, no Tithes, first Fruits or
Therumahs, were, or are by their Canons payable. and agreeing to them expressly
herein is (...). lib. a. cap. a.
Eusebius, who, amongst other of their Mosaicall Laws, puts their paying of
Tithes for one specially that was confined to the land of Israel and Jerusalem.
for, first reciting that about eating the Tithes in the place, Deuteronomy. 14.23. and
cap. 16.
which the Lord shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, (which indeed is
only spoken of the second Tithe of the first and second years) and joining it
with the general commandment of Tithing, and with the precepts of the
Passover, of the feast of Weeks, and of Tabernacles. in which a certain Place
by such an indefinit designment is also mentioned; he adds at length with
reference to them all; (...) (...); seeing in so many things he designs out a
particular place, so often commanding them to meet there (every Tribe, every
Household) how can it fit them or belong to them, that dwell but a little out of
Iudaea? much less to the Nations of the whole world. But those feasts he
speaks of, the Jews, at this day, observe, although not accuratly according to
Moses his Laws.

Tithes how paid, or due among the Gentiles. CAP. III.
I. Some Romans paid to some Deities, and sometimes only, a Tenth of spoils; of
proceed of merchandise; of their estates; but usually also by vow, which bound
the Heir or Executor.

II. Festus is falsely cited for a general custom of payment of Tithes among
the Ancients.

III. Examples of Tithes paid among the Graecians.

IV. How the assertions of a general use of giving Tithe to the Gods among the
Graecians, are to be understood; and why (...), that is, to Tithe, signifies
also to Consecrate.

V. A Tithe paid to Hercules of Tire, and Sabis an Arabian Deity, the same
with Jupiter Sabazius.

I.
THe custom of the Gentiles, usually talked of in offering a Tenth, is chiefly
to be considerd in the Romans and Graecians. The Romans had a kind of devotion
of giving Tithes, but neither yearly, nor by compulsorie Law, as some falsely,
but confidently, through ignorance in human literature, deliver the welthier of
them, diverse times used to Tithe their estates to Hercules, by spending the
Tenth in sacrifices, gifts to his Temples, feasts in his Honor, and the like.
it appears so, and to be no otherwise, by Inquast. Romany.
Plutarchs words, in his questioning the reason of it. (...), says he, (...);
Why do many of the rich men tithe their substance to Hercules? and elsewhere In
Lucullo, alibi and D^odor. Sicul. Bibliothec. 5.
he (as other Ancients) notes it as a special devotion of some of the sons
of Fortune. Neither is old Apud Aur^l. Vi^t. in Orig. G^^. Romans
Cassius otherwise to be understood, where he deriues Hercules his Tenth from
an innovation made by Recaranus in Euanders time. This Recaranus, he says,
first taught them to give the Tenths of their fruits to Hercules (to whom he
consecrated an Altar under the name of INVENTORI PATRI, after he had regaind
his herds that Cacus had stolen) rather then to the King as before the use
was; and then he adds, inde videlicet tractum vt Herculi Decimam profanari mos
esset; that is, thence came it to be a custom, that diverse did pay him a tithe.
But, neither by their Law Civil or Pontificiall, was this payment. Often it
was as a thanksgiving after some increase of fortune, and often by vow
beforehand, and for the most part, of increase of estate by money gotten upon
sales, and of spoils of war. For such things that made accessions to their
estates, they were sometime so thankful. Whereat Cicero jesting, says, that
never any man vowed Hercules a Tenth, in hope of increase of his wit. Neque De
natura Deorum lib. 3.
Hercul^ quisquam Decimam vouit vnquam si sapiens factus fuisset. Of money
gotten upon sale, an example is in the Parasite, that, after reckoning up his
good merchandise, says, he must sell it as dear as he can, that he may spend
the Tenth upon Hercules. Plautus in Sticho.
Haec vaenisse iam opus est quantum potest,
Vti Decumam partem Herculi polluceam.
whence the same Author uses the name of In Tru^ulento.
pars Herculana. and In Apolog^tici cap. 39.
Tertullian, speaking of the prodigality of the Gentiles in their feasts;
Herculanarum decimarum and polluctorum sumptus tabularij supputabunt. For
spoils of war, witness is in that dedication of Lucius Anno ab V. C. 607.
Mummius, which got Corinth and settled it to the Romans, thus inscribed, and
yet remaining at Riete. I. Gruter. in Inscript. p* 96. and I^s. Scalig. in
Catalect. v^t. lib. tit. 14. plura de hoc Epigrammate, quae adijci possent,
hae^e ad^ectere intempestiuum esset.
SANCO SEMIPATRI.
De decuma Victor tibi Luciu' Mummiu donum,
Moribus anteiqueis hoc pro vsura dare sese,
Visum animo so. perfecit sa pace rogans te,
Cogendo, dissoluendo vt foelicia faxis,
Perficias Decumam vt faciat verae rationis.
Propter hoc, atque alieis donis, des cuncta roganti.
Their Sancus was Hercules; whom they usually titled Semo Sancus Deus Fidius,
and the title of this transcribed by some, is, Sanco Fidio Semo Patri, which I
rather think they mistake for S. F. Semoni Patri. That de decuma donum was
some special gift made with the cost of the Tithe of the spoils; and decuma
verae rationis is there for the best of discretion and policy, as Saepius apud
Symmachum in Ep^stolis.
edecumata among the Ancients were the best and choicest parts, and Videsis
Angel. Polit. Misc^ll. cap. 86
Decumanum the greatest and fairest; as fluctus decumanus, scuta decumana,
decima vnda, and the like. the great value that Hercules was by those vows
honored with, is understood in that of Phaniscus Plautus in M^stellaria act. ^.
of Tranio. -- vnus isthic seruus est sacerrimus
Tranio; is vel Herculi conterere quaestum possiet.
But neither did the Romans and their next Neighbors thus Tithe only to
Hercules; but these their arbitrarie vows and thanksgiuings were sometimes also
to other Deities. The old Pelasgi Dionys. ^ali^arnass. lib. 1. and Steph.
(...). in (...).
that transplanted themselves into Italy, gave their Tenth of gain out of
Sea-merchandize, to Apollo at Delphi, according to the Oracles direction, which
at Dodona before had told them, that being mixed with the Aborigines, (...),
they should send their Tithe to Phoebus. That example of Camillus, is to every
one known. he vowed the Tenth Plutarch. in Camill. L^u. lib. 5.
of the spoils to Apollo, and most carefully took order, by advice from their
most learned Priests, to perform it. and Posthumous Dictator Vide Dionys.
Halicarnass. lib. 6. and ^.
long before upon his happy victory against the Latins, tithed the spoils,
spent forty talents upon sacrifices and prayers, in honor of the gods, and
erected a Temple, with what remaind, to Ceres, Bacchus, and Proserpina. At
other times also, on the general worship of the gods, such a Tithe was spent.
And other Deities, besides any of these, had sometimes Tenths of gain; as
Fortune, Mercury, being the gods of Travelers and Tradesmen; and the Deities
of the way, or Dij Semitales; as Vius, and others. so Noble Scaliger
understands that which Taurinus speaks of his father Caesius a Merchant, in an
inscription Catalect. V^t^. lib. 1. tit. 14.
to Fortune. Omnibus hic annis, votorum more suorum,
Centenas adicit, numero crescente, coronas
Fortunae simulacra colens, and Apollinis aras,
Arcanumque Vij --
Thus in Italy the custom was arbitrarily to pay and vow Tithes to their
Deities, and continued in use til the later times of the Empire, as appears
also in that Law receiud from Vlpian by ff. tit. de* Policit. l. 2. quis.. 2.
Justinian. Si Decimam quis bonorum vouit, decima non prius esse in bonis
desinit, quam fuerit separata. and si forte, qui decimam vouit, decesserit ante
sepositionem, haeres ipsius, haereditario nomine, decimae obstrictus est. voti
enim obligationem ad haeredem transire constat. by this it is manifest that
though the vow, or payment without vow, were arbitrarie; yet, upon death, after
vow made, the Heir or Executor of him that vowed was bound to pay; according as
also in like vows C tii. de Sacra^ sanct. Eccles l 15. Si quis donauerit.
of Houses, Land, or Chattels, to the honor of a Martyr, Prophet, or Angel,
the Law was among old Christians.

II.
The view of these examples plainly disproues that assertion used by many out
of Festus: Decima quaeque veteres Dijs suis offerebant. no such matter. some
did, and only sometimes, and of some things, and most usually to some gods only.
Festus himself was too learned to have left such a moniment of ignorance. No
doubt is, but that which Festus had there in some larger note observed,
according to a truth agreeing with what is before opend, was too boldly
contracted into that piece of untruth, by his Epitomator Paulus Diaconas. as in
him, so in many other, most obseruable things have perished, both by the
ignorance as well as negligence of insufficient Epitomators. and Paulus is well
taxed for it by the divine Scaliger. Vide, says he, quantum iuris barbarus
ille sibi sumpserit in hoc loco mutilando! indeed, most of that, which we call
and receive as Sextus Pompeius Festus, is Paulus his only, abridged out of
Festus. and those of the middle (...). opusc. aduers. Episcop. Laud^. na^s. c.
20.
Ages cited it under the name of Paulus his Gloss. But when Scaliger there
adds; Vni enim tantum Herculi hoc fiebat; he mends it not enough. for if it
had been Decima quaeque. Herculi veteres offerebant, it had been false, if
understood as of Tithes used to be given by all or of all things. they
consisted painly in vows and special thanksgiving, which were wholly
arbitrarie, as Tenths or Fifteenths given by the Subject in Parliament. and had
the offering of them been usual of yearly increase, Cato, that in his de Re
Rustica has so fully the ceremonies of Sacrifices to be used by the husbandman
in his Harvest, had never omitted it.

III.
The Graecians (under which name, comprehend the Asians that were of Greek
manners) often consecrated their Tithes to Apollo. witness an inscription at
Delphi, sacred to him, Clem. Alex. Stromat. a.
having this Verse, (...). That we may hang up Tithes and first Fruits to the
honor of Phoebus* And, that famous Herodot. lib. (...).
Rhodopi^ sent to Delphi as many spits, for use in sacrifice, as the Tithe of
that gain which she had made of her body came to. The Crotonians, before their
war against the Locrians, vowed a Tenth Trogus histor. 20
to him; and the Locrians, to exceed them that way, a Ninth. the Oracle having
given it out, that rather by excess in vows then arms* the victory should be
gaind. To the same Deity the inhabi^ants of Sip^nus gave Herodot. lib. (...)
yearly the Tithe of their mines which they found in the Isle* And after a
victory against the Thessalians Idem in Vrani^.
had by the Pho^ians, they made two statues of the Tithe of the spoils for
him. Of Agit and Agesilaus the like deuotionis Xenophon Graec. hist. (...). and
in vita Ag^silat.
remembered. Other like examples are. Hence was Apollo called (...), as if you
should say, Crowned with Tithes. And in regard the offerings to him were either
the Tenth, or given as in liew of so much, they were styled (...), as if you
should say* first fruit in Tenths. (...)
(...) --
says an ancient Callimach in hymn. ad Delum.
to Delos, where Apollo was born and worshipped* that is yearly first fruits in
Tenths are sent thee. so I understand it. But also to others sometimes joined
with him, the like offerings were. After Pausanias his victory against
Mardonius, the money of the Herodot. lib. (...).
Tenth of the spoils was by consecration divided, between Jupiter Olympius,
Nuptunus Isthmicus, and Apollo elsewhere Xenoph. (...). Cyr. ^.
Diana of Ephesus participars with him. To other Deities without him, sometimes
was this honor given, as to Pausan. Elias. ^. and in (...).
Jupiter: to whom also Cypselus Aristot. in Occ^n^^ile. (...).
of Corinth, when he vowed all the goods of the Citizens if he could get the
City, had special ^egard to the Tenth part, as competent to a Deity; when to
perform his vow, he gave yearly, for ten year together, the Tithe of all their
estates, and left them the nine for their maintenance and merchandise. And
Cr^esus admonisht by Cyrus, would not have the goods of the Lydians Herodot.
lib. (...).
ransackt by his Soldiers, (...), Because necessarily they were to be tithed
to Jupiter. Sometimes Juno has this part; as in Idem in M^lpo^.
Samos, the Tithe of certain Merchants goods was consecrated to her in a Cup.
Pallas sometime has it. Diverse of the Boeotians and Chalcidians being taken
prisoners by the Athenians and ransomd, the Idem in Terpsich^r.
Athenians, with the Tithe of the ransom, consecrated a Chariot to her. She
also had among them the Tithe of all goods Xenoph. histor. Grac lib. 1. and
videsis M^ursi^^ Attic. l^ct. 5. c. 13.
confiscat, and that they called (...). And a tradition was among them of
Priapus a Genius of war, that at Juno's request taught Mars first to dance,
and then made him a perfect Soldier; that Lucian. (...).
Juno gave him for a perpetual salarie, all the Tithe of the spoils that Mars
should gain in his victories.

IV.
These examples among the Graecians are, for some kind of Tithes vowed, or
otherwise arbitrarily, or by some local custom paid to special Deities. But
testimonies are not wanting among them, as general almost as that of Festus is
for the Romans. (...) (says Harpoctation, and, out of him, Suidas) (...), They
used to Thithe their spoils of war to the gods. and Didymus Apud
Harpocrationem in (...).
an old Grammarian, tells us that, (...), It was a Greek custom to consecrat the
Tithes of their abundance to the gods. From whence both he and Suidas fetch the
reason why (...), to Tithe, signifies also to consecrat. but therein they are
deceiud. Neither does the Greek phrase to Tithe, signify generally to
consecrat; but in this notion it denotes only a special consecration of young
Athenian Maids made to Diana in her feast Brauronia. None by their Law was to
Suidas in (...).
have a husband, but such as were then initiated to her; and none was to be
initiated but between five and ten years of age; from which utmost year
(because for the most part till then, they staid from these Rites) the Virgins
to be initiated, were called (...), as if you should say, ten yeerlings; and
thence came Hesych. in (...) and Harpocration in (...).
the word (...) to signify, to this purpose only, to consecrat or initiat,
which otherwise was expressed by (...). But if those Grammarians meant that al
men paid their Tithes in Greece, and that of every kind of their spoils or
abundance; they deceive much and are deceiud. you must understand them as
speaking of what was sometimes, and by vow or special thanksgiving, done.
Their saying it was a Custom to tithe, or that they tithed, is but like that
of Cassius: mos erat Herculi decimam profanari among the Romans. It was a
custom sometime and of somthings to do it, as it was a custom to consecrat
statues, hair, vessels, and other more such like to Deities. yet were those
customs no more general or binding all or done by all, then the custom, in
some Cities among us, to offer at wedding-dayes. it was a custom or use to do
so; that is, many men did so. The examples before taken out of story make that
plain. And in that sense only are these autors to be credited, touching the
consecrating of Tithes to the gods in general. For sometimes they were
generally given to the gods, without any particular designed. Suidas In (...).
relates an example thereof, among the Lydians. And when the Athenians had
divided Lesbos into 3000. parts, they Thucydides lib. (...), hoc est, (...),
inquit Scholiastes vetus.
consecrated 300. that is the Tenth, generally to the gods. and Pisistratus
writing to Solon touching the tribute of a Tenth, says, that he took Tithes
of every one of the people, not so much for his own use, as L^^rt. de vit.
Philos lib* (...).
(...), as for public sacrifice or the use of the gods in general. and the
Tenth of what the Cooks in Scholiast. in Aristoph. (...).
Athens killed for meat, was so due for a public use in honor of the gods, if
my Author deceive not.

V.
Here may be added to the Graecians use, the example of the Justin. lib. 1^.
Carthaginians, that sent the Tithe of their Sicilian spoils to Hercules at
Tire. and you may remember that Arabian Law, wherein every Merchant was bound
to carry his Frankincense to Sabota (which the Learned take to be Saubatha in
Ptolemie; the chief City of Arabia foelix) and there offer to their god Sabis
the Plin. hist. 12. c. 14
Tenth of it, which his Priests received. neither might any sale be made of it
till that was paid. Sabis doubtless was their Bacchus, Vranus, Jupiter, or
Sabazius; which are one. For the Deities of the Arabians were always accounted
but C^lsus ap. Originem lib 2. Ar^^^n. de g^st. Alex. (...). Strabo lib. 1^.
Herodot. lib. (...).
two: the god Vranus (known also by those other names) and the goddess Urania
or Venus. it is nearest truth therefore, that their Sabis is the same with
Sabazius, which was first corrupted from Zabaoth, commonly occurring in holy
Writ as an attribute to the only and true GOD. and as this name, so the payment
of the Tenth very likely came to them from the use of it among the Jews, their
Neighbors, as also to the Carthaginians from their Ancestors the Phoenicians,
that spoke the same language with the Jews and conuerst most with them. Neither
is it unlikely but that the ancient and most known examples of Abraham, gave
the first ground, both to them and to the Europaeans, so sometimes to dispose
the Tenth of their spoils of war to holy uses. For it is no news to have the
eldest of Jewish customs usurped (though according to time and place diversely
varied) amongst the Gentiles. What of later time is found among Mahumedans for
the Tenth paid, must be referd to the Mosaicall Law, which they receive as
authentic, but keep it according to Mahumeds fancy, and the doctrine of his
Canonists. You may remember here Apud Aeliarum (...), lib. 4. cap. 53.
Eudemus his relation of some kind of beasts in Africa that always divided
their prey into eleven parts, but would eat only the Ten, leaving the Eleventh
as (...), a kind of first Fruit or Tithe. So says my Author, and take his word
alone; I am not his Suertie.

In the first four hundred years after Christ. CAP. IV.
I. No use of Tithes occurres till about the end of this four hundred years.
Offerings and Monthly pay for maintenance of the Church in the primitive times.
Diuisiones Mensurnae. Sportulae.

II. Payment of Tithes of Mines and Quarries to Christian Emperors. The wealth
of the Church envied.

III. The opinion of Origin touching Tithes.

IV. Constitutions of those times, that mention them, are of no credit.

I.
SInce our Savior, the time being about MDC. years, it will fall aptly enough
so to divide that number quadripartitly, that we may discover the known Use,
Opinion, and Constitutions of every four hundred years, touching the duty or
payment of Tenths. the difference or latitude of XX. years or some such number,
either of increase or want (as accasion shall serve) being allowd. and the
English Law and Use (because therein we shall be most particular) being referd
to the last seven Chapters. Till toward the end of the first four hundred, no
Payment of them can be proved to have been in use. Some Opinion is of their
being due. and Constitutions also; but such, as are of no credit. For the
first; it is best declared by showing the course of the Church-maintenance in
that time. So liberal, in the beginning gf Christianity, was the devotion of
the believers, that their bounty, to the Evangelical Priesthood, far
exceeded what the Tenth could have been. For if you look to the first of the
Apostles times; then the unity Act. cap 4 34*
of heart among them, about Jerusalem, was such that all was in common and none
wanted, and as many as were possessors of lands or houses, sold them and
brought the price of the things that were sold and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, and it was distributed unto every man according as he had need.
And the whole Church, both Lay and Clergy, then liud in common as the Monks
did afterward about the end of the first four hundred years, as Homil. 11. in
Acta.
S. Chrysostom notes. (...) (says he) (...), that is, so they live now in
Monasteries, as then the believers liud. But this kind of having all things in
common, scarce at all continued. For we see, not long after in the Church of
Antiochia (where Christianity was first of all, by that name, professed) every
one of the Disciples Act. Apostol. cap. 11.29.
had a special ability or estate of his own. So in Galatia and in Corinth,
where S* Paul ordaind Epist. 1. ad Corinth. cap. 16.2. vide O^kam in Oper 90
die^um, cap. 107.
that weekly offerings for the Saints should be given by every man as he had
thriued in his estate. By example of these, the course of monthly Offerings
succeeded in the next ages. Those monthly Offerings given by devout and able
Christians, the Bishops or Officers appointed Vide Synod. Gangr. Can. 66
in the Church, receiud; and carefully and charitably disposed them on
Christian worship, the maintenance of the Clergy, feeding, clothing, and
burying their poor brethren, widows, orphans, persons tyrannically condemnd
to the Mines, to Prison, or banished by deportation into Isles. They were called
Stipes (which is a word borrowed from the use of the Heathens in their
collections made for their Temples and Deities) neither were they exacted by
Canon or otherwise, but arbitrarily given; as by testimony of most learned
Apolog^tic. cap. 39. and videsis c. 42.
Tertullian, that lived about CC. years after Christ, is apparent. Neque pretio
(are his words) vlla res Dei constat. Etiam si quod arcae genus est, non de
oneraria summa quasi redemptae religionis congregatur modicam vnus quisque
Stipem menstrua die vel cum velit, and si modo velit, and si modo possit,
apponit. Nam nemo compellitur, sed sponte confert. Haec quasi deposita pietatis
sunt. And then he shows the employment of them in those charitable uses. Some
authority Urban. 1. in Epist. c. 12. q. 1* c. 16. Sed and vide Eusebius* Eccles.
hist. lib 9. cap. 9. Edict. Maximini, and lib. 10. cap. 5. Edict. Constant. and
in lib. 2. de vita Constantini, c. 39*
is, that about this time lands began also to be given to the Church. If they
were so; out of the profits of them and this kind of Offerings, was made a
treasure; and out of that, which was increased so monthly, was a monthly pay
given to the Priests and Ministers of the Gospel (as a salarie for their
service) and that either by the hand or care of the Bishop, or of some Elders
appointed as Oeconomi or Wardens. Those monthly pays they called mensurnae
diuisiones, as you may see in Cyprian. Epist. 27. and 34. and vide Epist. 36.
editione Pa^nmeliana.
S. Cyprian, who wrote being Bishop of Carthage, about the year CCL. and,
speaking familiarly of this use, calls the Brethren that cast in their monthly
offerings, fratres sportulantes, understanding the offerings under the word
sportulae, which at first in Rome denoted a kind of running banquets
distributed at great men's houses to such as visited for salutation, which being
ofttimes also given in money (as you may remember out of Mardial) the word came
at length to signify both those salaries, wages, or fees, which either
Papinian ss. de Occu^^on ^. 6. 1. and C. tit de ^portu^is and vide Glos^as
Graec. (...) in (...).
Judges or Ministers of Courts of Justice, receiud as due to their places, as
also to denote the Oblations given to make a treasure for the salaries and
maintenance of the Ministers of the Church in this primitive Age. and to this
purpose was it also used in later Council. Chalced. A. D. 451* in lib. ^^.
Samuelis and al. ^^ntra Iban. and videsis ^om. 3. Council fol. 23^. cap. 31.
edit. Binij penultima.
times. But because that passage of S. Cyprian, where he uses this phrase, well
shows also the course of the maintenance of the Church in his time, take it
here transcribed. but first know the drift of his Epistle to be a reprehension
of Geminius Faustinus a Priest his being troubled with the care of a Wardship,
whereas such, as take that dignity upon them, should (he says) be free from
all secular troubles like the Leuits, who were provided for in Tithes. Vt qui
(as he Epist. 266. edi^. Pammel.
writes) operationibus diuinis insistebant, in nulla re auocarentur, nec
cogitare aut agere secularia cogerentur. and then he adds, Quae nunc ratio
and forma in Clero tenetur, vt qui in Ecclesia Domini ad ordinationem*
Clericalem promouentur nullo modo ab adminstratione diuina auocentur sed in
honor Sportulantium fratrum, tanquam Decimas ex fructibus accipientes, ab
Altari and Sacrificijs non recedant, and die ac nocte coelestibus rebus and
spiritalibus seruiant. which plainly agrees with that course of monthly pay,
made out of the Oblations brought into the Treasury; which kind of means he
compares to that of the Leuits, as being proportionable. But hence also it is
manifest, that no payment of Tithes was in S. Cyprians time in use, although
some, too rashly, from this very place would infer so much. those words
tanquam Decimas accipientes (which continues the comparing of Ministers of the
Gospel with the Leuits) plainly exclude them. And elsewhere also the same
Father finding fault with a coldness of devotion that then possessed many, in
regard of what was in use in the Apostles times, and seeing that the Oblations
given were less then usually before, expresses De vnitate Ecclesiae*, 2^.
their neglect to the Church, with, at nunc de patrimonio nec Decimas damus.
whence, as you may gather, that no usual payment was of them, so withal
observe in his expression, that the liberality formerly used had been such,
that, in respect thereof, Tenths were a small part. understand it as if he had
said, but now we give not so much as any part worth speaking of. Neither for
ought appears in old moniments of credit, till near the end of this first four
hundred years, was any payment to the Church of any tenth part, as a Tenth, at
all in use.

II.
But some Laws of this time yet remain, which show that Tenths out of Mines
and of Quarries were paid, both to the Emperor and to the Lord of the soil; as
in the ancient state of Rome the Tenants of the Lands of the Empire paid for
Rent the Appian. lib. 1. etc.
Tenth of their Corn, whence the Publicans that hired it (as the Customers do
here the Kings custom) were called Decumani. those Laws for the tenths of
Mines and Quarries, were made by C. tit de Metalla^iis l. 3. Cuncti. and ^in C.
Theodos. lib. 10 ^it. 19. l. 10. and 11.
Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, Christian Emperors, about CCC.LXXX. and
show withal that they thought not then of any Tenth of such things, to be
given otherwise, when indeed (howeuer Cyprian might before have cause to
complain in Afrique) Christian bounty in Oblations (especially at Rome; and
with proportion like enough in other Churches) so inricht the Clergy, that
their wealthy happiness thence was much wonderd at, and not a little, from
thence, envied. For the then Bishop of Rome his wealth from Oblations chiefly,
you may see Amm. Marcellin. lib. 27.
Marcellinus. For other of the Clergy, a whole Sermon is in Tom. 6. edit.
Sauiliana, page 897. (...) etc.
S. Chrysostom that liud at the end of this first CCCC. years, against such as
envied the wealth of the Church, that grew only out of such Christian devotion
to the Priesthood.

III.
As touching Opinion in that time; Origin a great and most learned Father,
living about the year CC. has a whole Homily Homil. in Nu^er. cap. 18.
upon the Text of First Fruits in the Law, wherein while he teaches that some
things are literally to be obserud, he well admonishes that it is the part of a
wise Interpreter to find out which are so, and which not. And then first he
delivers his judgment, that this of First Fruits is one to be obserud still
according to the letter, and gives this reason; Decet enim (as the Latin is:
the Greek I neither have, nor could ever learn that it has been published) and
vtile est etiam Sacerdotibus Euangelij offerri primitias. Ita enim and Dominus
disposuit, vt qui Euangelium annuntiant de Euangelio viuant, and qui Altari
deseruiunt de Altari participent; and a little after adds also for Tithes: Et
adhuc vt amplius haec obseruanda etiam secundum literam ipsius Dei vocibus
doceamur, addemus ad haec; Dominus dicit in Euangelijs; Vae vobis Scribae and
Pharisaei, hypocritae, qui decimatis mentam, hoc est, Decimam datis mentae and
cymini and anethi and praeteritis quae maiora sunt legis. hypocritae, haec
oportet fieri and illa non omitti. Vide ergo diligentius quomodo sermo Domini
vult fieri quidem omnimode quae maiora sunt legis. non tamen omitti and haec
quae secundum literam designantur. Quod si dicas, quod haec ad Pharisaeos
dicebat non ad Discipulos; audi iterum ipsum dicentem ad Discipulos: Nisi
abundauerit iustitia vestra plusquam Pharisaeorum and Scribarum, non intrabitis
in regnum Coelorum. Quod ergo vult fieri a Pharisaeis multo magis and maiore
cum abundantia vult a Discipulis impleri. And a little after. Quomodo ergo
abundat iustitia nostra plusquam Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, si illi de
fructibus terrae suae gustare non audent priusquam primitias Sacerdotibus
offerant and Leuitis Decimae separentur; and ego nihil horum faciens fructibus
terrae ita abutar, vt Sacerdos nesciat, Levites ignoret, diuinum Altar non
sentiat. And in this form, and upon these reasons, he brings in that of Tenths
in the Gospel, to prove his purpose of First Fruits. But in his conclusion
upon it, he leaves out Tenths, and speaks only of First Fruits, thus. Haec
diximus asserentes mandatum de primitijs frugum vel pecorum debere etiam
secundum literam stare. What we have transcribed shows both his opinion fully,
and the ground of it; without which specially observed, error soon follows
ofttimes in collection from authority. For Opinion of this time, thus much.
More, I confess, might be added out of some other great Fathers, as S.
Ambrose, and S. Augustine. but because they fall so near the end of our first
age and continue into the second; they are omitted here and referd to the
beginning of the next four hunderd years.

IV.
For Constitutions of the Church; if you could believe those supposed to be
made by the Apostles, and to be collected by Pope Clement the first you might
be sure both of payment in the Apostles times, as also of an express opinion
as ancient for the right of Tenths. there you read: Clement. in Con^^it.
Apostol. lib. 2. Cap. 25.
Quae secundum Dei mandatum tribuuntur, Decimas dico and primitias, insumat
Episcopus vt homo Dei. and the right is there largely grounded upon the
Leuiticall commandment. But no man that willingly and most grossly deceiues not
himself, can believe that this Constitution or diverse others there, are of any
time near the age of the Apostles, but many hunderd years after. The little
worth, and less truth, of the whole Volume is enough discouerd by diverse of
the learned. and it was long since branded for a counterfeit in an Oecumenicall
Synod 6. in Trullo* cir^a a. d. 690. Ca^. 2.
Council, when, doubtless, it was not yet neither so stufft with Canons of
later birth, as since it has been. neither are there greater arguments against
it as now it is, then some passages of fact that obuiously occur in it, among
which this may clearly go for one. Had it been the Apostles ordinance or the
use of the Church in the Primitive times, Origin, Tertullian and Cyprian
(having such occasion to mention it) could not have been so silent of it. And
is it likely that all the old Councels, from thence till near DC. years after
Christ (which, being authentic beyond exception, have special Canons for the
lands and goods possessed by the Church, the Offerings, Revenues, and such more)
could have omitted the name of Tenths, if either such use or Apostolical Law
had preceded? They talk of (...), the goods of the Church, (...) or Offerings
of fruits; but have not a word any where of the Tenth part. And in those
counterfeit Canon. Apost. cap. 3. and 4.
Canons also which some too credulously (and those also that wholly reject the
eight Books of Clementines) received as made by the Apostles, one is indeed of
first Fruits (although, touching them by that name, certainly no Law was made
under the Apostles) but no word of Tenths. Of a like credit, its to be feared,
is that which is attributed to a fourth Council of Rome, held about the year
CCC.LXXX. by Pope Damasus. indeed (upon Cardinal Baronius Baron. Annal. tom.
4. (...). 382. page 399. and ^. 384. page 427. edit. Plantiniana.
his credit) in the Vatican the Legend of this Pope, which was used to be read
in the Church, is extant; and, with some miracles, are mixed in it certain
decrees supposed his, and made in he knows not what Council at Rome. of which
one is; Vt Decimae at que primitiae a fidelibus darentur, and qui detrectarent
anathemate ferirentur, as he relates it. But those decrees, being taken out of
the Legend of him, neither ever were receiud as Canonical in the Church, nor
has the eldest Code of the Church of Rome, or Fulgentius, Cresconius, Isidore,
Burchard, Iuo, or Gratian, mention of any of them. Not because what was taken
to be truly his, was altogether wanting; for the Canons of one Council of Rome
under him, his Epistles, and some Decrees are and have been from ancient time,
public and dispersed in some of those Compilers; and one C. 1^. q. 1. c. 15.
hanc cons^etudina^.
especially they have of his time, which being made only for the disposition of
such things as were given to the Church, speaks only of Oblations. but this of
Tithes or any of the rest joined with it touching Usurers, Witches, and other
more (which Baronius only and first published to the world, out of the Ms.) none
of them once remember. Neither before Binius his edition had any Volume of the
Councels receiud into them a memory of any such Decrees under this Damasus, or
any Council of his of that number. Those kind of Acts and Legends of Popes and
others, are indeed usually stufft with such falsehoods, as being bred in the
middle ages among idle Monks, not only grow ancient now, but are receiud amongst
us with such reverence, that the antiquity which the Copies have gaind out of
later time, is mistook for a Character of truth in them for the times to which
they were first, by fiction or bold interpolation, referd. In sum, no example
for the Synods of succeeding ages, no antiquity for the Compilers of the
Canons, had been of equal reverence to this of a Pope, and done at Rome.
neither had they omitted every of those Decrees, had they been truly his.
Confidently conclude, they are supposititious. yet remember too that some
color is for the truth of such a Constitution, in regard that about that time
the first memory is of Tithes by that name paid in the primitive Church; as in
the next part of this division shall be declared. And were that C. 16. q* 1. ^
68. quoni^m. vt genu^^nae D. Hieronym^ memini^ etiam Innocent. 3. in ext^ de
his qu^ fiunt a Prael^tis. ^ 7. cum. Apostolicae.
Epistle not counterfeit, which is attributed to S. Hierom, as written to this
Pope upon that question: Vtrum us as decimarum and oblationum secularibus
peruenire possit, it might be good cause to maintain the truth of this Decree
of his for Tithes. But plainly that Epistle is alike fained; neither tastes it
of him or of any time near that age; nor has it been ever receiud among that
most learned Fathers works.

From about the year CCCC. ^ill DCCC. CAP. V.
I. Tithes were now paid in diverse places, to Abbots, to the Poor, to the
Clergy.

II. Some Consecrations were then made in perpetual right, at the pleasure of
the Owner.

III. That story of Charles Martell his taking away Tithes, and making them
feodall, cannot be justified.

IV. The opinions of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and S. Chrysostom.
the first two teach, the Tenth due by Gods Law; the other two persuade only
that a less part should not be offered.

V. Of Canons, for the payment of Tithes, that are attributed to this Age.

VI. No Canon or other Law was yet generally receiud to compel any payment of
Tithes, although among the Offerings of devout Christians, gifts of that
quantity, were received as due by the Doctrine then in use, in some places
only.

ABout the beginning of the next, or rather some years before the end of the
first part of this division, and afterward, Tenths were paid, or, for holy uses
offered (as the phrase was) in diverse places, in Offerings of that quantity;
and some testimony is of Churches also endowd with the perpetual right of
them in the later half of this four hundred years. Great Opinion was now of
their being due. And some Canons and Provincial Constitutions, attributed to
this time, ordain a payment of them. But not above one of these (and that is
only Provincial) is of any credit.

I.
That they were offered under the name of Tenths in part of Italy, may be
collected out of S. Ambrose who was Bishop of Millan before, and after the year
CCC.XC. And the like for the Diocese of Hippo may be supposd out of S.
Augustines vehement Sermon for the payment of them. The words of both these
Fathers (which in relating their opinions are anon transcribed) may enough
prove, that some did in those times offer them. And it may be, In Epist. ad
Nepositnum ^e vita Clericorum.
S. Hierome pointed at the receiving of Tithes then so offered, in those words
of his, spoken in the person of a Clergie-man. Si ego pars Domini sum and
funiculus haereditatis eius, nec accipio partem inter caeteras tribus, sed
quasi Leuita and Sacerdos viuo de Decimis, and Altari seruiens Altaris
oblatione sustentor, habens ^. ad Tim. c 1 p. 6.^
victum and ves^itum; his contentus ero and nudam crucem nudus sequar. But it is
no necessity to understand him so. it may well be, that de Decimis there is
but a continuance of the comparison made by quasi Leuita; as if he had said,
But live like a Leuite that liud of the Tithes, and serving at the Altar, am
maintaind by the offerings at the Altar etc. what in Gratian is falsely
attributed to him, is before rememberd. In Egypt also, some holy Abbots had
Tithes of all fruits offered them about the beginning of this age. Certatim
Decimas vel primitias frugum suarum memorato seni (to Abbot John) de suis
substantij offerebant, Collat. Abbat. Theone, 21* cap. 1. and 2.
says Cassian, the Hermit that liud about the year CCCC.XXX. and the Abbot
receius the offering with this kind acknowledgement; Deuotionem huius
oblationis (cuius dis^ensatio mihi credita est) gratanter amplector, quia
fideliter primitias vestras ac Decimas indigentium vsibus futuras, velut
sacrificium Domino bonae suauitatis offertis. Where it appears the Abbot
receiud them as a Tresurer for the poor. And about the year CCCC.LXX.
Christians also in Pannonia, by example of S. Seuerins bounty, gave the Tenth
of their fruits to the poor. Deuotissime (says ^ugippius in v^ta S. Seuerini,
cap. 17. and 18.
my author that then liud also) frugum suarum Decimas pauperibus impendebant;
quod mandatum, licet cunctis ex lege notissimum sit, tamen quasi ex ore Angeli
praesentis grata deuotione seruabant. And a little after, he relates that the
Inhabitants of Lauriacum (which some take for Lorch in Austria) being often
admonisht by S. Seuerin, to pay the Tenths of their fruits to the poor, had
notwithstanding omitted it; whereupon, their Corn being blasted, they humbly
come unto him, poenas suae contumaciae confitentes, acknowledging their loss
as a reward of their fault. And the Saint answers them; Si Decimas obtulissetis
pauperibus, non solum aeterna mercede frueremini, verum etiam commodis possetis
abundare praesentibus. whence is seen both the receiud use of offering them in
that place, as also the opinion of Seuerin. And in a Provincial Council at
Matiscon. Conc^l. ^ cap. 51
Mascon, held in the year D.LXXXVI. that is, the XXIII. of King Guntheram, by
all the Bishops subject to his government in France, the payment of Tithes,
into the hands of the Ministers of the Church, is spoken of, as of good
antiquity at that time, and grounded upon the Mosaicall Laws, which they call
there diuinas, and add; quas leges Christianorum congeries longis temporibus
custodiuit intemeratas. that long time they speak of, might have had perhaps
beginning from the doctrine of those two great Fathers, S. Ambrose, and S.
Augustine, about the year CCCC. whereof, more presently. But observe also that,
Leo the Great (he was Pope from CCCC.XL. to CCCC.LX.) has diverse Sermons, yet
remaining, De ieiunio Decimi mensis and eleemosynis, wherein he is very earnest
and large, in stirring up every man's devotion, to offer, to his Parish Church,
part of his receiud fruits, but, speaks not a word of any certain quantity.
The like may be noted in some Homilies of Vide cum in Epist. ad Philippe^s. and
Sermonem 103. ^n cos. qui Clericorum opulentam inuiderunt, Tom. 6. Edit.
Sa^^liana.
S. Chrysostom, touching the Churches maintenance, in which you might wonder
how Tithes were omitted, if either devotion or doctrine had near the beginning
of these CCCC. years made payment of them (especially in the more Eastern
parts) of any common use. For the later part of those years, see toward the
end of this Chapter.

II.
But beside the offering of Tenths yearly (as was done, by the deuouter sort,
sometimes to the Ministers of the Sacraments, sometimes to Abbots, and the like)
a perpetual right also of them was consecrated to some Churches, by grant or
assignment, out of such or such land, at the owners pleasure; and that long
before the end of this four hundred years. These special indowments may be
collected from a Canon of a Council of Arelat. 4 c. 9. and videsi^ c. 16. q.
1. c. 42.43. and 44*
Arles, held in the year DCCC.XIII. which thus speaks: Vt Ecclesiae antiquitus
constitutae, nec Decimis, nec vlla possessione priuentur. and other Prouincials
of that time, and Laws of Charlemain agree with it; as that of his thus
speaking; Anseg^sus C^pitular lib. 2. c. 36. and vide lib. 2. cap. 15*
Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae, nec Decimis, nec alijs possessionibus
priuentur, ita vt nouis oratorijs tribuantur. These cannot well be understood,
unless you interpret them to mean Churches anciently endowd with Tithes. And
what was then about the year DCCC. said to be anciently endowd, must be referd
back into some part of the time we now speak of. Neither are the moniments of
that time without example of such endowments. It is reported that Pipin about
the year DCC.L granted the Tithes of all that lay between Ourt and Lesche two
Rivers of Ardoinne, to a church consecrated to the honor of S. Monon. So I take
that in Apud Molanum in SS. Belgii in 18. October.
S. Monon's life. Beato viro ob titulum Christianitatis mactato Pipinus Rex
regaliter Decimas obtulit, quas habet inter Letiam and Vrtam. So about the year
Chronicon. Came^ac. and A^reb. lib. 1. c. 15.
DC.LXXX. Decimancula in Rodulfi Curte, that is, the right of a Tithe of small
value, in a place called Rodulfs Court, was consecrated to the Church of Arras.
And in a confirmation by King Pipin of the foundation Bonifac. Mogunt. Epist
151. Al^ae sunt ciusmo^i Donationes Pipini Regis and aliorum in Regesto Ms.
Ecclesiae Vltraiect ensis, quod seruatur in Bibliotheca C^^toniana. and vide
proximum caput de^a^re.
of the Abbey of Fulda (which was made in DCC.XLII.) consecrations of Tithes to
the same Abbey, either already made or thereafter to be made, are specially
confirmed. whatsoever it had or thereafter should have in donis, oblationibus,
Decimisque fidelium, absque vllius personae contradictione firmitate perpetua
fruatur, are the words. But these kinds of grants it seems were not yet in much
use. and what was of them, I guess, might have beginning not long before DCC.
years from our Savior. For if they had been known much before, the precedent
of them could hardly have been omitted by Marculphus, who liud under King
Clouis the second about the year DC.LX. and collected carefully the Formulae or
precedents of al kinds of Deeds, Conueyances, and Grants, that were practiced
in his time; amongst which he has many by the name of Cessiones and
Donationes, wherein lands and other profits were given to this or that Church,
but never mentions any one for the gift of Tenths.

III.
If the common tale of Charles Martell his taking away the Tithes, that
Churches were endowd with, and giving them to the Laity, about the year
DCC.XL. were true, it were authority (both for general payment, and special
endowment in those times) of great antiquity and fair proof. but although
that of him be receiud as a story by diverse of late time, yet clearly it can
never be justified. He was indeed a robber of the Church; but he is not
mentioned by any old author of credit, to have meddled with Tithes. He was
Monasteriorum multorum Euersor, and Ecclesiasticarum pecuniarum in vsus
proprios commutator, as In Epist. ad Ethelbald. R^g. M^r^. apud G. Malm^sb.
lib. 1. cap. 4. quod t^^ de Carolo isthoc ibi dicitur, in editis Bonifaci^
Epistolis deest.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, that liud in his time, complains of him. that
is, he took Monasteries, Bishopriques, Church-Rents, and possessions from the
Clergy, and prophand them to lay-hands, as a reward of their military service
then done for Christianity against the Saracens, who from Spain invaded the
Country* whereupon also, another fiction is too patiently receiud; Legend
^uch^rii apud Surium, tom. 1.30. Febr. and vide Gratian. c. 16. q. 1. post
Canonem. 59. edit. Gregorian.
that, Eucherius Bishop of Orleans in a vision saw him damned for it; and that
by a search (according as an Angel admonished) in his tomb, it was also
confirmd for truth; there being found in it, no relic of him, but only a
dreadful Serpent. The first author of this Hobgoblin story seems of like
credit with him, who ever he was, that first published that the taking of Tithes
was Martels chief sacrilege. Tithes in his time were not so universally as yet
annexed to churches, as that they could be the main object of such a sacrilege.
nor are they ever reckond so among those ancients, that largely speak of Lay
men's oppression by defacing whole Monasteries and Bishopriques in the times
that next succeeded. Neither is it clear that in Eucherius his life, Martell
was dead. for it is observed and taught by that great and most learned
Cardinal Tom 9 page 111. and 138. ^dit. ^la^tini^na. ^ed v^roin hacre alij
aliter. and qui curios^s hic esse velis* prae^. (...) qua satis o^u^a^un^*
ad^is. Adreualdi autoris v^tustiss l^b. 1. de miraculis S. Benedicti, c. 14.
Baronius, that he liud at least ten years after Eucherius. How then could
Eucherius cause his Tomb to be searched; and there find a Serpent? That Is
enough, and truth too, that Boniface brands him withal for his tyrannical
spoiling the Church of her other possessions; Longa torsione and verenda morte
consumtus est. the rest is only out of the Legend of Eucherius his life, which
(as other things for the most part of that kind) is too full of falsehoods to
gain to it self any credit. And some late Canonists that out of his tyranny
against the Church, interpret their Decimae infeudatae, or feudall Tithes, are
alike in no small error, as in the next Age shall be manifested. For neither
was the course then used in taking the Church revenues for military
maintenance, to give them in fee to any Lay man. but leases for life were made
by Churchmen, to such as the Prince appointed, of great part of their
possessions, whereupon certain small Rents (according to a proportion ordaind by
the State) were reserud. Those leases were sometimes upon the Princes request
renewd, but upon death of the Lessee, the estate and possession reuerted to the
Church. all which appears plainly in a Inter Ep^st. S. Boni^aci^ post. 78.
x^de, si placet, Epist. 132 and Zachariae PP. ad ^um Epist. 142.
Council held in the year DCC.XLII. under Prince Carlomann son to Martell;
where that, which was so leased, is called according to the phrase of the Time,
Ecclesialis pecunia, ou^ of every Casa^a whereof a shilling was to be reserud
to the Church or Monastery, whence it was granted. That Casa^a was a quantity
of land known certainly from the custom only of every Country, as a yard land,
or a hide of land with us. the same word, but varied in gender* often occurres
in old Charters of our Saxon times, especially in the Lieger books of
Worcester, and Abingdon. And in that of Abingdon, a Charter is of King Edwi,
made A. D. 956.
to one Brithric of quinque Cassati terrae, the title or rubrique being Carta
quinque hydarum; and another there is with the same rubrique, the words of the
Charter it self being quinque Mansae; whereupon by a Marginall note in an
ancient hand, one observes those two to denote but the same. Nota (says he)
quod Hidae, Cassati, and Mansae idem sunt. But this by the way. Of no less
falsehood or upon other ground, then this fiction of Martell, is their C^nt.
Madg^urg. 8. etc. V^teris huiusce ae^i sermonis ignari hallucinati sunt* in
ipsam Synodo ita legerant funda^as pecunias Ecclesia^um Ecclesijs restituimus.
Et ita Codex vetutiss* Ms in Thesau^o illo Cottoniano, pecunias autem Decimas
significasse opinabantur sedperperam and ridicul^. Pecunia^ ibi praed a sunt.
relation which attribute to that Synod under Caroloman, these words, Decimas
occupatas a prophanis restituimus. Neither course nor any story of the time
can justify it.

IV.
For the Opinions of Fathers in the beginning of this Age; first, Tom. 5. sermon.
ser. 2. post. Dom. 1. quad^ag^ssima, and vide sermon in Ascens. Domini.
S. Ambrose thus, in a sermon of Repentance, teaches them due by Gods Law. Non
nobis sufficit (says he) quod nomen Christianorum praeferamus, si opera
Christiana non facimus. Decimas nostras annis singulis de cunctis frugibus,
pecoribus etc. praecipit erogandas Dominus. Then he ^ltes the Text of that
Precept, out of Moses, and goes on with Nouem parts vobis tributae sunt, sed
qui Decimas dare noluistis ad solam Decimam reuertotis. Next, he reprehends
other offenses, and adds, Quicunque recognoscit in se quod fideliter non
dederit Decimas suas, modo omendet, quod minus fecit quid est, fideliter
Decimas dare, nisi vt nec peius, nec minus aliquando Deo offeras, aut de grano
tuo, aut de vino, aut de fructibus arborum, aut de pecoribus, aut de harto, aut
de negotijs, aut de venatione sua. De omni substantia quam Deus homini donat,
Decimam partem sibi reseruauit, and ideo non licet homini retinere illud quod
Deus sibi reseruauit. Agreeing with him, is S. Augustine in a whole Homily In
sermon. de Temp. in tom. 10. est vero 219. edit. Antwerp. atque ipsissima huius
vocabula habentur in tractatu illo supposititio B. Augustino falso tributo, and
de rectitudine Catholica conuersationis* inscripto.
for the right of them; About Harvest he made it (if it be his; for it has
been doubted whether it be his or no) on the XII. Sunday after Trinity.
Propitio Christo, says he, fratres charissimi, iam prope sunt dies in quibus
messes colligere debeamus, and ideo gratias agentes Deo qui dedit, de
offerendis, imo reddendis Decimis cogitemus. Deus enim qui dignatus est totum
dare, Decimam a nobis dignatur repetere, non sibi, sed nobis sine dubio
profuturam. and grounds himself upon that of Cap. 3.10.
Malachy, the text of honor the Lord thy God with all thy substance, and the
like. Then exhorts them. Decimae tributa sunt egentium animarum. read ergo
tributa pauperibus; offer libamina sacerdotibus; and admonishes, that, if they
have no fruits of the earth, they should pay the Tithe of whatsoever they live
by; Quodcunque te pascit i. e. viuend^ g^nus.
ingenium, Dei est; and ind^ Decimas expetit vnde viuis; de militia, de
negotio, and de artificio read Decimas. aliud enim pro terra dependimus, aliud
pro vsura vitae pensamus. And then urging more Texts out of the old Testament
touching Tithes and first fruits, and telling them, that the neglect of payment
is the cause of sterilitie and blasting; Haec est (he says) Domini iustissima
consuetudo, vt si tu illi Decimam non dederis, tu ad Decimam reuoceris. And
afterward with much earnestness, Decimae ex debito requiruntur, and qui eas
dare noluerit, res alienas inuasit. and quanti pauperes in locis vbi ipse
habitat, illo ^ecimas non dante, fame mortui fuerint, tantorum homicidiorum
reus ante tribunal aeterni iudicis apparebit, quia a Domino pauperibus
delegatum suis vsibus reseruauit. Qmi ergo sibi aut praemium comparare, aut
peccatorum desiderat indulgentiam promereri, reddat Decimam. These two great
Bishops agree; and from the Law given to the Israelites, take their whole
doctrine. S. Hierome is by some used for an author to the same purpose, and that
from his Ad cap. 3. Malachia.
Commentary to the text of Malachy, which (after he has opened the words of
the Prophet, being only about the neglect of payment of Tithes and first
fruits; about the neglect of payment only, not the right of them) are these;
Quod de Decimis primitijs que diximus, quae olim dabantur a populo Sacerdotibus
ac Leuitis, in Ecclesiae quoque populis intelligite, quibus praeceptum est non
solum Decimas dare and primitias, sed and vendere omnia que habent, and dare
pauperibus, and sequi Dominum Saluatorem; quod si facere nol^mus, sal^em
Iud^^rum imitemur exempla, vt pauperibus partem demus ex toto, and Sacerdotibus
and Leuitis honorem debitum deferamus. Who hence thinks, that his opinion
agrees with the other two, may as well infer, that he meant also, that all
men were still bound to sell all they had, as in the Apostles times. He
speaks only, as admonishing Christians to give their alms to the poor, and
double 1. Tim. 5.17.
honor to the Labourer in the Lords service, not binding them at all to offer
this or that part, but leaving plainly a Christian liberty; wherein yet, true
devotion indeed, as he means, should not be more backward then the Jews were,
when they duly paid. He that indifferently reads him, will think no otherwise.
Neither is S. Chrysostom at all different from him. He persuading Hom (...)
epist. 1 ad Corinth. in cap. 16.
even laborers and artificers to give bountifully their offerings to the
Church for holy uses, according to the Apostolical ordinance in the Churches
of Corinth and Galatia, brings the Jewish liberality in their payments of
Tenths for an example (beneath which, he would not have Christians determine
their charity) and says withal, that he speaks these things not as
commanding or forbidding that they should give more, yet as thinking it fit
that they should not give less then the tenth part ((...), as his words are)
of all profits gaind either from the earth, or by merchandise, or whatsoever
just employment either of person or estate. but not of Usury and War, which
(at least as it was used in those primitive Ages) was held by most Doctors
Videsis Lactantium lib. de vero cultu cap. 18. and Tertull. de Corona Militis.
of the time, as unjust as Usury. and indeed, where it was just, there no part
of the gain or spoils was to be given to the Priests, by the doctrine of some
Abrah. Ben. ka^. ta^. pracept. 501.
Rabbis, that affirm it as expressly taught Deuteronomy. cap. 18.1.
within a Text of Moses. But his exception of Usury agrees with the Canonists
of late times, that will not have Tithe paid of unjust gain, no more then Ibid.
cap. 23.18.
the hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog, was to be brought into the Temple.
what is there called the price of a Dog, is by Josephus Origin. Iudai^. lib. 4.
cap. 7.
taken for money given for the lone of a Dog to breed withal. You may add to
the opinions of this time that of Homil. 16. in Euang. and did. 5. de
Consecrat. c. 16.
S. Gregory, where he admonishes the hallowing of Lent, consisting of six
weeks, out of which, the Sundays being taken, XXXVI. days remain for the
Tenth part of the year; fractions of days omitted. this Tenth of time he would
have us give to God, vt in lege iubemur (as his words are) Domino Decimam rerum
dare.

V.
Some Canons, both Pontificiall and Synodall, made for the right and payment of
Tithes, are attributed to the ages that fall about the middle of this time. But
I have not obserud above one, that is of any credit, as referd hither; neither
was that ever receiud into the body or any old Code of the Canons. That one is
Provincial, and made in the year D.LXXXVI. in the Council of M^tis^o^. 2.
Cap. 5.
Mascon (a Bishoprique in the Diocese of Lions) where all the Bishops of King
Guntherams Kingdom being present, speak of reforming Ecclesiastical customs
according to an ancient example, and then begin with Leges Diuinae, consulentes
Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro haereditaria portione omni populo
praecaeperunt Decimas fructuum suorum locis sacris praestare, vt nullo labor
impediti per res illegitimas, spiritualibus possint vacare Ministerijs; quas
leges Christianorum congeries longis temporibus custodiuit intemeratas. Vnde
statuimus vt Decimas Ecclesiasticas omnis populus inferat, quibus Sacerdotes
aut in pauperum vsum aut in captiuorum redemptionem erogatis, suis orationibus
pacem populo ac salutem impetrent. Here is no small testimony as well of
ancient Practice in paying of them, as of great Opinion for their being due.
But although the whole Council has to this day remaind with the subscriptions
of the Bishops to it, yet (whateuer the cause was) not so much as any Canon of
it is found mentioned, as of receiud authority in any of the more ancient
Compilers of Synodall decrees; notwithstanding, that the fullest of them, I
mean Isidore, liud long after this Council held, and has some other Synods
of the Continent of France, as of Orleans, of Arles, of Agatha. But this he
mentions not. The first that published it, was Friar Tom. 2. Conc^lior. fol. 90.
Crab, in his Edition of the Councels under Charles the fifth. Yet also in some
that collected the Canons since Isidore, Decrees of elder time then that is,
are to this purpose spoken of; as you may see in Iuo Decret. part. 3. cap. 11^.
at the end of a Decretall of Gelasius that was Pope in the year CCCC.XCII.
where these words are annexed, Decimas iusto ordine, non tantum nobis, sed
maioribus nostris visum est, plebibus tantum vbi sacrosancta dantur baptismata
deberi. This stands continued with the rest of Gelasius, in the print. But in
an old and very fair Copy near as ancient as Iuo, remaining in the Library at
Paul's, these words begin with a colored capital, as a several Paragraph; and
indeed are not Gelasius his, but Pope Leo's the fourth, who lived above CCC.L.
years after. that appears plainly out of the Epistle C. 12. ^. 2. and 25 etc.
of Gelasius (whereto they are annexed) which Gratian has in all, saving this,
according to Iuo, yet cites this passage in another place C. 16. q 1. c. 45.
by it self, out of that Leo, from whom also it is likewise taken by Anselm and
Gregorius Presbyter, who have in their collections the rest of Gelasius his
Epistle according to Iuo, as it is noted to the Text published by command of
Gregory the thirteenth. And in those Decrees Decret. G^las^, cap. 20.
of Gelasius that are extant touching the Church-treasurie, or revenue, no
mention is of other then of redditus Ecclesiae and oblationes fidelium. A like
falsehood is committed by them Ex Binio in tom. 2. Council. alij, qui de hac re
agunt.
that attribute a Provincial Constitution touching the distribution of Tithes
amongst the Bishops and inferior Ministers to the first Council of Orleans,
held in the year D.VII. and that by finding some words to this purpose added to
a Canon which in the printed Iuo Decret. lib. 3. cap. 202.
has a marginall reference to some Council of Orleans. It is most certain
that the first Council of Orleans, Council. ^urel 1. cap 9.10. and 11.
has no word of Tithes in it, but speaks of the distribution only of such
things as in Altario oblatione fidelium conferuntur, and possessions of other
like kind of Church Lands. and according to that, Burchard and Gratian C. ^0 q.
1 c. 7. de his.
cite it; who have also those words that Iuo there has, excepting only that of
Tithes. And some other Prouincials of the Council. Aurel. 3. cap. 5. and Aurel.
5. cap. 15.
same place and age, to the same purpose, speak afterward of oblationes and
facultates, but not a word of Tithes. All which shows plainly that no such
matter was ever in the first Council of Orleans. The truth is also that Iuo
himself cites it not out of any Council of Orleans, but from, I know not what
Council of Toledo, as his Ms. copy is, and as it is truly published in the
printed book. all that directs to the Council of Orleans there, being only the
marginall note of du Molin a Canonist of Louain that set it forth. But neither
any of Orleans or Toledo has it all as he relates it. The truth is; that Canon
of his is made up out of two Councels indeed, the first Arelat. 1. cap. 11.
of Orleans, and the ninth of T^l^ta^. 9. cap. 6.
Toledo, and agrees well with both, saving for so much as is expressly spoken of
Tithes. That which in those two had been ordaind for Offerings and other
revenues of the Church, he not unfitly applies to Tithes, being a more known
part of that revenue in his time; and thither draws also an old Council of
Synod Romans sub Syluestro Papa cap. 4.
Rome as if it had spoken expressly of them, and writes all in no other
syllables then De^ret. lib. 3. cap. 136.
Burchard had before delivered with a like title of ex Concilio Toletano. But
this excuses not those which make the words of such a collection, out of two or
three old Councels, applied to a later time, to go for a Canon of any one of
them. Many such are occuring in Burchard and Iuo epecially, and some in
Gratian; which are noted upon their credits, and, in some editions, placed in
the times to which they attribute them, licet forsan falso tali sint Pontifici,
vel certe tali Concilio per scriptorum incuriam adscripti, as Friar In
Prologo^m. ad Tom. 1. Council.
Crab well admonishes. A like falsehood is in attributing, out of the same Part.
3. c. 174. Gar^^as apud Binium in Tom 2. Council. ex eo alij.
Iuo, an express Canon for the payment of first Fruits and Tenths, to the
Provincial Synod of Civil, held in the year D.CX. in these words. Omnes
primitias and Decimas tam de pecoribus quam de frugibus, dives simul and pauper
Ecclesijs suis recte offerant. and a little after: Omnis rusticus and artifex
quisque de negotio iustam Decimationem faciat. and then, Si quis autem haec
omnia non Decimauerit, praedo Dei est, and fur, and latro; and maledicta quae
intulit Dominus ((...)) Cain non recte diuidenti congeruntur. There is little
reason to doubt, but that the reference of that Canon in him, to that Council
of Civil is false. The Council of that year and place is extant, whole in
diverse editions, as it was certified by eight Bishops which were at it; and in
that no taste is of any such matter. The old Ms. copy of Iuo, of or very near
his time, in the Library of Paul's, has it ex Concilio Spanensi, the printed
book being ex Concilio Hispalensi; what Spanensi is, I know not. if it were
Spalensi, it were the same with Hispalensi, for which Spalensi is always in
Isidores Councels, as Spania is sometimes Palladiu^ hist. Lausiaca in M^lan^ and
in Concilio Sardi^ensi subscribit Osius ab Spania and Coltus ab Spa^ii^.
anciently for Hispania. what ever he meant by it, clearly the whole Canon is
of much later time; the first words of it also being nothing but the syllables
of one of Charlemains Laws Ans^gisu^ Capitular lib. 1^ cap. 91 quod ipsum etiam
habet Iuo part. 16. cap. 262.
that was not made till DCC.LXXX. years from Christ. that is, Vnicuique
Ecclesiae mansus integer absque vllo seruitio attribuatur. where Mansus is for
a Farm or dwelling place, in the same sense as at this day Manse is used in
the Laws of Scotland. Some others like these occurring are mistaken. and you
may observe that Gratian more warily abstaind from using such Canons mistitled;
among which also, from these. But the less falsehood is to be imputed to Iuo,
in regard that Burchard before him had almost all his syllables; from whom he
transcribed. yet that excuses not his negligence committed in not carefully
examining his author; which often causes gross impostures, sometimes proceeding
from malice, sometimes from ignorance, to be received as perfect truth;
especially by those that cite, without more regard, Provincial Synods
absolutely there mentioned for the first of that name, when indeed they are
often of far later time. Slothful Readers are soon so deceived. But among the
known and cerain moniments of truth, till about the end of this CCCC. years, no
Law Pontifical, or Synodall (saning that of Mascon) determins, or commands any
thing concerning Tents; although very many are which speaking purposely and
larely of Church Revenues, Oblations, and such like, could not have been silent
of them, if that quantity had been then established for a certain dutie^ You
may see Synod. Agath. c. 4. and 7. and ^8. Synod. Romans 4. sub Symmacho PP. c.
4. and 6. edict. Leones. and Anthemii C. de Sacros. Eccles. L. 14 iubemus, etc.
c. 10. q. 2. c. 2. Novel. 120 and 131. Co^c. Paris. 1. cap. 1. Turonens. 2.
cap. 26. Bracarens. 2. cap. 2. Leg. Wis^gothorum lib. 5. etc.
enough in those to which the margin refers you; all made in this part of our
division; none using other words (to this purpose) then facultates, praedia,
(...), oblationes, vota fidelium, res Ecclesiae delegatae, or collatae, and the
like, as the phrases are in the other first CCCC. years. some of which kind yet
the Canonists and others, in Provincial Synods, have in the later ages,
compiling their Decrees, made to serve as if they had expressly named Tithes. as
you may see in that example rememberd before out of Iuo, and Burchard; in that
of the Council of Gangra in C. 16. q. 1. c. 57. in Canonibus; in that of the
29 Chapter of Gelasius his Decree in the Council of Tribur held DCCC.XC. cap.
13; in that of the first Oecumenicall Council of Chalcedon cap. 17. in c. 14.
of the same Synod of Tribur; and in that of the ninth Council of Toledo
Burchard lib. 3. cap 135. and Iuo part. 3. cap. 201.
in an old Council of Cologne. he that reads those old Canons only, as they
are so applied, in late authority, to Tithes, might perhaps soon think that at
first they were made specially and by name for them. The matter is plainly
otherwise. what was ordaind in them about Oblations, is out of them in later
times (Tithes and Oblations being then supposed of equal right) expressly
extended also to Tithes. the word Oblations, as you see in those times, being
usual for Tithes also when they were given; and offerre Decimas was the common
phrase, for to give Tithes. About the end of these years in a Prouincial Synod
held at Friuli in D.CC.XCI. under Paulinus Patriarch of Aquilegia, the words
are, De Decimis vero vel primitijs (saluis scilicet allegoricarum rerum
mysticis Sacramentis) nihil melius puto dicere quam quod scriptum est in
Malachia Propheta, dicente Domino; inferte omnem Decimam in horreum meum etc.
and upon that place, the supposition of the duty being grounded, a Commination
is added; Quis non timeat vel contremiscat illam maledictionem quam minatur
nolentibus offerre? The opinion of the Synod is here plainly seen. and it is
rather a declaration by Doctrine, then a constitution by Precept.

VI.
But howeuer either this of Friuli, or that before cited of Mascon, had their
Provincial authority, no Canon as yet was received in the Church generally,
as a binding Law, for payment of any certain quantity; which not only appears
in that we find none such now remaining, but also is confirmd by the testimony
of a great and learned French Bishop (in whose Province also Mascon was) that
could not be ignorant of the receiud Law of his time. He liud and wrote very
near the end of this first four hundred years (I think, in the very
beginning of the next.) And, in a Treatise about the dispensation of Church
revenues, expressly denies, that before his time any Synod or general doctrine
of the Church had determind or ordaind any thing touching the quantity that
should be given, either for maintenance or building of Churches. Because his
words are special authority also against those counterfeit titles of Canons
before spoken of, they shall have place here. Iam vero (says Agobardu^
Lugdunensis de dispensatione etc. contra sacrileg^s, page 276. edit.
Massoniana, Parisijs.
he) de Donandis rebus and ordinandis Ecclesijs nihil vnquam in Synodis
constitutum est, nihil a sanctis patribus public praedicatum. Nulla enim
compulit necessitas feruente vbique religiosa deuotione and amore illustrandi
Ecclesias vltro aestuante etc. This Author is Agobard Bishop of Lions (very
learned, and of great judgment) and had not so confidently denied what you see
he does, if any Decree, Canon, or Council generally receiud, had before his
time commanded the payment or offering of any certain part. How the authority
of that Council of Mascon stands with his meaning, I well conceive not. But
clearly, he speaks truth, in regard of what was generally receiud. For neither
in the Codex Ecclesiae vniuersalis, or the Codex Ecclesiae Romanae, or
Africanae, Fulgentius Ferrandus, Cresconius, or Isidores collection (all which,
in those elder ages, were as parts of the body of the Canon Law) is once any
mention of the name of Tenths. And indeed, that Council of Mascon, with all
other Church-Laws in Bonifac. Arch. Mogunt. epist. 132. Zacharia^ PP. ibid.
epist. 143. and Will^baldus in vita Bonifac. cap. 9. and 10.
France, lay a long while neglected before Agobards time, as in the age of our
fathers that of Mascon likewise did. Yet withal, no doubt can be made, but
that in most Churches in this time, amongst the offerings of those of the
deuouter sort, Tenths or greater parts of their annual increase were given,
according to the doctrine of those Fathers before mentioned, and those other
testimonies. Whereto you may add that complaint of Boniface Epist. 105. ad
Cutbertum Arch. Cantuariensem. (...) item Epistola (...) videsis number. 107.
Archbishop of Mentz, about D.CCL. against the Clergy. Lac and lanas (says
he) ouium Christi oblationibus quotidianis ac Decimis fidelium suscipiunt, and
curam gregis Domini deponunt. And in an Exhortation M^. in Biblioth. Cotton.
written near D.CCCC. years since: Ille bonus Christianus est qui ad Ecclesiam
frequentius venit, and de fructibus suis non gustat nisi prius ex ipsis Domino
aliquid offerat; qui Decimas annis singulis Pauperibus reddit; qui Sacerdotibus
honorem etc. These also show a use of payment among the firmer and deuouter
Christians in those times. But they were then disposed of diversely; now you see
to the Priests, now to Abbots, now to the Poor. and when they were offered to
Baptismall or Episcopal Churches, they were receiud as indefinit Offerings,
the quantity whereof was wholly arbitrarie, in respect of any constitution or
general Law in use. The quantity of the Offerings was arbitrarie, but some
kind of Offering was necessary. He that offered not at all, of his fruits, was
compellable, it seems, by Excommunication (as in the Ph^t. Nomocan. tit. 5. and
C. de Episcopis and Cleric. l. 39
Eastern Church; where that compulsion also was taken from the Churches
authority in the Patriarchat of Constantinople) but not as yet, he that offered
a less quantity. And that it was a special bounty to offer the Tenth, you
may see in the old Ethiopian Biblioth. Patrum, tom. 4.
Mass, where a distinct prayer is for those, Qui obtulerunt munera sanctae
vnicae, quae est super omnes, Ecclesiae sacrificium scilicet Forte legendum
primitiarum and Decimarum.
primarum Decimarum, gratiarum actionis signum and monimentum. And it seems the
disposition of the Offerings were so in the Patrons power (by the practice of
some places) that he might assign a Council. 2. Bracarens. cap. 6. and vide
Toletanum 9. cap. 1
certainty of them to the Minister of his Church, and employ the rest at his
pleasure (which agrees enough with the right challenged, in the succeeding
ages, touching Inuestiture and arbitrarie Consecrations; whereof, more in the
next CCCC. years) although in this age also some Canons Council Aurelianens. 1.
cap. 13.
of the Clergy subjected all newbuilt Churches to the Bishops government; but
were little obeyed. For mere Church-Laws, hitherto. Some secular Constitutions
are, that about the year D.CC.LXXX. were made for the payment of Tithes, by
Charles King of France, Italy, and Lumbardy, and afterward Emperor. But
because they fall so near the end of this part of our Division, and are rather
to be accounted amongst the Laws of his Empire (which began not till near XX.
years after; that is, about D.CCC.) then only of his Kingdom, and were
afterward receiud into the Imperial Capitularies, whence we have chiefest
notice of them; they are purposely referd into the next CCCC. years, as the
first Latitude, required in our Division, permits. Neither before them, did any
general Law, that yet remains in public, and is of credit, ordain any
payment of Tenths in the Western Church. For in the Eastern, never any Law,
that I have obserud, mentions them.

Between about the year D.CCC. and near M.CC. CAP. VI.
I. Payment of Tithes, how performed.

II. Arbitrarie Consecrations of them alone (like Grants of Rents-charge) at
the Lay-owners choice, to any Church or Monastery, were frequent; and
sometimes Laymen sold them to the Church. Redimere Decimas.

III. Appropriations of them with Churches; wherein they passed as by
themselves, from the Patron severally and directly in point of interest. The
beginning of Parish Churches. Disposition of the Offerings received there.
Lay-foundations of Parish Churches. The interest that Patrons claymed. Right of
Aduowson. The ceremony of putting a Cloth or Robe upon the Patron, at the
consecration of the Church. The use of Inuestitures, by which (as by liuerie of
Seisin) Lay Patrons gave their Churches. Commendatio Ecclesiae. Benefice. None
anciently received the character of Orders, but when also the ordination was
for the title of some Church. Thence came the later use of Episcopal
Institution. Whence some Patrons came to have most part of the Tithes. Canonica
portio. The Clergy and Councels against Inuestitures. Their continuance till
toward M.CC. when Institution (as it is at this day) upon presentation grew
common^ How Appropriations were in those times made. The ancient Episcopal
right to Tithes, especially in Germany, and the Northern parts. How Monks
justified their possession of Tithes and Parish-Churches. The right of Tithes
generally denied in Turingia, to the Archbishop of Mentz.

IV. Of Infeodations of Tithes into Lay-hands, both from the Clergy and
Laity; and of their Original.

V. Of Exemptions granted by the Pope. Templars and Hospitalars accounted no
part of the Clergy.

VI. The general opinion was, that they are due iure diuino. but this,
indifferently thought on, seems to have denoted rather Ecclesiastique or
Positive Law (by the doctrine and practice of the Clergy) then Divine Moral
Law.

VII. Laws Imperial, and Canons Synodall and Pontificiall, for the payment of
Tenths. The gross error of some that mistake Nona and Decima in the
Capitularies. The first General Council that mentions Tithes.

THe practice found in the time twixt about D.CCC. and M.CC. from Christ,
consists in some ordinary payments of Tithes, as in the former ages; in more
frequent Consecrations of a perpetual right of them alone to any Church, or
Monastery, at the owners choice; in Appropriations of them with the churches
in which they were by custom or consecration established; in Infeodations of
them into Lay-hands; and in Exemptions for discharge of payment. By the more
general Opinion of the Church, they are expressed to be due Iure diuino; but
that is warily to be interpreted out of the general practice clearly allowd by
the Clergy. From the beginning of this time Canons are very frequent for the
right of them. But the first Law that may at all be styled general for it, was
ordaind by Charles the Great, and receiud, but little practiced, through the
Empire. Of all these in their order.

I.
Not only from devotion, but through Ecclesiastique censure also, aided with
secular power, about the very beginning of this CCCC. years, many Churches in
the Western Empire, had the Tenth paid as a duty. This may be collected out of
an Epistle written by Alchwin to Charles the Great, touching the exaction of
Tithes (which he calls iugum Decimarum and plena per singulas domus exactio)
of the Hunnes and Saxons; who being then lately, by Charles, conquered, had
newly received the Christian faith, Alchwin there aduises, that it were better
for the Christian cause, to omit it amongst them, till they were grown firmer,
and speaks of it as a thing of known use among other settled Christans. His
words are: Vestra sanctissima pietas sapienti consilio praeuideat, si melius
sit rudibus populis in principio fidei iugum imponere Decimarum, vt plena fiat
per singulas domus exactio illarum. an Apostoli quoque ab ipso Deo Christo
edocti and ad predicandum mundo missi, exactiones Decimarum exegissent, vel
alicui demandassent dari, considerandum est. Scimus quia Decimatio substantiae
nostrae valde bona est. Sed melius est illam amittere quam fidem perdere. Nos
vero in fide Catholica nati, nutriti, and edocti, vix consentimus substantiam
nostram pleniter Decimari? Quanto magis tenera fides, and infantilis animus,
and auara men's illarum largitati non consentit? This Epistle was written about
DCC.XCVII. as the historical part of it persuades. and the general Laws, by
which that exaction might have been made, are among those which about DCC.LXXX.
the tame Charles had ordaind in an assembly of Estates, of which more in the
last Paragraph of this Chapter. But the execution of those Laws soon afterward
(as anon shall be declared) failing; this practice of payment also became to be
of rare use. and although diverse Synods soon followd which commanded a Tenth,
as what was due of it self to the Church (whence also in some places a
Parochial payment doubtless continued, and by prescription and custom
established a civil right in some Churches) yet Aliter Ecclesiastici. quod
vid^ prox..
the Laity (not much subiecting themselves to any Church-Laws of the time,
that touched their possessions) frequently exercised their arbitrarie
dispositions, especially of such of them as were not already consecrated, or
by custom, or prescription settled, and therein pretended them due only but as
their own choice, either by Consecration to any Church or Monastery
whatsoever, or by Infeodation into Lay-hands, should determine. And those also
which were established by former Consecration, Custom, or Prescription, were
very often arbitrarily disposed of also by Lay-Patrons in their Appropriations.

II.
For arbitrarie Consecrations; the Council. M^g. 16. q. 1. c. 42. Metens. circae
ann. 890. cap. 2. M^g* circa a d* 846 Benedictus L^uita lib. 5. c. 46.
Laws ordaind in the first of these CCCC. years, that speak of Decimationum
prouentu^ priori Ecclesiae legitime assignatus, and locus vbi decimae fuerant
antiquitus consecratae, and Decimae quae singulis dantur Ecclesijs, and such
more point at the use of them. And although, out of any continuance alone of
voluntary payment, a kind of Parochial right (which also by the Laws Leo 4.
in c. 16. q. 1 de Monachis c. 45 etc. 56. and saepe in Capitularibus.
of the time every Rector should have enjoyed in the Territory where he
dispensed the Sacraments) were created, yet Consecrations of Tithes (not yet
established by a civil title) made to the Church of another Parish at the
Lay-owners choice, were practiced and continued in force; as may plainly be
collected out of an old Law about the beginning of these years made (but not
put in execution) for punishment of such consecrations by compulsion of the
party to restore to the Church the quantity of the Tithe so aliened.
Quicunque (are the Leg. Lo^gobard. lib. 3. tit. 3. cap* 7. Hlothari^ Imp and in
Addit. q. ad Capitular. cap 73.
words of it) Decimam abstrahit de Ecclesia ad quam per iustitiam dari debet,
and eam presumptiose, vel propter munera aut amicitiam vel aliam quamlibet
occasionem, ad aliam Ecclesiam dederit, a Comite vel a misso nostro
distringatur, vel eiusdem Decimae quantitatem cum sua lege restituat. So
another was made against parsons, under pain of deprivation, that they
Benedict Leuitae, lib. 7. c. 141.
should not persuade Parishioners to come to their Churches, and suas decimas
sibi dare. With it agrees the complaint made about the same time in the
Council of Synod. T^cin^ns^ c 16 q. 1. ^. in s^cri^ Canonibus 56.
Pauia, against such as used to give away their Tithes alijs Ecclesijs pro
libitu. And many express examples are of such grants made, not otherwise then
as of Rents charge arbitrarily created. some shall be here added. But, because
since the last chapter printed, the Chartulary of the Church of Vtrecht among
many other select moniments to the purpose of this discourse (through the favor
of that right worthy and learned Sr Robert Cotton, my most honored friend) came
to my hands, wherein an obseruable consecration of tithes in the former CCCC.
years, is preserved; it shall here (not much out of its place) be first
rememberd. There, in confirmations to that Bishoprique made by Pipin, Charles
the great, and other of the succeeding Emperors, is expressed that some near
ancestors of that Charles (as the elder Pipin, Charles Martell, Carloman) had
given great endowments to it, and among them, Videsis, ante alia, diplomae
ibid. dat* 2. I^do^i^i 1. Imperatoris. in quo, quae superiores concesserant,
recensentur.
Omnem Decimam de Mancipijs, terris, and telonijs, vel de negotio, vel de omni
re; vndecunque ad partem regiam fis^us teloneum exigere aut accipere videbatur.
it seems it must be restraind to what the grantors possessed in the Territory
about Vtrecht, although no such thing appears in the diverse Charters there
remaining of it. For the following times; in the same Chartularie, is a
commemoration of the possessions of the Bishoprique, wherein diverse particular
Tenths possessed by special grant are reckond; as Tenths of wreck, of treasure
troue, of fishing. and a relation is of promise made to the Bishop by one Gutha
to endow a Church, which he gave to Vtrecht, with the Tithes of diverse Manors.
In Beuorhem (the words are) tradidit Gutha Ecclesiam necdum consecratam in ius
and dominium Sancti Martini (to that Saint was the church of Vtrecht
consecrated) ea videlicet ratione, vt, post consecrationem eiusdem Ecclesiae,
Decimae darentur ad supranominatam Ecclesiam de villis hijs nominibus
vocitatis; Beuorhem, Gisleshem, Hegginghem, Schupildhem. And in the year
DCCC.LII. Raginer Duke of Lorrain, for the health of his own soul, and the
souls of his wife, children, and parents, gives to the Abbey of Vito in
Verdun, a whole Town called Longuion with the appurtenances, and all the Tithes
of the Land that he had within the bounds and precinct of the same Town. Villam
nostram (as the Charter Diplomat. ^7. and 35 in Stemmat. ^otharingiae apud
Francisc. de Rosicres
speaks) quae dicitur Longuion cum omnibus appendicijs suis ac Decimis quas in
Banno dictae villae habebamus. and one of his successors Rigimir, by Charter
dated DCCCC.XLVI. for like consideration gave to another Monastery, seated
upon Moselle, all the Tithes within the liberty of the Town where it stood, in
these words; Imperpetuum omnes Decimas quas habeo in Banno praefati oppidi tam
in blado, quam in vino, ac alijs rebus. where Bannus or Bannum is used for the
continent within the utmost precinct of the Town; in which sense Banleuca, as
also leuga circumiacens, occurs in the moniments of this Kingdom, as In placi^.
de jurat. and assis. apud Cicestr. 47. Hen. 3. R^t. 44.
Banleuca de Arundell, for all comprehended within the limits or land
adjoining, and so belonging to the Castle or Town, which are both as one to
this purpose. So the Monks of Clugny in Burgundy, founded by William Count of
Auuergne in the year DCCCCX. had Tithes of diverse possessions given them; which
the phrase of the time styled Biblioth. Cl^^iacens. page 265.
Decimas indominicatas, in a Charter to them made by Jews the fourth of
France, in the year DCCCC.XXXIX. and those Tithes were often confirmed to them
by Pontificiall authority: as by A. D. 948.
Agapetus the second, A. D. 1144.
Lucius the second, and afterward by Urban Biblioth. Clu^ia^. page 1447.
the third, in the year M.C.LXXXV. in whose Bull, a recital and confirmation
also is of an instrument of Adhemar Bishop of Xantoigne made to this
Monastery, that has these words in it. Damus and concedimus vobis Decimas
quas a Laicis acquisistis vel acquirere poteritis, with a command that Laimen
in the precinct of their Abbey, should not convey their Tithes to any other
Churches. And when the Abbey of Vendosme was founded about the year M.L. by
Godfrey Martell Earl of Aniou, the Tithes Ex Tabular Monasterij a^ud Iaecob.
irmondum in G. Vindoc^^ens. page 66.
of the Salt Pits in some part of Poictou, were consecrated to it. the like had
the same Monastery in some Salt Pits possessed by the Bishop of Xantoigne,
which although it had enioied for threescore years, yet the Bishop began to
deny any more payment, and for his own gain, would have maintaind this
opinion, That no church lands were to pay Tithes to any Church. But Godfrey
Abbot of Vendosme about the year M.C.XX. sharply corrects him in an Epistle*
and shows that the opinion of all France and Italy, then was, that although
lands charged to any Church with the payment of Tithes, were possessed by
another Church or Monastery, yet the Tithes were still paiable Parochially
from the one Church to the other. That Abbots words are obseruable, because
also they show a general practice of payment Parochially by Churches to
Churches. Nobis dictum est ( says Goffrid. Vindoci^ens lib. 3. Ep^st. 41.
he) quia dicitis, quod Ecclesia non debet Decimam dare. Hoc verum est, vbi
Ecclesia nihil habet in Paroecia alterius Ecclesiae, vbi vero Ecclesia, in
alterius Ecclesiae Paroecia, possessionem aliquam habet, vel quippiam quod
Decimari debeat, ibi Ecclesia Ecclesiae Ita etiam Petrus Cluniac. lib. 1.
Epist. 33. and 36.
Decimam reddere debet, si illud just possidere desiderat. Hoc tenet Italia,
hoc tenet Gall^a; Ibi enim nouimus Ecclesias Ecclesijs Decimas reddere, and
maiores minoribus, and minores maioribus, vbi altera earum possessionem obtinet
in iure alterius. hoc facimus Ecclesijs, hoc Ecclesiae fecerunt nobis. and
according to this had he a Decree for the Monastery from Pope Calixtus the
second. This, by the way here, for payment among the Clergy. But for more
arbitrarie consecrations by Lay men; in the year M.C.XXIV. Ansellus de
Garlanda, in his foundation of the Abbey of Saint Mary of Gornay in France,
among other possessions gives it In Diplomat. Ludouici Crass^ apud Andream
Quercetan n Noti^ ad Petrum Abelardum, page 1174.
Decimam de Berchorellis, and Duas parts Decimae de Ber^herijs, and totam
Decimam de Ponteuz, and apud Terciacum medietatem Decimae. Many like examples
might be added, but one more only shall suffice, in which the frequencie of the
practice may be easily ghest at. that is found in a Bull, of confirmation, made
by Pope Innocent the III. of the possessions of the Abbey of the Holy Cross,
and S. Leufrid, in the Diocese of Roan; among which Innocent. 3. Epist.
Decretal. lib. 2. page 435. edit. Coloniensi.
diverse appropriated Churches are with their Tithes (and so expressed: Ecclesia
N. cum decimis) but beside them also many Tithes severally granted by diverse
Barons and Gentlemen to the Abbey, out of such or such lands, without any
Churches, are confirmed, as Decimam de feudo Hugonis de Sensei apud Neufuillam.
Decimam Willielmi de Maudit apud Luderuillam de feudo Willielmi Pelet apud
Amercort. Decimam de feudo Matthaei de Gamichijs apud Maneuillam. Duas parts
Decimarum de feudo Pagani de S. Luciano, and de feudo Orselli, and de feudo
Flooldi, and Decimam de Hendicruilla, and de Sesseuilla in feudo Autulij.
Decimam de Boelio in feudo Roberti filij Williellmi. Decimam de Mesuilla in
feudo Hugonis de Lace. and Decimam de Buison in feudo Hugonis Bigot etc. If one
Abbey had so many arbitrary Consecrations, who can doubt of the most common use
of them? But if you desire more examples, look in the places Vide, si placet,
Chartam Galfr^d^ Viceconitis Monasterio S. Dionisij datam apud Andr. Qu^r^etan.
in notis ad Bibl. Cluniac. page 14. Chartam W. Comitis Niuern. apud eundem page
174. Adelardi Cast^igunterij Dom. apud la^. Sirmondum in notis ad Goffr.
Vindoc. page 95. Gottefredi Bullo^^i. apud Aubert. Miraum in lib. de Canonicis
Collegijs c 91 Innoc. 3. Epist. Decret. l. lib. 1. page* 160.
noted in the margin, but especially where anon we have the practice of our own
Cap. 11.
Nation by it self declared. Out of them all (being but few in regard of what
questionless might be had in the Records of churches, and Monasteries, yet
remaining in other States) you may find a use of that arbitrarie disposition
till about the year M.CC. when the distribution of Tenths also to the Poor
according to the owners free will (which I take to be consecrations, or grants
to Monasteries; for the Monks were usually called Pauperes, and were so indeed
by their vow) was expressly complained against, as a great fault of the time by
Pope Innocent the III. For he then preaching of In sermon. ^. de Dedication^
Templi page 83. Tom. 1. nec vigo^em eiusmodi donationes obt^nere san^^uit ille,
extr. tit. de De^ c 7 cum. Apostolica.
Zache's charity, that consisted as well in making restitution of what was due
to others, as inerogation of alms to the poor, obserus that he gave of his
own, and paid what was other men's. Dedit proprium and reddidit alienum.
Grauiter ergo peccant (says he) qui Decimas and primitias non reddunt
Sacerdotibus, sed eas pro voluntate sua distribuunt indigentibus. But as great
a fault as it was, it was a common one; and being committed by the Laity was
usually allowd in fact by the Pope and the Ordinaries; whateuer they thought of
it in right. And of such authority was this use, that an opinion was bred from
it among very great men of the Clergy, that, as arbitrarie Consecration was a
cause of the right of Tithes in a Church whereto they were conueid, so
continual payment of many years (which being by diverse, of the more devout,
faithfully performed, those Clergy men took as equivalent to a personal
consecration of the Tenths of their increase, whereuer it were receiud) had so
settled the perpetual right of the Tithes of any Family, that whither soever
it transplanted it self, it must still send its Tenths to the place where
before it paid them; as if this continual payment had forever so bound it,
that it might not pay them otherwise. This was the opinion of diverse Bishops in
the Patriarchat of Grado, as you may see by the same Pope Innocent his
Decr^ral. Epist. lib. 1 page 83.
reprehension of them, and Extr. de Paroch. cap. 5 si^nificauit.
of others elsewhere also. Neither were these grants always free consecrations,
but often times were made for valuable consideration given by the Church, which
is expressed in the phrase B^nedict. Leui^a Capitular. lib. 5. cap* 46. Conc.
Megunt. c. 16 q. 7. c. 7. Leg^s Longobard. lib. 3. tit. 3 cap. 8.
Redimere Decimas, used in the Synodall and Imperial Laws, of this time, made
De Decimis quas porulus dare non vult nisi quolibet modo, or munere ab eo
redim^at^r. For, howsoever Hincmar Bishop of Rheims, in reprehending Apud
Fl^d^ard^m in hist. Ecclesia Rhemensis, lib. 3. cap* 25.
the Monks of S. Denis, because they were about to take money of a Parson for a
right of Tithe, advised them with absit vt Laici audiant, quod nemo etiam
peccatis publicis implicatus in mea Parochia facere audet. as if it had been
almost unheard of in that age (he liud about DCCC.LX.) that any man had ever
took money for a grant of his Tithes* yet plainly the authority of those Laws
show, it was no such raritie. nor was it out of practice about the end of this
CCCC. years, as may be collected out of a question disputed in Summa part. 3.
qu^st. 51. memb. 6. art. 4.
Alexander Hales touching Tithes held by Lay men, In territorio alterius
Ecclesiae quae non potesteas redimere. although perhaps his meaning was only of
feudall Tithes. But neither did the Laity thus only Vide etiam quae in proxima
sectione de Danis. Turingis, alijs item adferuntur.
dispose Tithes not already consecrated, but in some kind also (by
Appropriations) such as were before established to Parochial Churches.

III.
In declaration of the course of Appropriations, it is first necessary, to
know so much of the nature of Parish Churches in those times, as without which
the Appropriations then used cannot be understood. Briefly therefore, for
Parish Churches; it is plain that as Metropolitique Sees, Patriarchats
(Exarchats also in the Eastern Church) and Bishopriques: those greater
dignities, were most usually at first ordaind and limited Videsis Anacl^^. and
Steph. PP. in Epist. Decre^. Hin^mar. Rh^mens. in Opusc. 55. ca. 15 and
Consulas inprimis Iosephum Scaelig^rum in Not^tia Gallia, and in Epistolu page
247. editione Francosurtana. and Ph. Berterij, Diatribas in Pithanon.
according to the distinction of seats of government, and inferior Cities, tha
had been assigned to the Substituts or Vicarij of the Prefecti-praetorio or
Vice-Royes of the East and West Empire, so were Parishes appointed and divided
to several Ministers within the Ecclesiastique rule of those dignities,
according to the conueniences of Country Towns and Villages; one or more or
less (of such as being but Council. Sardic. cap. 6.
small Territories might not by the Canons, be Bishopriques) to a Parish; the
word Paroecia or Parish at first denoting a whole Bishoprique (which is but as
a great Parish) and signifying no otherwise then Diocese, but afterward being
confined to what our common language restrains it. The Curats of those Parishes
were such as the Bishop appointed under him to have care of souls in them, and
those are they which the old Greek Neocasar. cap. 58. and vide Anti^chen. cap.
87. and 89.
Councels call (...) or (...) (...) or (...), that is, Prebyteri Leg. Aleman.
cap. 13.
Parochiani, within the Bishoprique. neither were the Chorepiscopi much
different from them. These had their Parishes assigned them, and in the
Churches where they kept their Cure, the offerings of devout Christians were
received, and disposed of in maintenance of the Clergy and relief of
distressed Christians, by Vide Council. Gangr. Can. 67 and Chalced. Can. 204.
the Oeconomi, Deacons, or other Officers thereto appointed under the Bishop.
Neither had those Parochial Priests at first such a particular interest in the
profits received in Oblations as of later time. All that was received
wheresoever in the Bishoprique, was as a common Treasury to be so Vide Council.
Antioch. c. 103. and 104. and Urban. c. 12 q. 2. c. 26.
dispensed. One part was allowd to the maintenance of the Ministry (out of
which every Parochial Minister had his salary, according to the monthly pay
spoken of in the first CCCC. years) another to the relief of the poor, sick
and strangers, a third to the reparation of Churches, and a fourth to the
Bishop. so it appears by the ancient Synod. Romans sub PP. cap. 5. and Gelasis
Decret. cap 27. atque hic diuisionis modus in vsu erat vetustioribus istiusce
aeui Christianis; quod innuit Wala^ridus Strabo (qui floruit a.d. 840. lib de
r^b. Ecclesiast. cap. 17. vide Great. c. 12 q. 2. c. 26 and seqq.
Canons, if we may at least herein, conjecture of the use of the time, by what
they have ordained. And it is like enough to have been no otherwise, so long as
these Parochial functions were so personal that they were not as now, so
annexed to foundations and endowments, but rather exercised as by messengers,
sent from the Bishops, who had no such reference to Lay-Patrons, as they that
afterward came in upon Inuestiture or Presentment have had, but only were
protected by some appointed by the State for Vide, si placet, Theodor.
Balsamon. in (...) page 454. post Con. Carth. Can. 7. Iusti^ian. Novel. 15.
and Capitular. Karol. and Iudonic. lib. 5. cap. 31. and lib. 7. cap. 508.
(...), or Defensores of the Church, as they called them. the name of
Defensores being in the primitive time, for this and other purposes, given to
such Protectors, (...), in regard of their assistance and help to such as
sufferd injury, as Justinians words are. And in the first ordination of this
Hierarchy of Bishops and Parochial Priests, it seems, in some Lands
wherewith the Bishoprique was endowed, the Churches were erected, in which the
Bishop had a kind of right of aduowson; who, taking on him the general care of
his Diocese, ordained Incumbents in every of them. and the oblations there
receiud were of the Churches common treasure, and so to be divided and disposed
of quadripartitly. But that quadripartit division was chiefly in the Diocese of
Rome. For by some Council. Aurel. 1. cap. 13. Toletan. 9. cap 6 Bratar. 2 ca. ^.
and vide Anse is Capitul^r lib. 1. c. 87. and Addit ad Capitu^ar. 4* cap. 37
etc. 9. q. 3. c. 2. and seqq.
Canons of the French, Spanish, and some other Churches, it was tripartit, and
had other differences. But, all this in the primitive times. and from the first
establishing of Christianity by a disposition of the Hierarchy, till about D.
years from Christ, it seems, it continued. and such kind of Parishes only were
those spoken of in that Epistle of Pope In Epist. Decr^tal. and in c. 13 q. 1.
c. Ecclesia^.
Denis the I. about CCLX. if at least that Epistle be not a fiction. if it be,
then our Canonists do ill to use it at all. if not, then plainly they abuse
it, where they pretend in it an original of such kind of Parishes as since for
the most part have had their beginning from lay-foundations. But not long after
such time as lay men began to build and endow Parish-Oratories or Churches in
their Lordships, and in them place or inuest Chaplains (ordaind, that is, made
Priests by the Bishop, but not instituted by Presentation as at this day) that
might receive the offerings of such as repaired thither for holy service; that
former kind, of making a common treasury in every Diocese, was discontinued,
and the Chaplain or Incumbent, acknowledging the Lord, of his Churches
Territory, for Patron, (not much otherwise then, as in the ancienter course,
every Parochial Priest did the Bishop that collated to him) received now the
profits that rose out of Christian devotion, to a particular use of his own
Church; the Canons nevertheless saving the fourth part to the Bishop. For,
that Episcopal right grew afterward to be so established by the receiud Extr.
de Offic. iud. cap 16. conquer^ute, and de praescript. c. 4. de quarta
Canon Law, that till this day, where prescription of XL. years excludes not,
the fourth part of all Oblations and Tithes are, by it, due to the Bishop. and
some Panormit ad tit. de Decim. c. 1. ^. 3.
Canonists make it as a duty succeeding in lieu or proportion to the Tenth of
the Tenth that was paid by the Leuits to their Priests. But howeuer the Canons
were (in which also it had been often constituted, that every Church Did. 96.
etc. 16 q. 7. passim.
and the profits thereof should be subject to the Bishops disposition, as to
the only immediate superior; and in some Did. cap. 26. pia m^^tis.
that the founder should be utterly excluded from all interest) yet diverse
lay-Patrons in those elder times had, or at least challenged, in the Oblations
receiud from Christian devotion in their Churches, an interest somewhat like to
what more anciently the Bishop had in the offerings made at the Churches
wherein he only placed the Ministers. Whence the erecting of Churches became,
amongst some, to be rather gainful then devout. for the Patron would
arbitrarily divide to the Incumbent, and take the rest to his own use. This is
manifested in the II. Council of Bracara, held about D.LXX. where a Canon
forbids the consecration of Churches built not pro sanctorum patrocinio, but
sub tributaria condition, as the use was of some places; that is, to the end
that the lay-founder might have half or other part of the Oblations. Si quis,
are the words, Basilicam non pro deuotione fidei sed pro quaestu cupiditatis
aedificat, vt quicquid ibi de oblatione populi colligitur, medium cum Clericis
diuidat, eo quod Basilicam in terra sua quaestus causa condiderit, quod in
aliquibus locis vsque modo dicitur fieri, Hoc ergo de caetero, etc. And such a
practice is titled a custom of the ancient times in an Epistle 1. C. 10. q. 1.
c. 15
attributed to to Pope Damasus. And in the IX. Council of Toledo about the
year DC.LX. Lay-Patrons are forbidden to use iuris proprij potestatem in Church
goods or lands, as if great pretense in those times had been of their right in
disposition of them. and, in the Imperial Capitularies of about the year DCCC.
diverse times provision is made against such lay men as thought it had been
their right only to dispose of the endowments and offerings of such Churches as
they were Patrons of, and that the Bishop should be wholly excluded. But it
fell at length that, without much difficulty, the Church, what through
Constitutions, what through Constitutions, what by their Doctrine, had remedy
for this usurpation upon the Offerings solemnly consecrated to the Priests at
the Altar. And in the following times it had been abstaind from as the playnest
part of sacrilege. Yet nevertheless, another interest, that is, the interest
of Patronage, and a right of disposition of the Temporal endowments, which the
Lay founders first challenged in their new erected Churches, which was a right
of Collation or Inuestiture, whereby the Incumbent might receive full
possession without aid of Bishop or other Churchman, could not so easily be
gotten from them, although some Capitular. Kar^li and Ludouici lib. 7. c. 213.
Imperials were provided against it. For although no lay man could, of
himself, make any building to be a Church, without the Bishops consecration
of it (as even among the Gentiles, it was carefully foreseen, that in all new
Temples Cicero in Orat. pre domo sua.
one of the Priests solemnly holding a Pillar of it in his hand, should make
the dedication) yet it being consecrated and endowed, the lay Patron, in these
ancient times, took upon him not only the Aduocationem, or aduowson (that is,
the defense or patrocinie of the Incumbents title; as officium aduocationis is
used in the Vlpian. ff de rei vindicatione L. 540.
Imperials) but also the Collation by Inuestiture without presentation at every
vacancy. And the right of aduowson (whereto the other of Inuestiture in those
times was annexed) in some places the Bishop confirmed to him by putting a Robe
or such like on him at the dedication. as the example Anonym. in vita S.
Vdal^ici cap. 7.
is of Vlrique Bishop of Auspourg, in one of his dedications, about DCCCC.L.
where Consecratione peracta as the Author says) doteque contradita comprobato
illic presbytero, altaris procurationem commendauit, and Ecclesiae Aduocationem
firmit^r legitimo haeredi, Pa^no imposito, commendauit. From this right of
Collation and Inuestiture reserved by Lay-Patrons, the practcie came to be that
Parish-Churches and all the temporalties annexed to them, as the glebe and
tithes (and what else in succeeding times became to be endowments) were at
every vacancy, conferd by the Patrons to their new Incumbents, by some
ceremony, not differing from our liuerie of Seisin (which is nothing but
Inuestiture; for Inuestiture Iuo Carnotens. Epist. 41. and passim (...).
is only the immediate giving of seisin or possession) with these words, Petru^
Dam^an. lib. 1 Epist. 13. ad A^exandr. 2.
Accipe Ecclesiam, or the like. Neither upon presentation did the Bishop
institute, as of later time the use had bin. and whereas, at this day, nothing
passes out of the Patron, or vests in the Incumbent, in point of interest (the
presentation being only as a nomination, and the interest and possession being
immediately had from the acts of the Bishop and Archdeacon) it was far otherwise
in these elder times. For the Incumbent as really, as fully, and as immediately
received the body of his Church, his glebe and what tithes were joined with it,
in point of interest from the Patrons hand, as a lessee for life receives his
Lands by the Lessors livery. whence by the phrase of the time that kind of
giving a Church was styled Benedict. Le^^t. lib. 5. cap. 83. and Addit. 4 c.
37. and Synod. Romans c. 16. ^. 7. c. 33. Monast^rium.
Commendat^o Ecclesiae, that is, the Lay Patrons committing or livery of the
Church and the endowments to the Incumbent to take care of and dispose as a
Vsufructuary of what the Patron was Proprietarie, or as a Tenant of that
whereof he was in the reuersion. and in such sense is Commendo used, joined
often with trado, in Tully as, Commendo, ac trado. and hence came the Commenda,
wherein not the Title, but possession, profits, and custody of the Church is
committed. and the difference is obuious between Ecclesia titulata and
commendata commendata having chief reference to the possessions. And hence was
the name of Benefice, for a Church and endowments so given. For as such lands
or annuities, as in the Empire, were given for perpetual salaries to military
persons, had the name of Beneficia, so, what was thus conferd upon spiritual
soldiers in the Church, had afterward the like title. But, at this
Commendation of the temporalties so made only by the Patron, the Bishop indeed
had the usual consecration of the Incumbent, but nothing at all to do with the
disposition of the church or endowments. For, the Law then being that Orders
could not be given (...), Council. Chalc^d. ^ Can. 114 and did. 70. vide si
place^* extr. de prebend. cap 16* cum secundum.
sine titulo, or absolutely, but only when a Title of a Church, or some
special Ministry was at the same time assigned to the ordaind Clerk; all
orders otherwise given being void, so that at every new inuestiture a lay
Patron could not have (as at this day) a Clerk always ready made for his
Church; it was a necessity that for every new inuestiture (unless a
resignation of some other Church had preceded) the Bishops Ordination or
Consecration was to be used, which afterward grew to be what now is
Institution. And although the character of Orders were general, in so much
that, as now also, he that receiud them was a universal Priest, yet, in every
Ordination, special expression was made of the Title of the Church (that is,
the Saint, Angel, or Martyr, to whose memory the Church was dedicated; in
words Ordo Romanus de Diuinis Off^c^is.
to this purpose: Eligimus in Ordinem Presbyterij etc. ad titulum S. Mariae, ad
Ecclesiam quae est in pago illo etc.) to denote that the end of it was that the
Ordained should there exercise his spiritual function, and not leave it during
life. for which a Law was made also that such as were to be consecrated or
ordaind by the Bishop, should before they were ordaind by the Patron in the
Church (for the Inuestiture or Commendation was also an Ordination; and by the
name of Videsis Duaerinum de sacris Eccl. Ministerii^ lib. 1. cap. 16.
Ordinatus also, was he denoted that was so invested should either by oath or
caution secure their continuance upon that Church only. so you must Leuita lib.
5. cap. 108.
understand that in the Capitularies, Vt Presbyteri qui in Titulis
consecrantur, secundum Canones, antequam Ordinentur promissionem, stalitatis
loci illius faciant; the use then, it seems, being, that Clerks ordaind would
at their pleasure resign into the Patrons hand (for it is probable, that
resignation Vide ^undem, lib. 6. cap. 197. and lib. 7. cap. 173.
in those times, into the Patrons hand, without assent of the Bishop, like
surrender of particular tenants to them in the reuersion, was in practice, and
deuested the title of the Church; although at this day, by the Canon Law, it be
grown clearly otherwise) and being then capable, without new ordination of the
Bishop, of any Spiritual Function, would take Inuestiture of other Churches
without consent or knowledge of the Bishop; against which also, some Laws Vide
^undem, lib. 5. cap. 26.43. and 82.
were made in the beginning of this CCCC. years, but, with the rest, little
obeyed. From this use of Commendation, or Inuestiture, it came also, that if an
Aduowson had descended in coparcenerie, the Church had as many encumbents as
the parceners had parts. Singulae parts Addita ad Capitul. cap. 25. and
Council. Lateran. sub. Alex. 3. Can. 17. and vide* Append. addict. Council. part.
15. cap. 7.
singulos habebant Presbyteros: Every of them giving an interest in a part,
according as they might have done of any other inheritance descended unto them.
Nor (as it seems) from other original then this challenged and practiced
interest, came those droicts honorifiques des Seigneurs es Esglises (whereof
you may see the Treatise lately written by Matthias Marshall) and the custom
yet remaining in diverse places, especially in France, whereby the Incumbent
Vide extr. tit. de Prabend. c. 30. ex^irpand^. and de iur^ patron. c. 23.
pr^ter^a. and lib. 6. tit. de Pr^bi^di^, cap. 1* suscepti and le Code des
Decis. Fortens. Decis. 15. lib, 1. tit. 10.
has not for himself above a small part of the Tithes, at the arbitrarie
disposition of some spiritual Patron, who takes the rest (according to this
anciently practiced interest of Patrons) to his own use. What is so allowd to
the Incumbent, is styled his Canonica portio; which was, I think, Chro^i^.
Richersperg. page 176. and 204.
reserved to him in some Grants of the Archbishops of Saltzburg as Patrons, of
their Tithes, to the Abbey of Richersperg in the year M.C.XLIV. Neither let any
man out of this, or from other authority in Vide Synod. v^^ust. sub Ioann. 9.
An. D. 904. vt omnis decimatio etc. and Synod. Augusta^am, an. 952. etc.
Canons, gather, that all Tithes were arbitrarily disposed of by the Bishop in
these middle times; which yet is falsely affirmed by some that rashly think,
what ever a Canon mentions (because some of the Clergy would have had it so)
was a practice of the time. but the contrary plainly and frequently appears.
only as in the primitive times, when Parishes were not distinguished by
limitation of Ecclesiastique profits, but only by the Ministers Function, the
Bishop alone challenged, and frequently had, all Offerings, or (...), as
appears in those old Canons before mentioned, and especially in those of the
Council Vide Council. Gangr. cap. 7. and 8. and ad ea Z^nara^.
of Gangra, made against the Eustathians; so also after payment of Tithes grew
into more use in these middle times, he pretended by the Canons (as in the
examples which we anon have of the Turingians, and those of Holtz) a right to
Tithes through the whole Diocese, as his parish, where no Parochial right was
settled in several Rectors of Parishes. But clearly, in such as were once,
according to secular Law, made proper to this or that Church, he had not, even
by the Canon Law that was in use, more then his fourth, or other part, varied
by several customs; and by customs or ^xtr. de Pr^script. ^. 4. de quarta.
prescription he lost it. Neither was this practice of Inuestitures, only in
bestowing of Parish Churches. In Monasteries and Bishopriques the like was. but
the increasing power of the Clergy took it away wholly in the less Churches
(saving that in collations of free Chapels, Prebends, or other Benefices,
without parochial Cure, according to the Droict de Regale of the Kings of Vide
19. Ed. 3. tit. Quare impedit, 60.
England and Vide I. F^rhault de priuil^g. Regni Fran^^a, prin. 8. and R^buff.
praz. B^n^fici^rum, cap. ^^ Reseruationibu^, and Seru^^ en ^. Vol. des
playdoiez en l'arrest touchant la Chappelle S. Nicholas en l'Esglise S. Brice
de Colchi, Diocese de Noyon, p. 209. and Vol. 1. p^g. 298. and Petr. Gregor. in
Synteg^^. iuris v^i^ersi, lib. 17. c. 7. and 8. and Pasquier. Re^^rch liu* 3.
c. 31. and 32.
France especially, in some kind it has remained) and much altered it in
Bishopriques and Monasteries. It was in substance forbidden in the eighth
General Actio 10 Ca^* 22. A D. 871.
Council of Constantinople; then by Decree in the Council of Rome under
Gregory the seventh, about M.LXXVIII. in words, which as well show how the use
of Inuestitures at that time remaind in many places (for some few years before,
it appears, they were very common among the Laity, and scarce taxed by the
Clergy) as also what opinion the Church had of them: Quoniam Inuestituras
Ecclesiarum contra Statuta sanctorum Patrum (that is, against the many Canons
made against Lay men's disposition of Church-reuenues) a Laicis personis in
multis partibus cognouimus fieri, and ex eo plurimas perturbationes in Ecclesia
imo ruinam sanctae religionis oriri, ex quibus Christiana religio conculcatur;
Decernimus vt nullus Clericorum Inuestituram Episcopatus, vel Abbatiae, vel
Ecclesiae de manu Imperatoris vel Regis vel alicuius Laicae personae, viri vel
feminae, suscipiat. And in the general Ext^t in Roma^ae e^li^^oni^* tom. 4.
(...) and Ilud sub Jnno^^n^ 2. celeb^atum* and in Vaticana s^ruantur Mss. iam
vero etiam in nupera B^^ti editione reperiuntur.
Council of Lateran, held in M.C.XIX. under Calixtus the second, chiefly
against Inuestitures, one Canon is; In parochialibus Ecclesijs Presbyteri per
Episcopos constituantur, qui eis respondeant de animarum cura, and de ijs quae
ad Episcopum pertinent. Decimas and Ecclesias a Laicis non suscipiant absque
consensu and voluntate Episcoporum, Et si ali^er presumptum fuerit Canonicae
vltioni subiaceant. The like was in the next general Council under Innocent
the second. and very many other Pontificiall Decrees Habentur apud Gratianum
did. 63. and^ c. 16. q. 7.
were to the same purpose. For by this time, through the use of giving of
Orders without Titles of Churches (against the old Did. 70 ^. 1. and 2.
Canons) and Resignations into lay hands; every lay Patron easily could have a
Clerk capable of his Benefice, and so inuest him, without so much as notice of
the Bishop. And, notwithstanding those Decrees, both Oecumenicall and
Pontificiall, that practice of Inuestitures could not presently be taken from
the Laity, although soon after that general Council held under Innocent the
second, in M.C.XXXIX. it began to be less frequent, and Institution upon
Presentation here and there succeeded it. But not long before that Council, it
was much complaind against by the Clergy, and styled by Vide Goffrid.
Vindoc^nens. lib. 3. epist. 11. and Iuonem Carnot. Epist. 235.238, and 239.
some of them, Haeresis inuestiturae. others of them by no means admitting it
to be an Haeresie, but only a usurpation of the rights of the Church, which
should not be disposed of by lay hands. Besides other occurrences of
Inuestitures in Epistles, Councels, and Story of about M.C. you may see
especially the Epistle twixt Iuo Bishop of Chartres, and John Archbishop of
Lions, with others of Godfrey Abbot of Vendosme (all written about M.C.XXX.) in
which it is largely disputed of; and in them it appears plainly, that although
the Church would never have permitted it to the Laity, and did also sometimes
extort renuntiations of it, yet the Pope often regranted the right of it in
France and Germany to such as had renounced it. Whence also Iuo concluded,
that it was but a civil right belonging (by their Canons) to the Church, and
no such thing, as of its own nature, could not be enjoyed by the Laity. But
the Canons gaining force, as the Papal power increased, at length, about the
end of this CCCC. years, it became wholly out of use. for not till then was it
left off; and that the course of Institutions upon Presentations was not before
commonly practiced (especially in the case of lay Patrons) appears by diverse
Council General. sub Al^x. 3. cap. 9. and (...) c 4 10, 1^. and tit. de (...).
and t^t. de Praeb^nd^. c. 31. in Lat^ran^n.
Canons relating as much, to which I refer you. and more hereof in the
English use. By reason of these Inuestitures (wherein the Glebe, Tithes, and
all Endowments of the Church, as well as the Church it self, in point of
interest or estate, passed from the Patron, and at every vacancie were in him
as in the only proprietarie of them) when Appropriations in these ancient times
were made, it was not only the Church it self, or the Titulus Ecclesiae (for
that also, once by consecration created, was given by lay Patrons, when the
Clerk had already his Orders) or the patronage, that was directly in point of
interest conveyed, but withal the Glebe and Tithe made parochial by Grant,
Foundation, or Custom. And the title of the Church, the Monastery (according
to the Patrons provision in many Appropriations; and in others, at their
pleasure) still gave afterward by Presentation of a Clerk, whom the Bishop
instituted. For the Clergy, except Bishops and such as had Episcopal right by
privilege, gave Ad hanc rem, vide c. 16. q. 2.1. and 6.
usually by Presentations; these Inuestitures being altogether against their
Canons, and but like the Bishops Collations. Neither did any such thing follow
upon such Presentation as Disappropriation, in regard of the Endowments or
Temporalties. for such was the nature of the Appropriations, that the Church
remaind notwithstanding presentatiue. and the Incumbent, that came in by
presentation, had the Church only under the name of Vicar, and in another
right, and received the Tithes and the profit of the Glebe, no otherwise then
to the use of the Monastery, in which the Appropriation had settled them, as
Inuestiture should have done in an Incumbent. Neither was the Title of the
Church, and the Endowments, so entire a thing, but that, according to the
Patrons interest and will, they might by the Law then in practice be so seuerd.
The ordinary instruments of such Appropriations plainly show it. And all the
maintenance of the Incumbent was at the bounty of the Monasteries allowance.
And it is expressed usually in old Instruments of Appropriations, that such a
Clerk should answer to the Bishop de spiritualibus, vobis autem (to the
Monastery) de temporalibus. Which is complaind against in that of John of De
N^g^^ Curialium, lib. 7. c. 17.
Salisburie: Personatus quosdam introduxerunt, quorum iure ad alium onera, ad
alium referuntur emolumenta. Herewith agrees the general Ita etiam extr. tit.
de Priuileg. c. 2.. in Ecclesijs. Council. General. A.D. 1215. cap. 61. extr. de
Pro^. and dig^. c. 31. and Luc. 3 in App. ad Council. Lateran de (...) D. 1180.
tit. de iur^ Patronat. cap. 24. and Roger. Houed^n. in annal. ^ol. 460. ^^
Council of Lateran, held in the year M.C.LXXX. where the ancient course of
filling Churches, thus appropriated to Religious Houses, is commanded to be
thenceforth better observed. In Ecclesijs suis quae ad eos pleno iure non
pertinent (that is, those which they held both exempt from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and in them had the right of Institution and Destitution by
Privilege) instituendos Presbyteros Episcopis praesentent, vt eis quidem de
plebis cura respondeant; ipsis vero de rebus temporalibus rationem exhibeant
competentem. For how ever by the Canonists of later time, this in the Council,
and in our Appropriations, be understood variously, and, for the most part, of
Churches whereof Religious Corporations had only the Patronage, and according
to their Law, no property; whence also they interpret that rationem
competentem for an account only which the Patrons might exact, but not for a
denoting of the property or right that the Religious Houses had in the
profits; yet doubtless in those times, that suis Ecclesijs in this and the
like Canons had reference to Churches appropriated only, or to such as were
possessed by equal right to express Appropriation. And although Innocent Vide
^um ad ^i^. de Praeb. c. in Lat^rane^si 31. and tit. de Priuileg. c. 2 in
Ecclesijs editione Venet.
the fourth, being of the ancientest Writers on the Decretals, rather iustifies
that more common opinion (whereof you may have most special declaration in our
Constit. pro^ tit. de locato and conduct^* cap. licet bona v^r^ asserunt ^on
ligari.
Lindwood) yet others, and as great Lawyers of that time, expressly suppose,
that the Temporalties are by that passage understood due and payable to the
Monastery, and that not an account only was to be made of the dispensing of
them. Expressly In sum. tit. de Offic. Ordinarij, ^. sunt autem.
Hostiensis upon the difference of their Churches held pleno iure, and not
pleno iure: Vbi pleno iure non pertinet, tunc habet ibi Monasterium temporalia
and representationem Praesbyteri Vicarij tantum etc. Whereas if it were theirs
pleno iure, they had also Institution and Destitution to themselves. And
Ho^^iens. sum. tit. de ^^pell^^ M^nach qu^a (...), and (...) Priuil^g qu^d
oper^t^r*
elsewhere likewise he makes the enjoying the Temporalties to be denoted by,
Pro rebus Temporalibus debita subiectio. And so Durand (whom they call Spec u^.
tit. a^capell^ Monach.. 2.
Speculator) in his precedent for the Libell, whereby a Monastery having
founded a Church, was to demand the Temporalties, thus proposes the suit, Cum
Ecclesiam illam Monasterium a fundatione habuit (for in those ancienter times
the right of Foundation of a Church and Appropriation were as Vide Hosti^ns.
sum. (...). tit.. quid ^it.
one to Religious Houses) and sic per consequentiam in temporalibus sibi debeat
respondere, petit temporalia in ipsa Ecclesia sibi adiudicari, etc. Is it not
then plain, that respondere in temporalibus denotes the taking of the
Temporalties to the Monasteries use? Hostiensis and Durand are better
authority to prove how the Law was anciently taken, then a cart-load of the
later and more barbarous. Other reasons might be brought to prove this. but I
presume no man will doubt it, that knows how to examine it. I only add this
observation, to help clear it, out of a Bull of Pope Lucius the second, to the
Prior and Canons of Kenelworth, wherein license Ms. Reperitur in Vol. quo
compingitur Fride godus po^^a in Biblioth. Cottonian.
is given them, to hold their Churches in proprios vsus, that is, in manu
vestra (as the words are) retinere and earum Beneficia ad proprios vsus
reseruare, constitutis ibidem Vicarijs and Diocesano Episcopo praesentatis, qui
eis de spiritualibus, vobis vero de Temporalibus omnibus, videlicet Decimis and
Obuentionibus debeant respondere, dum modo Vicarijs and caeteris Ministris
earundem Ecclesiarum in necessarijs prouideatis, etc. What can be plainer, then
that the phrase of respondere in the Canons is here as it were purposely
declared, as we have conceiud it, according to Antiquity? And sometimes also
Appropriations were made by Lay men Amodaeus Corn* ^^baudiae in (...). Mo^ast.
(...) An. D. 1015. dat. extat in Biblioth. Cluni^c. page 413.
, reserving to themselves a ius patronatus, and ius praesentandi. But all the
profits of receiud Tithes and Glebe were theirs, who so had the Appropriations,
and were dispensed at their pleasure; and to the Curats, in both kinds, as they
thought fit, were some Salaries given. which turned afterward often time into
Vicarages that belong to such Appropriations; whence also it came, that their
Presentations have been since and are now taken to be only to those Vicarages,
being made perpetual; whereas indeed, their Vicars were originally presented
to the whole Rectorie, but had the benefit no otherwise then is before
declared. The words of conueyance in Appropriating commonly were, Dedi and
confirmaui Ecclesiam de N. cum decimis, or cum Decimatione, etc. Whereby the
Church Glebe and Tithes passed equally, by way of interest, to the Monastery.
So anciently, and at this day, many Couents, but especially the
Praemonstratenses, have diverse Churches continually in their own hands. And
some of the Monks receiud into Orders, discharged the Cure. And in such
Instruments (of the elder Times) as more commonly ordained, that they should
keep the Church presentatiue, the Church it self passed also it seems as well
in right of property, as of patronage; which sometimes also (as is before
noted) was excepted to the grantor. Examples enough are extant, wherein all
this is apparent. For that more general way of appropriating Tithes (the
Church still remaining presentable, which specially is pertinent hither) you
may see the Grants and Bulls made to the Abbey Biblioth. Cluniac. p. 1430.1454^
of Clugny, to the Abbey of Innocent. 3. in Epist* tom. 2. p. 435. alibi s^p^.
and vide si placet, Chartam Abbati Verz^lia^. apud Andr^am Quercetan. in Notis
ad Biblioth. Cluniac. page 133.
S. Germans in Auxerres, and many other like recited in Pope Innocent the third
his Decretals, as also the Charter of Henry Earl of Apud A^bertum Miraum in
Orig. Canob. cap. ^3. vbi and B. Jd^ diploma consulas.
Brabant to his Abbey of Afflighem, near Bruxels; of Thierry Earl of Holland
Apud I. Douzam. Annal. Holl. lib. 10.
to the Abbey of Egmond; which, being but a few of a multitude, enough show the
use of the time in conueying Tithes in Appropriations severally, and as
distinct from the Church; and more are of this nature, where we speak of the
English use. And although also, Confirmations and Bulls of Popes and Bishops
are sometimes added to such ancient Appropriations (as you see in an ancient
Biblioth. Cluniac. page 265.
Charter, by Lewis the fourth, of France, in the year DCCCCXXXIX. to the Abbey
of Clugny, where the Appropriations of Churches and Tithes, Sicut per
priuilegium Romanum, and per scripta Episcoporum ad quisierunt, are confirmed;
and in other Monuments of succeeding Times) yet those were gotten by the Monks,
to satisfy the Canons; not to give validity in secular or common Law, then
practiced. But also some Instruments of Appropriations are, wherein, from
Bishops only, Tithes of other men's Lands were conveyed to Monasteries; as in
that especially of Athelbero, Bishop of Hamborough, in the year MCXLI. In App.
ad Hist. Brom. page 114. and ^19.
whereby he gives to the New Minster in Wipenthorp, then newly founded by
Vicelin, in the Territory of Holst, eiusdem Villae Decimam cum aliarum
quarundum Villarum subter positarum Decimis, veluti in villa Stauera, Horgan,
Bra^htenuelde, Tuenthorp, Godeland, Wlmersthorp, Boienbutle, Husberg,
Cumerueld, Padenworth, Withorp, Padenstede, Bulligstede, sed and alias Decimas
iuxta fluuium Gestere in vtroque littore a villa Elmeshorne vsque ad lacum
Wicflet, etc. with diverse other. And by another Charter, dated MCXLVI. he gives
to the same Monastery other Tithes of great value; and some of his successors
Ba^dwin. Arch. Hamburg. An. D. 1174.
follow his example. If you question how the Bishop came to have power to make
these Grants, either in regard of Parochial Curats by the Canon Law, or of the
Lay owners interest, according to the practice of the Time; know, that in this
and most of the Bishoprique of Germany especially (which began with the
Christianity of the Dioceses, about, or since the beginning of the French
Empire) the right of Tithes, through those Dioceses, was challenged by the
Bishops only (and that justly enough by the Laws of the Empire, which
presently are related) because the Parishes being not limited, nor indeed
Christianity so at first settled, that they could have been well assigned to
Parochial Curats, the Bishops were the true and immediate Parochial and
ministering Rectors in their Bishop^iques. and although afterward, Parish
Churches were founded, yet to them they would not resign their ancient right
in Tithes, which from their first Function there, they had either enjoyed, or
still pretended to, both in regard of the value of them, as also because every
founded Church was to be otherwise endowed with Manse and Glebe. Neither had it
been altogether safe among so obstinate a people (which could scarce by any
means be brought to pay any Tenths) to have permitted every Parish Rector
afterward to have demanded them, or taught them due to himself. for to such as
had both at once received the Doctrine of the Faith, and the declaration of the
right of Tithes due to the Ministers (which were only, when they received it,
the Bishops; if you respect only, as you must, the Ministers settled among them)
it might have seemd a different Doctrine, to have afterward taught them due to
any inferior part of the Hierarchy; especially in the weaker years of that
Church. Hence is it, that the Archbishop of L^m^ert. Schass^^burg. page ^7.
Mentz claimed all the Tithes in Turingia, the Bishop of K^antz. Wandal. lib.
^. c. 38. and 39.
Lubek, of Vide Greg. 7. R^g^st. l^b. 2. ^pist. 77.
Saltzburg, and others, the Tithes of their Dioceses. and hence only those of
Hamborough so liberally dispose of them. Neither could any of these reasons so
well have place in other Countries. for (except in Germany, and those more
Northern parts) Christianity was in most places of Europe, it seems, so
established, and the Hierarchy of Bishops and parochial Rectors so settled,
before any common Doctrine or general Law, for payment of Tithes, was so
diuulged (for a thing of necessary observation) in the Church, that when it
came after to be commanded, it could not be, in any conceit, better ordered,
then according to the division of limited Parishes. and, those wanting at the
time when the Faith, and the Doctrine and Laws of Tithes, came first into those
parts, how could it on (the other side) fall out, but that they should be
taught due only to the Bishopriques? Which opinion also, it is no wonder, that
those Bishops should be willing to preserve and continue, after Parishes were
there divided, and after Tithes came at length to be paid them. For long they
preached, and much stir was about it, before they could get a usual payment
of them. Neither need you mistrust, that their right to Tithes, so clearly
pretended in the Appropriations by the Bishops of Hamborough, was only from
the Episcopal right which the Canonists allow, Extr. de De^. c. 13. quoniam.
in case where the Lands, wherein the Tithes increase, are not assigned to any
one Parish Church. the contrary thereof appears enough in other conueyances
made to the same Monastery; in which the same Bishop Athelbero, first in
MCXLII. appropriats to it the Parish Church of Bishorst upon Albis, cum banno
fimul and cum omnibus appendicijs eius acquisitis, vel ac quirendis, and with
the largest bounty, that the thing given might carry with it. but afterward,
in MCXLVI. he graunts to it also a good part of the Tithes within the Banne
and precinct assigned to the same Church; which plainly shows, that he
granted Tithes of Lands, already assigned to parishes. For his Parish
Churches and their profits were no other, then what Foundations, special
Endowments, and the Offerings of the parishioners, within their Banne or
Limits, had made them. Which is well justified by an old Rimer, that in Verse,
which would grieve Apollo's heart to hear, sings Athelbero's liberality to
the Monastery, and expresses the Tithes of foureteen Villages, and other
places given by him, and then comes to two Churches (that he afterward
appropriated to it) Bishorst and Ichorst, and names them only as they had
Bannes or Limits and parishioners; as Bishorst cum Bannis, Bannos cum
parochianis
Ichorst cum Bannis, Bannos cum parochianis.
And then adds, Et Bishorstensis Decimatio tota paludis
Additur and quaeque fratrum labor occupat aeque.
Where you see, he diligently remembers also an Exemption given to it by that
Bishop: which could hardly have been, if the general right of Tithes had not
been supposed in him. But out of these things you may probably collect, that
by this time (that is diverse years before the end of these CCCC. years) in
some of those Northern Churches, Tenths were paid more justly, according to the
desire of the Clergy, then in other places; where you shall find arbitrarie
consecrations by Lay men, continuing till about MCC.. For if the Bishop had not
had these Tithes paid, but had pretended only right in them, his bounty to the
Monastery had been to little purpose. So in the Diocese of Oldenburg, about
MCLX. payment was duly, it seems, made to the Bishop by all, saving those
which had improued the deserts of Wagria, which could by no means be brought to
it. Decimas ex more Wandalio lib. 4. cap. 38. and 39.
soluere recusauerunt, says Krantzius; being yet ready to give a competent
part of their increase. And although Gerold the Bishop and Count Adolph joined
together; the one with persuasion (wherein he pretended to them Exempla, as the
same Author writes, Ecclesiarum omnium and praesertim proximarum, and told them
of Diuinum de Decimis praeceptum:) the other with power, to make them tithe
their profits; yet they utterly refused, and with tumult and clamors made open
profession, Seruili conditioni nunquam se colla submissuros, per quam omne
Christicolarum genus Pontificum pressura laboret. Neither were the Danes in
those Ages easier to be brought to the payment of Tithes to the Church. Indeed
they so much abhorred it, that no greater cause was, why they barbarously
betrayed and murdered their King Knout An. D. 1078. Krantz. Dani^ 4. cap 37.
and in prae^. ad Hist. Regni Norwag and Dan. lib. 6. cap. 50.
the fourth, then that he would have imposed it. And about the year MCLXXX.
under King Waldemur the first, Absalon Bishop of Lunden would have had them all
paid their Tithes, and that under pain of an Interdict to continue against
them: but they stoutly refused, and answered by public message to the
Clergy, That notwithstanding the Interdict, they should carefully minister
Divine Service and Sacraments, or else depart the Country: if they did neither,
Non solum rerum amissionem sed membrorum etiam truncationem demorarentur. And
it is well noted by Krantzius, that the Northern Nations generally, were very
hardly brought to pay* but after continual and earnest Doctrine of the Church,
and command of Princes, at length many of them yielded; that is, as may be
coniectured, in the first half of the year MCC. Through the frequent use of
those arbitrarie Consecrations, and those Appropriations, Churches with their
Tithes, and Tithes of several possessions, were in exceeding number
established in Monasteries, as well of Nuns as Monks. The Tithes of LX. of
LXXX. or more Parishes, were by those courses, annexed sometime to one
Monastery; which the Head and Covent possessed, not as any part, or as
pretending themselves to be any part of that Clergy which made up the
Evangelical Priesthood, or deserved them by ministering Divine Service and
Sacraments to the owners. For indeed, diverse of these appropriated Tithes were
out of such lands as lay so distant from the Monasteries, not in other Dioceses
only, but also in other Kingdoms, that the owners never saw or knew the Monks,
or their Cloister, nor otherwise heard of them, but by their Cellarars or
Prouosts that exacted payment. Whereupon it was in time of our Edward the third
affirmed in a petition in Parliament, R^t. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. a^^. 94.
That Aliens (which by reason of appropriations made to their Houses beyond the
Seas, or to their Priories or Cells in this Kingdom, or the like) did so
devour the Salaries due to Parish Curats, and so neglect the Divine Service
which they should have taken care for in every Parish, that they did more hurt
to holy Church, then all the Jews and Saracens of the world. Which might have
been well applicable to some kind of Non-residence of Denizens also. But the
religious persons justified their consuming this Ecclesiastique revenue by
reason only of their Prayers, their Tears, their Psalms, their Alms, and the
like exercises of Devotion; beside their maintenance of Curats with arbitrarie
Salaries, in the Parish-Churches appropriated to them. Which is at large seen
in an Epistle of Peter Abbot of Clugny to S. Bernard Abbot of the Cistercian
Order at Clareuaulx, about the Monks of Clugny their possessing of a large
number of Parochial Tithes. The Cistercians had made diverse complaints against
them, and one was upon this very point, in these words: Ecclesiarum Petr.
Cluni^^. lib. 1. epist. 28. circ. An. D. 1150. Vide, si placet, Ioa^^.
Sarisbur. de Nugi^ Curialium* lib. 7. cap. 21.
Parochialium, primitiarum and Decimarum possessiones quae ratio vobis
contulit? Cum haec omnia non ad Monachos, sed ad Clericos, Canonica Sanctione,
pertineant; illis quippe quorum officij est baptizare and praedicare and
reliqua quae ad animarum pertinent salutem gerere, haec concessa sunt, vt non
sit eis necesse implicari saecularibus negotijs; sed quia in Ecclesia laborant
in Ecclesia viuant. Hereto, among diverse other imputations, the Abbot of Clugny
answers, and gives his reason for their enjoying of Tithes, thus: Quia Monachi
ex maxima part fidelium saluti inuigilant, licet Sacramenta minime ministrant,
estimamus ipsorum primitias, Decimas and Oblationes, and quaeque beneficia eos
digne posse suscipere, quoniam and reliqua populo Christiano a Presbyteris
(that is, by the Curats which they maintaind) faciunt exhiberi. And another of
great note before this Abbots time, pretends special charity toward the
poor, for sufficient reason why Monasteries and Hermitages had Tithes given
them: Vt copiosiora (says Petr. Damian. lib. 2* epist. 14.
he) alimenta proficiant, dantur in Monasterijs and Eremis Decimae quorunque
prouentuum, and non modo pecorum sed and (...), i. aui^m (...) Gallinarum.
ornicum pariter and ouorum. The same reasons hold in justifying of
Appropriations to Nunneries, where the persons are not capable of the
Ministry. And among Examples of the Age, take this one for some confirmation,
in these elder times, of the right which Monks pretended to them. In the year
MLIX. a great (...). Schaffnaburg* in Annal. page 466. edit. Arg^nt^rat.
Videsis etiam Francisci Monaldi consilium de iur^* Abb^tiae S. Mari^ ^
Carcer^bus in Dioec^si Pataui^a apud Ioh. Baptist. C^sar part 1. consil. 46.
controversy fell between Meginher Abbot of Herfeildi, and Burchard Bishop of
Halberstadt, about Tithes of large Territories in Saxony, appropriated to the
Abbey. The Abbot stood upon the Appropriation; the Bishop upon his Episcopal
right, which by the Canon Law is, and anciently was, the same with parochial,
in places not limited to any certain Parishes. The Bishops greatness with the
Judges of both Laws, made the Abbot so despair of success in the Suit, that
he prosecuted no further; but withal, summoned the Bishop to appear before
the Almighty in his Iudgement-seat, within some few days there to answer in
the same Action; and very soon after departed this life. Not many days
interceded, but the Bishop riding toward the Court where this Suit had
depended, to dispatch some proceedings touching it, suddenly fell from his
Horse very sick; and being carried into his Inn, gave most strict charge (as
one divinely moved) that the Abbey should have restitution and quiet possession
of those Tithes for ever; and admonisht them all, that were by, That who ever
had been parties with him in that oppression against the Abbey, should by the
like Judgment from Heaven, suffer as he did; confessing to the two Bishops of
Magdeburg and Hildenesheim (then visiting him) that he was now called,
according to the Abbots summons, to answer his exaction of the appropriated
Tithes, before the Judgment Seat of the Almighty: and soon after, he most
miserably died; Vto his Archpriest, who had been his great Instrument in the
Suit, the same year suddenly following him. But how ever either the usual
practice, or this example wrought; a year or two after, this questioning of
Tithes upon Episcopal right (that is, upon pretense that all Tithes of every
Diocese were due to the Bishop, as to the Rector of a great Parish; for such a
right was most specially pretended by Bishops in Germany, as is already
declared, and that both against Appropriations and arbitrarie Consecrations)
bred most perilous disturbances of State, and of no small consequent in those
parts. For in the year MLXII. when Otho succeeded his brother William in the
Marquisat of Turingia, Sigifrid Archbishop of Mentz denied him the relieuing of
his Fiefs held of the Archbishoprique, unless he would give him all the
Tenths of his Demesnes, and compel all the Tenants of his Marqusat to do the
like. This was exceedingly distasted by the Turingians, insomuch, that they
openly professed, they would sooner lose their lives, quam patrum suorum legitima
amittere; that is, then part with their ancestrell right of detaining, or
disposition of Tithes, according to their use, either of Infeodations or
Appropriations. so you must of necessity understand it; and other passages in
the Author ( Lambert of Schaffnaburg, then living, who relates it) make that
sense of it plain. Neither was this Otho, for as much as in him lay, wanting
to the Archbishops request. But in the year MLXVII. upon his death, he left
joy enough to his country men, in regard of that his yielding about the
Tenths, which none of his ancestors had given example of. but in him it was the
chief Seminary, as the Monk says, of the many calamities suffered in the
Saxon War of that time. Great disputation of Canonists followed some six
years after, in a Council held, about this Episcopal right, in Erpesfurt,
where not only the Tithes of Lay men were called Vide Schaffnaburg page 487.
in question, but Tithes appropriated to the Abbeyes of Fulda and Herfeldt, and
of all their possessions, were challenged by the Archbishop; his Canonists
vehemently disputing for him; and the Emperor Henry the fourth, who much
invaded the rights of the Church, urging him forward, that indeed he might
have had a moitie with him. At length, the Abbots divided with the Bishop by a
special transaction; and, when they yielded, the Lay men, serving the time,
agreed to give him theirs also. But presently the exaction of them ceased. Hoc
anno (MLXXIII.) post exortum bellum Saxonicum (says the Monk) nulla deinceps
exactio facta est Decimarum in Turingia; gaudentibus Turingis quod occasionem
inuenissent, vt traditas sibi a patribus leges manu militari tuerentur. And
although the Archbishop again questiond it, no success followed. Of
Appropriations of Tithes, hitherto.

IV.
The use of Infeodations, or Conueyances of the perpetual right of Tithes into
Lay hands, is rememberd by Peeter Damian, that complaind of it to Pope
Alexander the second, about the year MLX. Insuper etiam and Decimae (says
Petr. Damian. lib. 1. epist. 10. and lib. 4. epist. 12.
he) ac plebes adduntur in Beneficium saecularibus. Where plebes is taken for
Parish Churches, as it is often used in the old Canons: and they are the same,
to this purpose, with parochial Tithes and Temporalties; although literally,
they interpret only (...), that is, the Lay people of the Parish, or those of
whom the Cure is; which word is often for plebes in the Greek Canons of the
African Church. The Original of the practice of these Infeodations of Tithes
appears not in old moniments. Those which refer them to the time of Charles
Martell, or Vide Kr^ntz. Metropol. l^b. 4. c. 2 Vbi ^d morem Mandrabu^^,
coniectura^ de hac rein^^eliciter ad^^it.
any age near him, are in gross error; neither is any mention of them, for the
space of about CCC. years after him. Lands and Monasteries consecrated, were
Vide, cum his quae supra adnota^imus, Flodoard. hist. ^h^mens. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 12. etiam in Ecclesia O^ientali Monasterijs sacris Laici saepe vsi (...)
sunt. constat in (...). (...) Patriarchae Constantinop. edit. in comm^nt.
Zonara, and in Cano^. 13. Synod, O^cum^nica 7.
about those times of Martell often possessed by the Laity, and often
wrongfully, as the story of him, Carloman, and their successors, plentifully
discover. and thereof enough in the former Chapter. But no Tithes in those
times were Infeodated, as also is iudiciously observed and taught by the
learned Stephen En les r^cerches de la France, liu. 3. chap. 35.
Pasquier, Aduocat General en la chamber des Comptes, whose diligence yet
fails, when he confidently delivers, that these Infeodations began about the
time of the holy Wars that were between MXC. and MC. The contrary appears
plainly, not only in that of Peeter Damian, who lived long before, but also in
the Counell of Lateran, held in MLXXVIII. where this Canon is, Decimas quas in
vsum pietatis concessas esse Canonica authoritas demonstrat, a Laicis possideri
Apostolica authoritate prohibemus. sieve enim ab Episcopis vel Regibus, vel
quibuslibet personis eas acceperint, nisi Ecclesiae reddiderint, sciant se
sacrilegij crimen incurrere: Which in the same syllables is iterated in the
general Council of Lateran, held in M.C.XXXIX. under Innocent the second. But
in the first you see clearly, that Infeodations of Tithes were ancienter then
the Holy Wars: Which is plainly confirmed also by the Council of Cleremont,
held in MXCV. by Urban the second; where it was forbidden, That Lay men should
thenceforth Altaria vel Ecclesias sibi retinere, that is, keep Churches and
consecrated Tithes in their own hands. for so was the common C. 1. q. 3. c. 4.
quasitum*
signification of Altaria at that time in France. And observe there withal,
that they had been practiced not alone by Lay men, but by Bishops also; as is
declared in Peeter Damians Lib. 4. Epist. 12.
complaint against them for it. Likewise it seems, Religious Orders made Fiefs
or Tenements of Tithes 6. Decretal. tit. de Dec. c. 2.. san^.
for Lay men. Testimony of these Infeodations are very frequent in the Canon
Law, which commonly-stiles the Tithes so conveyed into Lay hands, Decimae
Laicis in feudum concessae, and Feudales, and Infeudatae, that is, Feudall
Tithes, or as the French Lawyers call them, Dixmes infeodees. And to this day
these Infeudations remain; especially in France and Spain, and also
elsewhere. Neither are the Tithes so possessed, other then mere Lay possessions,
and determinable before the secular Judge. But thereof, more in the practice of
the next CCCC. years, in which the ancient Infeodations have continued. But
since the year M.C.LXXX. none could, in France especially, be newly created;
that is, no Lay man might thenc^forth begin Infeodations of Tithes parochially
due by the Canons. So was it ordained in the general Council of Lateran then
held, in these words: Prohibemus Extr. tit. de De^. c. 19* prohibemus.
ne Laici Decimas cum animarum suarum periculo detinentes in alios Laicos
possint aliquo modo transfer. Si quis vero receperit and Ecclesiae non
reddiderit, Christiana sepultura priuetur. So has the continual practice
(which in such a case is the best interpreter) since been in that Country,
which has received this Canon for a binding Law. Neither is it Neque aliter
sa^^ intelligunt vetustiores illi iuris interpretes Innocent. 4. Host^e^sis.
Bernardus. and vide H^nricum Bow^i^ ad tit. de Dec. c. quamuis.
otherwise to be understood; how ever diverse of the later Canonists, with
ignorance enough, draw it to a different sense, and oppose it against the right
of all feudall Tithes, being ancienter then the Council, and since passed over
into Lay hands. And whereas they commonly suppose, that all these ancient
feudall Tithes were at first spiritual, and transferred from Churchmen (at
the request of Princes) into Lay hands, and since wrongfully detained; surely
it is an error. neither is there any ancient warrant sufficient for it: many of
them were doubtless created by Lay men's Grants, as Rents-charge, Estouers,
Turbaries, and the like are. Who can doubt of it, that observes but alone this
Canon Prohibemus? Whence also may be strongly inferd, that the greater number
of Infeudations were through Grants made by Lay men to Lay men, as
Consecrations were, at their pleasure, made to Churches. for what is there only
forbidden by the Council, may be thought the greatest and most prejudicial
practice of the time against the profit of the Clergy. Neither is any
provision there made against the other kind of Infeudations, which pass Tithes
from Churchmen. And although the words and Ecclesiae non reddiderit, in the
Canon (and in the body of the same Council, in Roger of Houeden) seem to
suppose, as if it had been made for such Tithes as had been taken from the
Church; yet indeed, the truer reading is tradiderit, as appears in the body of
that Council first fully published out of the Vatican, in the last Tome of the
General Counsels printed at Rome by command of the present Pope Paul the
fifth; wherewith agrees other Editions, but of less authority. And perhaps
also some old Infeodations were made by Lay Patrons in the vacancie of their
Churches, by the same challenged right as they alone made Appropriations. For,
as by our common Law, the Patron and the Bishop may in the time of vacancie
dispose of the Endowments (as by the Canon Law also, if the Chapters consent,
or the Popes, be had;) so in those elder times, upon equal reason, when the
Patron had the only disposition and interest of the Church (as is already
showed) he alone sometimes granted any part, at his choice, it seems, to Lay or
Clergy men. Why not any part as well as all? And that Patrons granted whole
Churches into Lay hands, appears by diverse passages in Flodoards Rhemish
history, by that before cited out of Damian, and by the general Council of
Lateran, under Innocent the second; where it is ordained, that they should be
restored from the Lay men to the disposition of the Bishops. And an example is
extant among the Records of the Apud (...). D^uzam. in Annal. Holland. lib. 5.
Monastery of Egmond in Holland; wherein Charles King of France (who is
commonly therein taken for Charles the Bald; but Douza thinks it to be rather
Charles the Simple, and made about D.CCCC. and is thereto persuaded by
Synchronisme, the best trial of such truths) recites, that Hagano, one of his
Nobles, humbly requested of him for Thierry (the first Earl of Holland)
quasdam res; Ecclesiam videlicet Hecmunde, cum omnibus ad eam iure
pertinentibus a loco qui dicitur Zwtherdes Haghe vsque ad Fortrapa and Kinn^m,
etc. Which by patent he grants him in fee, and vt libere haec omnia teneat
atque possideat, habeat que de his potestatem iuxta libitum suum ordinandi seu
saciendi. If the Church it self of Egmund (the Parish Church; for it was then
no Abbey, but afterward made one by that Thierry) passed not by this patent
into Lay hands, I sufficiently understand it not. neither is it spoken of, but
as what might, according to the use of that time, be clearly made a Lay fee.
Through these kind of Grants, practiced both by Lay and Clergy men, Princes,
and private persons, the ancient Infeodations of Tithes had their original, as
well as by Leases from the Church; and not by imposition of Tenths by Princes,
as some Videsis Krantz. Metropol. lib, 1 c. 2
have ignorantly coniectured; although also it be certain, that Princes
sometimes joined S^bassnaburg. An D* 10^3. and Krantz l^b. 4. Wandaliae. cap 37.
with the Bishops to bring in the payment of Tithes, that thereby themselves
might have beneficial Infeodations of them from the Church. But as Princes
made Infeodations out of their own Demesnes, or their own Churches; so other
private Lay Persons. And the Clergy, sometimes of Tithes already vested in
them; and sometimes, it seems, out of their Demesnes. And perhaps especially
religious persons, exempted from payment by Bulls, made some out of their own
Demesnes, as may be coniectured out of a Decree 6. lib tit de Dec. c. 2* san^.
of Pope Alexander the fourth, that speaks particularly of Infeodations made a
religiosis exemptis and alijs. And for example of Tithes already possessed,
and thus granted by the Church, you may specially see that of Engelbert Count
of Goritz, who had an Infeodation Innoc^^t 3. epist. lib* 2 p. ^47. and vi^e
ib. p 48^. Edit. Colon^ensi.
anciently from the Church of Trieste, in the Patriarchat of Aquilegia. and
Henry Count of Ratzenbourg Krantz. Wandali^, lib. 4. cap. 38. and 39.
had an Infeodation of all the Tithes which were paid to the Church in his
Territory, from the Bishop of Oldenbourg. so one Hildeward had one in the
App^nd. ad hist. ^ramens. p. 134.
Diocese of Hamborough, and surrenderd it to Baldwin Archbishop there, about
M.C.LXXIV. But examples of them were Vide extr. de Dec. c. 17.
very many, the dissike whereof was one special cause, pretended by those of
the Deserts of Wagria in Holst, about M.C.LXX. why they would pay no Tithes.
Praeterea (says Wandali^ lib. 4. cap. 38.
Krantzius) and hoc adiecerunt, non multum a veritate aberrantes, quod omnes
paene Decimae in luxus cesserint hominum saecularium. To these testimonies, of
Lay men's arbitrarie detaining, disposing, or receiving of Tithes in those elder
ages, you may add Ms. lib 2. de (...) temptu mundi. in Bibl^oth. Cotton.
Bernardus Morlanensis (an English Monk of Clugny, about King Stephen) his
complaint of non-payment to the Clergy. thus speaks he in his affected form
of Verses.

Rusticus hordea, mittit in horrea, farra recondit.
Horrea grandia, vasa capacia multaque condit.
Nec pecus aut sata dante Deo data vult Decimare.
Nec sacra portio, nec Decimatio redditur arae.
V.
The like liberty as Lay men had enioied (in not subiecting themselves to the
payment of Tithes, according to the Laws of the Church, but bestowing or
retaining them at their own wills in most places, even from the beginning of
Christianity, until about the year M.CC.) was another way purchased, for some
time, by religious houses, so to discharge themselves of censure of the Canons,
and that by Exemptions or Papal privilege. For howeuer the Laity justified
themselves by their secular right, admitting of Canons that touched their
estates, but as they saw cause in their own judgments; yet Religious persons,
who were always of the Pontificiall side, and reckond in the Catalogue of the
Clergy, and possessed diverse large Territories, durst not so oppose what was
ordaind either by decree at Rome, or in Synods General or Provincial.
Therefore when from the beginning of this Age, both Doctrine and Canons (of
which more presently) had made the duty of Tithes of a known right among the
Clergy; Clergy men became somewhat strict obseruers of the payment, as you see
plainly in that before cited out of Godfrey Abbot of Vendosme, with whom Peeter
Abbot of Clugny agrees. And, although Videsis ^. 16* ^. 1. c. 46. and notas
ed^tioni Greg^riana adiectas.
Canons be in Burchard, Iuo, and Gratian, referd to, I know not what ancient
Council of Chalons or Mentz, whereby Lands, occupied by Bishops or Abbots,
seem to be discharged; according to which also, another Decree is found in the
Vatican, annexed to some Councels of Pope Urban the second, yet it seems by the
authority of those Abbots and other testimony, that they were not practiced as
Church Laws. But what some of the Clergy durst not do for the Canons, they had
license for by Exemptions from the Pope. And, beside those other Canons; from
Extr. tit. de dec. ^* no^u^ g^nu^, and App. Council. Lateran. part. 13. cap. 16
Paschal the second, about M.C. there was granted to all religious persons, a
special discharge from Tithes. but it seems also that this Exemption soon took
not force in execution. for it was made diverse years before those two Abbots
wrote, and (if I understand them) expressly affirmd the common practice of the
contrary. And in an instrument of composition twixt the Templars Chronic. O^d.
Praemonstrat.
and Praemonstratenses in the year M.C.XLII. one special article was, that,
Nullus in vtroque ordine, alter ab altero, tam de nutrimentis, quam de
laboribus Decimas exiget vel accipiet. whence some inference might be that no
clear exemption preceded (at least in force and practice) for both. But
howeuer, afterward about M.C.L. most of all the religious Orders were Extr. de
dec. c. 10 ex part vide (...)* Sar^^^^riens. de N^g. Curialium lib. 7. cap 21.
and Append. ad Council. Lateran part. 13. cap. 3. and 10. and part. 41. cap. 4.
exempted, by Pontificiall privilege, from payment out of possessions kept in
their own occupation, which Pope Hadrian the fourth (about that time)
restraind to the Cistercians, Templars, and Hospitalars, and decreed that all
other religious Orders should pay Tithe of whatsoever increase they had in
their own occupation, saving of Videsis Alex. 4. in 6 de dec c. 2. statuto. and
Inno^ent. ^. tom 2. p 410. (...). Coloniensi.
new Improuements by culture, of pasture for their Cattle and of Garden
fruits. But neither were they by these exemptions, freed from payment of
Tithes, which were taught due only by common right to the Church. They were
discharged also from such as had formerly been Petr. (...). Epist. 8^. apud
^ochell. in Decre^. Eccles. Gallicaen. lib. 6. cap. 19.
consecrated out of their possessions, by their Founders or Benefactors, to
other Churches, over which also the Pope challenged supreme authority in
disposition of their Revenues. But the Laytie would not permit such exemptions
to extend to their Infeodations. Milites Galliarum, says Peeter of Blois,
speaking of the Cistercians, sibi ius Decimationis vsurpant, nec vestris
priuilegijs deferentes, eas a vobis potenter extorquent. But, that of those
three Orders. was afterward in the year M.CC.XV. in the general Council of
Lateran, limited to such Lands as they Extr. de dec. ^. 34. Nuper Abbate^.
had before that Council purchased. where observe by the way, that Exemptions
were then chiefly allowd to two Orders, which are not properly to be reckond
amongst any part of the Clergy, or Ecclesiastique persons. For the Templars
and Hospitalars were devout Soldiers only, neither could Videsis Ioan^.
Sari^^ur. de Nug^ Curialiu^, lib. 7. cap. 21.
they justify their enjoying of tithes, either through exemption from the Pope
or consecrations from the Laytie, by the reasons which other Cloister Monks
used. Their prayers, or devotions in private, were not the services expected
from them in the Church; but their swords and valor only gave the desert, as
at this day may be truly affirmed of the Hospitalars or Knights of St. John's of
Jerusalem, which being now, as in those ancient times they were, only
Soldiers of the Church, have therefore been diverse times lately Le (...)
Aduoca^ ^n la dicte ceur. (...)* 7.
adjudged in the Court of Aides in Paris to be no part of the Clergy. But
also, by the succeeding Popes, other like privileges were granted to Vide
Innocent. (...) 2. page 139. (...) ad (...) Later. (...). 13. cap. 2. and seqq.
Bishops, Abbots, and at their pleasure. But of the Practice of these CCCC.
years, thus much.

VI.
Of the Opinions left in the moniments of the Clergy, both touching the Right
of tithes, and those Practices, next briefly. Very frequent are the testimonies
in the old Councels of about the beginning of these CCCC. years, in which
Tithes are spoken o^ as due generally by Gods Ordinance. as, Decimas Deo dari
omnino non negligatur, quas Deus sibi dari constituit, quia timendum est, vt
quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte Deus per peccatum suum auferat ei
necessaria sua, which occurres in the Provincial Council of Mentz held in
DCCC.XIII. and is iterated in some Vt in Council. M^gunt. a. d. 846. and a d*
887.
other succeeding of the same Province, and in the Benedict. Leuit. lib. 5. cap
9.
Capitularies. And it is ordinarily grounded upon the Leuiticall Laws (which
are obuiously cited for the right of Tithes in the very Vide Council. (...).
lib. 1. cap. 11 and seqq ^om. 3. edit penult* ^in* page 586.
syllables of Moses) but sometimes also on Abraham's and Jacobs examples, as in
Walafrid Strabo, that liud about DCCC.XL. whose words are, Decimas Deo and
Sacerdotibus D^i dandas Abraham factis, Jacob promissis insinuat, deinde lex
statuit and omnes Doctores sancti commemorant; the self same being C. 16 q. 7.
c. 6.
referd also to one of the Councels of Mentz of those times. And res Leuit.
lib. 7. cap. 152.
Dominicae and Dominica Council. Ti^in. quod Regiaticini^ d^ci^ur, sub L^o^. ^.
substantia and Dei Agrippin* ^pud Burchard. lib 3. cap. 135.
census, and the like are the attributes given to Tithes, by the ancients of
this age, which also they style ^quisgran. sub Steph. 5. c. 116. extr. de dec.
c 26. Na^n^tens. syn. c. 10.
patrimonia pauperum, and Tributa egentium animarum, and Stipendia pauperum,
hospitum, peregrinum; whence also the Clergy was not to use them quasi suis
sed quasi commendatis, as the words are of the Council of Nantes, held about
the former part of these CCCC. years. And Pope Alexander the third in an
Epistle Extr. de d^^. c. 14. and 15.
to the Archbishop of Rheimes, says, non ab hominibus sed ab ipso Deo sunt
institutae. and in another to the Bishop of Amiens, he calls them Sanctuarium.
and Caelestin Eod. c. 23 ex transmissa and c 26. tua nobi^.
the third; Fidelis homo de omnibus quae licite potest acquirere, Decimas
erogare tenetur after him, Innocent the third; Decimas Deus in signum
vniuersalis dominij sibi reddi praecepit suas esse Decimas and primitias
asseuerans. and his general Council of Cap. 54. and extr. de dec. c. 33. ^um
non sit.
Lateran agrees with him. and it appears that S. Vlrique Bishop of Auspurg
about the year DCCCC.L. in his Visitations had especially this article of
inquiry; Berno ^bbat in vita ^. (...) cap. 10.
Si Decimas recte darent; which shows his opinion that they were generally due.
With these take the authority of the Poenitentials exercised by the Clergy in
that Age, by which, strict examination was to be made at Shrifts, whether the
penitent had paid all kind of Tithes, in these words. Have thou at any time
neglected to pay thy Tenths to God, which God himself has ordained to be
given him? or if thou have done so or consented to the defrauding of the Church
therein, first restore to God fourfold: and then must thou suffer penance with
bread and water only, for twenty days. So it is deliuerd in Lib. 19. de
Poenitenti^. and in Paenitential. Roman. tit. 8. cap. 17. idem habetur.
Burchard Bishop of Worms, that collected the Canons about the year M. Neither
was any difference in the nature of the increase by the common opinion of this
time. The tenth of Calestin. 3* extr. de dec. c. 22. non est. and 23. ex
transmissa
all, as well of all kind of Personal as Prediall, was taught due. Neither find
I any man in this Age that by Doctrine expressly opposed any of this, saving
only that French Leutardus, who about the year M. held the payment of them
necessary. Decimas Rodulphus Gla^^r hist. ^. c. 11.
dare, dicebat omnimodis esse superfluum and inane. But also other opinions he
had, that being against the usual Doctrine of the Church, gave him the name of
Heretic, which he kept till his miserable death. This may suffice for the
express testimonies of Opinion of this CCCC. years touching the general right
of Tithes. But although this opinion be so frequently delivered in such terms
as may denote the Tenth due by Gods Law, (that is, as it should at first sight
seem, by the Divine moral Law, or the Divine natural Law, which should bind
all men and ever, and are to this purpose both one) ye it is plain, by so much
of the practice of the Laity as the Clergy commonly allowd of, and by the
general opinion of the Time, that the persons held capable of them, were not
only the laboring Priesthood or Ministering Clergy. The disposition of them
in perpetual right to Monks, Nuns, the poor in Hospitalls, to religious
orders of Knights, and that out of one Province or Kingdom whatsoever into any
other, in this time was allowd clearly in practice; and according to that
practice they were enioied. And the Clergy also generally agreed, that, by
their Canonical form of conueyance, Tithes might be given (although some
ancient Leo 4 in c. 16. q. 1. c. 45. etc.
Canons were for Parochial right) to any Church, to Monasteries, Hospitalls,
relief of Poor or Sick: that is, as Epist. 207. astipulatur, c. 16* q. 1. c.
68. qui canon falso ad D. Hieronymum refertur and Council. Clarim^nt, An* Do.
1095. c. 1. q. 3. c. 4. etc. 16 q. 7 c. 2.
Iuo Bishop of Chartres (being a great Canonist about M.C.XXX.) in his
justifying the right of Tithes expresses it; Decimas and fidelium oblationes
Ecclesiae (so you must read, and so is his In Bibliothec. Cottoni^n^ ^^ vbi
Codex editus habet Ecclesiastica.
Ms. copy) lex caritatis communicare potest non tantum Monasterijs sed etiam
Xenodochijs, infirmis and peregrinis. For, says he, licet Decimae and
oblationes principaliter clericali debeantur militiae, potest, tamen, Ecclesia
omne quod habet cum omnibus pauperibus habere commune. But this might not be
done, as they would have it, by the Lay owner only. For he well adds, that
nevertheless no Monastery might, by the Urban 2 c. 16. q. 7. c. 39.
Canons, lawfully receive a conueyance of Tithes, ab illis ad quos non
pertinet, id est a Laicis. yet you see clearly that Monasteries and other
Churches did receive them from Lay men, and continually enjoyed them. So that
the chiefest difference twixt the Laity and Clergy herein came to be, who
should dispose or convey the Tenths (according as they varied also about
Inuestitures) not what persons (saving in the use of Infeodations) might have a
perpetual right in them. and in that difference the Clergy yielded so
frequently in receiving, allowing and confirming arbitrarie conueyances (as is
before showed) of Tithes, no otherwise then as of Houses or Glebe, to Monks,
Nuns, or Churches far distant; that if they held them due to the laboring
and Parochial Minister (were he Bishop or other) by the Divine moral Law,
they did in this no less then commit against their own consciences, and
exercise a kind of continual and fearful sacrilege. And indeed it appears
that it was expressly held against the Divine Law, to convey Tithes to any other
Church then where the owner used most commonly to receive his souls food. For
the Clergy in a Petition to the Emperor Jews the second, in the Council of
Pauia in DCCC.LV. confidently affirmed that it was generally taken, that such a
conueyance to another Church pro libitu was as well diuinae C. 16. q. 1. c. 56.
Legi, as sacris Canonibus contrarium. But then clearly also, the chiefest
practice of these CCCC. years was herein contrary to the Divine Law; a strange
imputation to lay on the time, if at lest Divine Law there, and Deus praecepit,
and Deus constituit, and the like in their other pasages for Tithes, denoted
the Divine Moral Law. But if you so understand it, how could that Lex
Charitatis, that Iuo speaks of, so dispense with it? And with what color could
the Church so frequently practice against it, or pretend arbitrarie
Consecrations to be so meritorious? But for an Interpretation of their meaning,
by showing how others conceive that Lex diuina here, look in the next CCCC.
years. As for Exemptions; some complaints were made against them by such as
lost by them; as you may Pet Cl^niac. lib. 1 epist. 33* ad Innocent. 2. and
Petrus Bl^s epist. 82. apud Bochel Eccles. Gall Decret. lib. 6. cap. 19.
see by the Monks of Clugny, complaining against the Cistercians, and by Peeter
of Blois. But out of them also may be collected, that the general Opinion of
the age was not, that they were due by the Divine Moral Law. Was Rome, in
those ancient times so bold to grant so many Dispensations expressly against
the Divine Moral Law? Yet also John De nugis Curialium, lib. 7. cap. 21.
Bishop of Chartres, in those times, found much fault with the Exemptions given
to religious persons. Miror (says he) vt fidelium pace loquar, quodnam sit
quod Decimas and iura aliena vsurpare non erubescunt. Inquient forte Religiosi
sumus. Plane Decimas soluere Religionis pars est. And more to this purpose you
may find in him, where he tells you, that these Exemptions did derogare
constitutioni Diuinae. But the Clergy generally was much against the use of
Infeodations of Tithes and Churches into Lay hands, although it were practiced
by some Bishops and Religious Houses; who committed strangely, if they were
also of opinion, that the right of Tithes was due to the Priesthood immediately
from the Moral Law. Quid est enim (says Peeter Lib. 4. epist. 12. Vide etiam
Bullam Vrbani 3. in Biblioth. Ci^^iac. An. D. 1185.
Damian) Decimas in vsum saecularium vertere, nisi mortiferum, eis virus, quo
pereant, exhibere? Hinc accidit quod and plebesanis iusta detur occasio, vt
Matricibus suis Ecclesijs obedientiam subtrahant, vt non eis legitima Decimarum
persoluant. And Alexander the third directed the Bishop of Amiens to Extr. de
dec. c. 15. ad ba^. and vide App. ad Council. Lateran. part. 4. cap. 1.
decree, that a gift of a Tithe by an Abbot into a Lay hand, was void, quoniam
sanctuarium de iure haereditario possideri non debet. But these are only
against Conueyances of Tithes already consecrated to Churches, and so
hallowed. But, such as were by their first creation infeodated to Lay men, can
no more be accounted (in their own nature) differing from other Temporal and
Lay possessions, then Rents-charge, Estouers, the tenth sheaf, or the like at
this day granted in fee by one Lay man to another. Neither indeed was the
Churches right (what ever it were) to her Tithes properly diminished by such
Grants. for if, at this day, the owner grant the tenth sheaf of lands
titheable, to a Lay man, may not the Grant be good, as a Charge out of the
land? and yet the Church there has her right as before. But the truth, it
seems, was, that in those elder times, Lay men that had created a Tenth into
Lay hands, rarely, or not at all, paid any to the Church; and those
Infeodations, once made, gave them greater pretense, of withholding what the
Church demanded: as if it had been enough to say, they must not, could not, pay
two Tenths out of their land; and that if a Tenth were once created to any man,
nothing else might be exacted under the like name. The same may be thought on
in Consecrations to Monasteries. For if Tithes had been held generally due and
paid parochially (as now) then clearly, although a Lay man had granted a Tenth
to another Church or Monastery, what other soever had been due parochially,
had, Vide, si placet, 44. Ed. 3. sol. 5. and 44. Assis. pl. 25.
notwithstanding the Grant, still remaind payable to the Parson. How could it
have been otherwise? And so no small number of doubly-paid Tithes had remaind
at this day.

VII.
The Laws made in this time for payment of Tithes, were Imperial, Provincial,
and Pontificiall. The first of the Imperial, was made by Charles the Great, in
a general assembly of Estates, both Spiritual and Temporal, under him, in
the XI. year of his reign over France and Germany, and in the year of our
Savior, DCC.LXXVIII. it was there ordaind, Vt vnus quisque Constit Karcli
edit. a Vito Am^rb^chio, cap 7. Leg Longohard. lib 3 tit 3. cap. 1. Capitular,
lib. 5. cap. 123.
suam Decimam donet; at que per iussionem Episcopi sui* (or Pontificis, as some
Copies are) dispensetur. Which Law indeed, with diverse other, for true payment
of Tithes, were generally made by him before his Empire, which began not till
the year DCCC. yet because this was in the same terms received into those
Capitularies collected by Benedictus Leuita, as from him being Emperor, it may
well enough be titled Imperial, and it is the first to this purpose extant,
which can be at all styled General, and was ordained by both powers, Secular
and Spiritual, to any whole State: unless you will believe, that in Scotland
a Law was established by King Congallus and his Clergy, about D.LXX. after
Christ, for the general payment of Tithes there, according as Hist. Sc^torum.
lib. 9. caute^ de Congallo Buchananus, lib. 5. Sacerdotes, inquit* praedijs
alijsque prouentibus ditauit. To Decimis adijcer^ vir doctissimus non ausus est.
Hector Boethius has related. Congallus, indeed, is by others affirmed to have
been very careful for the Clergies maintenance. But it will, I think, fall
out to be too bold an assertion of that faining Hector, who often, as it were,
makes Laws for the Scottish Kings, that he may relate them; or else he was
deceiud by them from whom he took it. No good Authority can justify such
particulars of that age there. neither is it to be receiud otherwise then as
fabulous, and proceeding out of that common mistaking of ancient passages of
Church-reuenues, and confident (but ignorant) application of them to Tithes.
But from that Law of Charles the Great was that exaction of Tithes, spoken of
before by Alchwin; and thence are Tithes, in Ansegisus his collection of his
Imperialls, so frequently mentioned, as of known right; and hence also had the
title of the German Bishops, before spoken of, its original. Those
Capitularies, both of Ansegisus and Leuita, were collected by them about the
year D.CCC.XL. in both of which, frequent constitutions are for Tithes, and for
the A^segis. Capitular. lib. 1. c. 155. etc.
parochial right also of them. Yet with them also take the constitutions of
Charles the Great, about the same time collected, but published by Vitus
Amerpachius in the year M.D.XLV. as also others occurring in the collection of
Melchior Goldaflus. These, together with the Laws of the Lumbards, have very
many constitutions of about the beginning of these CCCC. years for this
purpose; and one only shall suffice to be here transcribed. De Decimis
Benedict. Leuit. lib. 5. cap. 46.
quas populus dare non vult, nisi quolibet modo ab eo redimantur; ab Episcopis
prohibendum est ne fiat: and si quis contemtor inuentus fuerit; si noster homo
fuerit ad praesentiam nostram venire compellatur, caeteri vero destringantur vt
inuiti Ecclesiae restituant quae voluntary dare neglexerunt. This was made
either by Charles, or Jews the first. but it is falsely referd to the Emperor
Lothar, in the Laws of the Lumbards. It was provided you see against such as
would not give their Tithes, unless they were purchased of them for valuable
consideration. But the effect that these Laws had, was short; the Laity soon
disobeying such commands as diminished their revenues. And it enough appears in
the story of about the year Vide Baronium (...) 9.10. An. D^. 8^5 and (...)
lib 3. Io^an. PP. 8. (...). ^1. 2^^. 45. 262.293.
DCCC.XLV. that little or no practice was of any of those Laws of the
Capitularies, in behalf of the Clergy; nothing being more frequent, then not
only the denying them what they would have had, but also the taking from them
what they otherwise possessed. Nor could they have sufficient remedy for it,
either in the Council of Meaulx, where, under Lothar the first, they humbly
sought it, or long afterward, as is manifest in the Moniments of the succeeding
ages. But by the way, whereas some (both strangers, and of our own country
men) out of the joint mention of Nona and Decima in those Imperial
Capitularies of Charles and Jews the first, fetch an example of a Ninth paid
to the Church as well as a Tenth, and bring it as a character of the times
devotion; as if the Tenth had not then been thought enough, unless a Ninth
also, like a second Tenth, had been offered; it is a ridiculous error, and
proceeds from gross ignorance of the Common Laws, Story, Councels, and use
of that age. The Ninth and Tenth there spoken of, were only the rent due from
the Tenants of Church lands by the ordinary reservation of the Tenth, as of
what was held, by many, of it self due to the Clergy, and of the Ninth, as of
the Rent or consideration to be given to them as to Lessors for the received
profits. so will it plainly appear in a multitude of old Ansegis. lib 1. cap.
163. lib 2. cap. 2. Leuit. lib. 5. cap. 145. Council. Turon. 3 cap. 46. Meldens
An. D^. 845. cap 62. Flodoard. hist. Rhemens. Eccles. lib 3 cap. 4. Vide and
Goldast: constit. Imp* tom* 3. page 648. and quae a^iecta sunt C. 16. q. 1. c.
59. edit. Greg.
autorities, to which I refer you. Neither was the Ninth here thought due
otherwise, then as among the ancient Bauarians, the Tenth only from occupiers
of Church Lands. The Tenth of the profits was all that their Laws Leg.
Bai^ariorum tit. 1. cap. 14. de Colonis and s^rius Ecclesia.
appointed to be paid for rent to the Church by Lessees. But also very many
Provincial Constitutions were made for the true payment of Tithes about the
beginning of this CCCC. years. as in the Council of Mentz in the year
DCCC.XIII. Admonemus atque praecipimus vt Decimas Deo omnino dari non
negligatur. which words were received also into the Imperials. and with them
agree diverse Councels, held about the same time; as the Councels of Rheims; the
fourth of Arles; the second of Chalons, and many other following. And in
Scotland (if we may believe the Hector. Bo^t. hist. Scot. lib. 10.
Author, for though he speak very good language, yet he is of no such sound
credit) about the year DCCC.XL. King Gregory in his Laws for Church liberties,
ordaind that the Spiritual Court only should have conisans of Tithes; which
had been perhaps all one as to have established them to be generally due. for
by the opinion of that Court it is likely they would then also have been judged
so. And also among the ordinances Idem lib. 12.
of Cing Macbeth about the year M.LX. the same Author puts one in these words,
Decimam partem Terrae nascentium pastoribus Ecclesiarum libere conferto: Many
more of like nature are where we speak severally of the English Constitutions.
For Pontificiall decrees; Public moniments, I think have none in express
terms of command (except you look back to that Sup. cap. 5.
faind one of Pope Damasus) ancienter then that attributed to A. D. 1059. in
Synod. Rom etc. 16. q 2. c. 3.
Pope Nicholas the second. Praecipimus (says he) vt Decimae and primitiae seu
oblationes viuorum and mortuorum Ecclesijs Dei fideliter reddantur a Laicis,
and vt in dispositione Episcoporum sint; quas qui retinuerint a Sanctae
Ecclesiae communione separentur. The self same words Did. 32. c. 6. praeter
d^iude.
are also under the name of his next successor Alexander the second. That of
Pope C. 16. q. 1. c. 45.
Leo the fourth, about the year DCCC.L. De Decimis, iusto ordine non tantum
nobis sed etiam maioribus nostris visum est, plebibus tantum, vbi sacrosancta
baptismata dantur, debere dari, may be reckond for a Canon for the right of
Tithes, if you will. but it seems rather it was at first a Declaration of an
opinion then a Constitution. But both the other and that, with diverse passages
also out of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and others, and those old Provincial
Councels, that make for the general right of Tithes, were confirmed for
general Canon Law in Gratians C. 13. q. 1. and c. 16. q. 1. c. 41. and seqq.
etc. 16. q. 7. passim
Concordia discordantium Canonum, by Pope Eugenius the third in the year
M.C.LI. or presently after. for howeuer some Canonists ignorantly otherwise
place the Collection of that first part of the body of the Canon Law; it is
most plain that it was in that year collected by him; which is best justified
by a most ancient copy of it written before the Paleae were inserted, and
remaining in the Vatican, with this Vide prolegom. ad Corpus Iuris Canonici,
auspic js Greg^rij 13. editu^. and ^bb^tem Vsporgensem.
inscription: Decretum Gratiani Monachi Sancti Faelicis Bononiensis Ordinis
sancti Benedicti compilatum in dicto Monasterio Anno Domini millesimo centesimo
quinquagesimo primo, tempore Eugenij Papae Tertij. enough other testimony is
of it. And in the Council of Cleremont held in M.XCV. by Pope Urban the second
it was decreed, Ne laici Decimam partem de laboribus suis retineant. some other
passages of Popes are about that time against the selling of Tithes, which they
call Simonie. And in C^ 16. q. 7. c. 1. after the passage of Gregory the
seventh, before cited out of his Council of Rome against feudall tithes, these
words follow as if he had continued them; Oportet autem congruentius nos
Decimas and primitias, quas iure Sacerdotum esse sancimus, ab omni populo
accipere, etc. which comprehend in them a Constitution. but neither these or
any of the rest that follow there, are in that Council of Gregory, neither
find I whence Gratian had them. But an Epistle Regest l^b. 9. epist. 14.
of that Gregory is extant, wherein among other admonitions to some Princes of
Spain (after such time as the profession of Christianity there, was purged of
some Gothique corruption, by a Vide Marianam de reb. Hisp. lib. 9. ^ cap. 11.
Council held under Richard Abbot of Marseilles, the Popes Legate in MLXXVI. so
I understand that reference made, in the Epistle, to a kind of new conversion
to the Faith) he persuades them, Decimas, quae ad vsum tam ipsorum quam
Ecclesiarum and pauperum proficiant, dare, totique regno indicere. Quod quidem
nulli debet grave videri, pro meliori part, videlicet semper victura anima,
quemque decimam Deo offerre, cum pro morituro corpore plurimae gentes
coniugibus suis tertiam rerum legibus compellantur exsoluere. He admonishes,
you see, and persuades, but commands not. He thought not, it seems, his own
power great enough to have had effect in disposition of a Tenth part of every
man's revenue, and therefore abstaind from command. neither could he have
pretended the authority of any Law or Canon, generally received into practice.
for neither in his time, nor long after, till about MCC. were Tithes so
generally paid (as since) without special Grant or Consecration (as is
sufficiently showed:) neither had any General Council as yet once remembered
the Duty, or the name of Tenths. The first of the General Councels that
mentions them, is the Ninth, that is, that of Lateran, held under Calixtus the
second, about M.C.XIX. extant in the Vatican, and first published in the late
Edition of the Greek General Councels printed at Rome by authority of the
present Pope Paul the fifth, and now newly inserted into Binius his last A. D.
1618.
Edition. But they are there spoken of only, as they were receiud by special
Consecrations. and in the General Council of Lateran, held in M.C.XXX. under
Innocent the second, feudall Tithes are in the same syllables mentioned, as in
the Decree of Gregory the seventh, before cited out of the Council of Rome.
And this also, taken out of the Vatican, is to be found only in those two late
and fullest Editions. But of the General Councels (before that Edition at
Rome) ordinarily known and read, the first that names Tithes, is the Eleventh,
that was held under Alexander the third, in M.C.LXXX. But there, Infeodations
of them into Lay hands, and Consecrations or arbitrarie Conueyances of them to
Vide infr. c* 7.. 1.
Religious Houses, without assent of the Bishop, are only forbidden. Neither
was any Canon of a General Council as yet found, that purposely commanded
payment of them; nor any that expressly supposed them a duty of common right,
before Cap. 53. and in extr. tit. de Dec. ^ 33. cum non sit. and vid^ caput
prox.. 1.
that of Lateran in the year M.CC.XV. held under Pope Innocent the third,
about which time, Ecclesiastical Authority became more powerful, the Canons
were more receiud into practice (that before were little, especially herein,
obeyed) and Parochial right to Tithes grew to be more established; whereof,
more in the next and last part of our general Division, and in the English
practice. But if that Canon in the Lateran Council, held under Alexander the
third, against arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes without assent of the Bishop,
might be understood literally, and of new Tithes so created (neither is any
thing in the Council that denies that to be the meaning of it) then needed we
not perhaps seek further for the cause of that Assertion amongst our common
Lawiers, That, before the Council of Lateran, every man might have given his
Tithes to what Church he would. Who ever observes the practice of the
preceding time only, and the words both of that Council, and, to the same
purpose, of the other held under Calixtus the second, may well enough be
persuaded, that the intent of those Canons were no otherwise. But in regard we
find that Canon of Lateran, under Alexander the third, to be differently
interpreted by Innocent the third, within twenty or thirty years after the
making of it, and understood only of Feudall Tithes formerly granted out from
the Church into Lay hands (according as the Canonists after him also take it)
we cannot be altogether so secure of that other interpretation. In Lateranensi
Concilio (says Extr. de his qua f^a pral. sine assens. capituli, c. 7. cum
Apostolica.
Innocent; meaning, that under Alexander the third) est inhibitum ne quaelibet
Religiosa persona Ecclesias and Decimas de manibus Laicorum, sine consensu
Episcoporum recipiat; per quod indirecte datur intelligi quod sufficit
consensus Episcopi, vt licitum Ecclesiae sit Decimas de manibus recipere
Laicorum. Hoc autem de illis Decimis intelligimus quae Laicis in feudum
perpetuo sunt concessae. But we must take it upon his word only, and the credit
of the following Canonists, that the Canon was so to be understood. They may,
as they will, understand it by judicial application. but you may, at least,
doubt still, that the Historical understanding of it, is to be had out of
arbitrarie Consecrations before practiced. And it was even equal to ordain,
that Lay men should not arbitrarily consecrate, and that they should not
consecrate without assent of the Bishop; every Bishop (I think) being supposed
a careful obseruer of the former Canons, which would have induced parochial
right to Tithes, and general payment. So that what in this kind might not be
done without his assent, was conceiud as likely to be never done to the
Churches prejudice. Let every able reader judge here. but let him not be much
swayed with the rabble of late Canonists, that go away clear with this of Pope
Innocent. When the Pope had said so, they made no scruple of the truth of it;
and one takes it (as their fashion is) from another with too much easy
credulity. But although this be not sufficient ground for that assertion of
our common Lawiers (which clearly, being rightly apprehended, is true; though
lazy ignorance cry against it, even to hoarsenesse) yet enough other will be
found, whereof more toward the end of the tenth Chapter.

Of the time from M.CC. or near thereabouts, till this day. CAP. VII.
I. The Canons of General Councels, and Decretals, for parochial right in
Tithes (not formerly otherwise conveyed) which now became more established.

II. The opinion of the Canonists, in the question of what immediate Law Tithes
are due by, is, that they are payable iure diuino.

III. How the same question is determined by the opinion of the Schoolmen.

IV. Of those that held them mere Alms.

V. The opinion in Divinity, that concludes them due iure diuino. With a
Determination of the University of Oxford touching Personal Tithes.

VI. Laws, Customs, and Practice of France, in exaction of them. Of their
feudall Tithes at this day.

VII. Laws, Customs, and Practice in Spain, touching the general payment of
Tithes. Tithes there, in Lay men's hands.

VIII. Customs and Infeudations in Italy; Payment in Venice; in Germany: Of
the Hungarians, Polacks, Swethians, and others, touching the duty and
possession of Tithes.

IX. Of Tithes in Scotland. With an Example of an Appropriation of Churches and
Tithes there, by Robert de Brus. And something of Tithes in Ireland.

IN these following times, the Canon Law grew to be of more force, and
Parochial right (through the Decrees made against that former course of
arbitrarie Conueyances, and from the passages of Canon Law, that supposd the
general right of Tithes) became to be more established. But the Opinions of
Canonists and Divines have been and are much different in the question, upon
what Law the general right of them is immediately grounded. But by the Practice
of the Common Laws (for so much as I have read) of all Christian States, they
are subject to Customs, and that sometimes as well in non payment as in payment
of a less part. And Infeodations of them into Lay hands, yet continue in
France, Spain, Germany, and elsewhere. And of Customs only and Infeodations
we shall principally speak in the practice of this time. For, what ever might
here otherwise be rememberd touching Compositions, Exemptions, or such like, is
but a mere consequent of those Customs, and of the Opinion that makes them due
only by Positive, Human, or Ecclesiastical Law.

I.
It is sufficiently manifested in the practice of the former CCCC. years, that
the Laity did usually convey their Tithes by Consecrations and Appropriations
to what Church they would, and by Infeodations to Lay men. Their Infeodations
were forbidden by the Videsis, cap. 14. and 9. edit. Romana and extr. de Dec.
c. 19. and de Preb. and d^g. cap. 31. in Latera^ens. tit. de ^ure patron. c.
17. nullus* and de his qua fiunt a pr^^. c. 7. cum Apostolica.
General Council of Lateran, in M.C.LXXX. whence that most known Canon
Prohibemus, before cited, was taken into the body of Gregory's Decretalls, and
has ever since been, and still is, in authority, and that also in the secular
Laws of France especially. It was in the same Council ordained, That no
religious Orders should receive any Appropriations or Consecrations of Churches
or Tithes, without assent of the Bishop. Ecclesias and Decimas (are the words)
de manu Laicorum, sine consensu Episcoporum tam illos (that is, Templars and
Hospitalars, against whom the provision was chiefly made) quam quoscunque
alios Religiosos reciperc prohibemus. This was confirmed in the General
Council of Lateran, held under Innocent the third, in the year M.CC.XV. And a
Canon of the General Council of Lateran, under Calixtus the second, in the
year M.C.XIX. (wherein parochial Ministers were also forbidden to receive
Tithes, or Churches, from the hands of Lay men, by Inuestiture especially,
Absque consensu and voluntate Episcopi) was afterward, in diverse Epistles of
Pope Alexander the third, received Extr. de iure patr. c. 10.11.21. and de
Instit. c. 3. ex frequantibus and Append. Council. Lateran. part. 15. cap. 18.
and confirmed. And although many Decrees were before against those
Conueyances, yet till these General Councels (under Alexander and Innocent)
neither was the Authority of the Church so powerful, neither were Epistles
sent from Rome so frequent, to put that in execution, which had so been there
established against that challenged right of the Laity. But by this time, when
the arbitrarie disposition of the owner was thus provided against (reference
being made to the Bishops assent, that was bound to square all things by the C.
16. q. 1. c. 45. and 56.
Canons, which would have Tithes paid parochially, and became to be much more
obeyed then before) it grew frequent, to have Decretall Epistles sent from Rome
into every Province, both to ratify the former Consecrations and
Appropriations, (which the Popes Vide Innocent. 3 in extr. de his qua s^a pral
c. 7.
began also, at pleasure, to declare sometimes void, if made by Lay men alone)
and also to exact parochial payments of other Tithes, not canonically conveyed
out of the Parish: and the reason sometime was added; that is, Extr. de dec. in
c. 29. cum cont^ng^^.
Perceptio Decimarum ad Parochiales Ecclesias de iure communi pertinet. and the
General Council Ibid. c. 33. cum non sit..
of M.CC.XV. had taken it clear, and so expressed it, that in signum vniuersalis
Dominij quasi quodam titulo speciali sibi Dominus Decimas reseruauerat: And
after a few words, the Canon is concluded with Decimare cogantur Ecclesijs,
quibus de iure debentur. And the action for parochial Tithes in those times,
as now, is called Ibid c. 31. dudum aduersus.
iure communi fundata intentio; that is, by common right, Tithes praediall and
mixed were due to the Rector of the Parish (were he Bishop or Priest) if they
were not otherwise, by special title, enjoyed by some other Church, or
discharged by Canonical Exemption. But how little this common right had before
been practiced, appears not only in what is already declared, of the use of
the former time, and in the doubts made by Gratian in the Decree, and Pope
Lucius the third, Alexander the third, and others in their Epistles touching
it, but also in other occurrences of somewhat before the beginning of these
CCCC. years, amongst which you shall find, that both the religious and secular
of the Clergy would usually take Covenants from their Tenants, to pay them the
Tithes, and so prevent the Parson of the Parish where the land lay. If
parochial right had then been common, how could such a Covenant have prevented
the Parson? That practice is both related and remedied in the C. 56. and extr.
de ^actis c. 17. plerique and videsis Append. ad Council Later. part. 13 cap. 6.
General Council of Lateran, of M.CC.XV. and an example of it in the
Archbishoprique of Matera is remaining among the Decretals Tom 3. Epist.
Decretal. lib. 2. p. 483.
of Innocent the third, where also it appears, that the Archbishop had
complaind to the Pope, That the Land-occupiers in his Diocese used to divide
their Tithes at their pleasure, and arbitrarily give part to the Church, part
to the poor, part to their kindred. for which he had remedy by Pontificiall
Decree. Hereto you may add that of an old Council of C. 13. quast. 2. ^ 6.
vbicunque, in Concilio ipso, c. 15
Tribur, in DCCC.XCV. Vbi quis Decimas persoluebat viuus ibi sepeliatur and
mortuus. As if every man, by the choice of the place of his devotion, in paying
his Tithes, might make it his Parish. And when Alexander the third, about the
year M.C.LXXX. was to answer the doubt touching Parochial right of Prediall
Tithes (that is, whether they were due intuitu territorij, in regard of the
limits within which they grew, or obtentu Personarum, by reason of the person,
and so to be paid to the Church wheresoever the owner for the most part
received the Sacrament and heard Divine Service) he knew not how to determine
it; and withal acknowledged, that although it had been often moved, it was
never resolved. Sane (says Epist. Decretal. lib. 3. Ms in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
he) cum huiusmodi quaestio temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum mota fuerit,
non determinata, alijs intuitu Territorij, alijs Personarum obtentu Decimas
asserentibus debere persolui, non est nobis facile certum tibi dicere: which
are the words of that Epistle; a part whereof is in Gregory's De Decima, c. cum
sint.
Decretals. So, that although by the Canons they would have had a universal
payment of Tithes, and although some much ancienter Vide C. 16 qu* 1. cap 45.
and 56.
authority be in that Law for Parochial payment, yet they had long before, and
about the beginning of this last CCCC. years, so much controversy touching
Parochial right, that even thence alone you may see, it was not so much as, in
Opinion, established. Enough more like Examples are of that time. And you may
observe, that where Pope Alexander does by Decretall command a Parochial
payment in the case of the Monks of Extr. tit. de dec. c. 4. commissum. and
Append* ad Council. Lateran. part. 13. cap. 12.
Boxley (for so you must read in Gregory; not Bosse, as it is in the most
polite Edition) yet his ground is from a use of Parochial payment in that
particular; without which, he had been as uncertain there, as he and others
are in Epistles of that time. But so far also was the former course of
arbitrarie Consecrations now withstood, that not only the Lay owner might not
of himself consecrate the right of his Tithes at will, but also, although the
Bishops assent had ioind with his in conueying any Tithes (except only such as
were infeodated to him before the Council of Lateran of M.C.LXXX.) the
Conueyance had been declared void; and to that purpose only, of passing Feodall
Tithes out of Lay hands to the Church, was the Bishops assent D^h^ qua f*
ap^al. sine cons. c. 7. cum Apostolica
decreed to be sufficient. But howeuer, through those Oecumenicall and
Pontificiall Decrees, a more certainty of Parochial right was now begun; and
though those old Canonists also, Pope Innocent the fourth, Cardinal
Hostiensis, and some others, about the year M.CC.LX. writing on the Decretals,
took Parochial right as a thing clearly established in Law, yet it is reported
by some Ancients of good credit, that sufficient remedy was not fully provided
against that practice of the former course of Arbitrarie dispositions of
Tithes, till the General Council of Lions, held under Pope Gregory the
tenth, in the year M.CC.LXXIV. in which, they say, it was constituted, Vt nulli
hominum deinceps liceat Decimas suas ad libitum, vt antea, vbi vellet
assignare, sed Matrici Ecclesiae omnes Decimas persoluerent. So Randall Higden
the Monk of Chester, Henry M^. in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
Knighton Abbot of Leycester, and Thomas of Walsingham a Monk of S. Albons,
tell us; and all three of them liud but about C. years from the time of that
Council, and might so perhaps, have had for it some ancienter Authority from
some now lost moniments. And upon this, doubtless, was that assertion
corruptly related in the printed Examination of W. Thorp before Arundell
Archbishop under Henry the fourth; where he answers, That one Pope Apud Fox.
in H^n. 4. page 494.
Gregory the tenth ordained new Tithes first to be given to Priests now in the
new Law. But the body of that Council (which was first published only in the
late Edition of the General Councels at Rome, and is now also in the last
Edition of Binius) has no such matter in it. One Canon is there, specially
against Extat i^ lib. 6. tit. de feb. Eccles. non ali^n. c. 2. hoc
consultissimo.
Allenation of Revenues of the Church by Clergy men, and another, against
usurpation In 6. t^t. de El^ctione, c. 13. in generali.
of them by Lay Patrons in time of Vacancie; but neither out of them, or the
rest, can you extract what those Monks have related. But although they might
err in the relation of the Canon, yet, doubtless, they had some special
memory, that Parochial right to Tithes had been but of late years, and
sometime after M.CC. receiud into the more known and practiced Law; although
the Doctors so confidently before talk of it. For we must not doubt, but that
those elder Canons, notwithstanding their great authority, were by most
different degrees of time receiud into use, and in some places, not till long
after M.CC. as we see particularly in that of the practice in the Diocese of
Palentia, till M.CCC.XXII. which was, that every man, wheresoever he dwelt,
yet might declare himself to be of what Parish he would, and to that Parish
only give his Tithes: Which was remedied by a Council then held at Villadolid,
under William Bishop of Sabina, the Popes Legate; where he begins with,
Parochiarum diuisio a sanctis patribus instituta certitudinem Parochianorum and
Decimarum debitam solutionem inducit. For indeed, Parochial payment regularly
was now grown, by the Canons gaining force, to be the only debita solutio. The
next authority of a General Council for Parochial right (after that of
Lateran; wherein yet nothing directly constitutes it, but rather it is
supposed, as of former time) is the Condemnation, in the Council of Constance,
of Wicklefes assertion, That Tithes were mere Alms, and that parishioners
might, ad libitum suum (as his position was) eas auferre propter peccata suorum
Praelatorum. And since that, in the General Council of Sess. 25. de
reformatione. cap. 1^.
Trent under Pius the fourth, about M.D.LX. this Canon was published. Non sunt
ferendi qui varijs artibus Decimas, Ecclesijs obuenientes, subtrahere
moliuntur, aut qui ab alijs soluendas temere occupant and in rem suam vertunt,
cum Decimarum solutio debita sit Deo. Et qui eas dare noluerint aut dantes
impediunt res alienas inuadunt. Praecipit igitur sancta Synodus omnibus
cuiuscunque gradus and conditionis sint, ad quos Decimarum salutio spectat, vt
eas (ad quas de Iure tenentur) iu posterum Cathedrali aut quibuscunque alijs
Ecclesijs, vel Personis quibut legitime debentur integre persoluant. Qui vero
eas aut substrahunt, aut impediunt, excommunicentur; nec ab hoc crimine, nisi
plena restitutione secuta, absoluantur. For Popes Decretals of this time, I
refer you further to the Laws made or receiud in England.

II.
In the Opinions that have been since the beginning of these CCCC. years,
touching Tithes; the chiefest to be observed here, are those which determine,
by what immediate Law Tithes are payable. For how ever very many other
questions, about the duty of them, are usually disputed, yet resolve but this,
one way or the other, and most of the rest that follow, about Customs,
Appropritations, Exemptions, and such more, will soon have little doubt. This
point has been controuerted both betwixt Canonists and Divines, and between
Divines and others of their own profession. The Canonists (except very few)
with one consent grounding themselves upon the letter of some of those passages
of Provincial Councels, of Fathers, and of Popes, before rememberd, generally
deliver, that Prediall and Mixed Tithes are due to be paid iure Diuino, which
is commonly taken for the Divine Moral Law, and they usually cite also the
Leuiticall Precepts, to justify it. Yet do they allow the right of former
Tithes, Canonically settled by Cosecrations, Appropriations, and Exemptions
also, for the most part. for to those they require Pontificiall Confirmations,
or a supply of them, by such prescription of time, as may suppose them. For
they take this Ecclesiastique revenue to be no otherwise due to the Clergy by
common right, but that the Pope (whom they, to the utmost, maintain, as they
have reason; for out of the Popes authority, first came their general
profession, as it now remains one) may as a supreme Steward of the Clergies
maintenance, dispose of this or that particular part of it. This is their
common Opinion, although some, in the Point of Exemptions, have made scruple.
But where none of those special Titles precede, there they clearly agree also,
that by common right, all Prediall and Mixed Tithes are due parochially. Neither
need Speculator lib. 4. part. 3. tit. de Decimi^. Prosper Farnia^. Criminal.
decis. Rota Romans 291. ^. 13. alij passim.
the Rector in his Libell upon his Actio Confessoria (which is the general
name of such Actions as lie for demand of incorporall rights, as with us, our
Quod permittat, Quare impedit, Droit d^auowson, and the like) propose more,
then that the increase is within his Parish; and the other Titles (if any be)
must be showed in the Exception, or Answer. But by the way; though the Doctors
commonly suppose the Action for Tithes to be Confessoria, and grounded upon
common right, yet that great and ancient Lawier, Bishop Durand, or Speculator,
would have them demanded by the Condictio ex Canone, that is, as we call it, by
Action upon the Statut. The Canons whereupon he would have it grounded, are
those passages of S. Hierome and S. Augustine in C. 16. q. 1. c. 65. and 66.
and he takes for his authority, why this kind of Action should be brought,
that of ff. de condict. ex l^g. L. Vnic.
Paulus, out of the Imperials, Si Obligatio lege noua introductasit, nec Cautum
eadem lege, quo genere Actionis experiamur, ex lege agendum est. So that as ex
Lege in the Imperials, so ex Canone in the Pontificiall Law, the Action should
be brought. He liud long since, and perhaps, in regard of the various practice
that had preceded against the common opinion of his profession touching the
common right, he thought it most secure for the plaintiff, to ground his Libell
upon the Canon, rather then upon common right. But for Personal Tithes (which
yet they agree not all to be due iure Diuino; although Pope Ad tit. de Paroch.
and al* Paroch. (...) figu^ficauit.
Innocent the fourth make it a wonder to see any man deny it, and diverse of
them follow him; the old precedents also of Libels in Speculator being equally
for these, as for prediall) they are held payable only to the Church, where the
owner, for the most part, receives the Sacraments and Divine Service; not where
the gain is made. neither in them is any regard had to the parish. Whence it
comes, that Jews and Panor^^it. and gl. ad^ tua nos, tit. de Decimis.
Saracens (because they have no personal use of the Evangelical Ministry)
are to pay none by this Law, saving in case where they hinder the continual
payment of some former personal Tithe had from Christians. The best Authority
they bring for personal Tithes, is that in Deuteronomy. XII. where Tithes and the
offerings of your hands are spoken of. By reason of that most received ground
amongst them, That the Tenth is due to the Church iure Diuino, their most
common opinion is also, that every man is bound to pay the whole Tenth, or the
value of the whole Tenth, of all increase, notwithstanding any custom or
prescription to the contrary. Indeed, no reason is, that a custom should take
away what God had immediately, and, by his Moral Law, established. The
consequent is good, were the antecedent clearly proved. But some of them, and
such as are of no small name, deliver their Law to be only, that custom cannot
wholly discharge any Land of Tithes, but it may diminish the quota, or bring
them to a less quantity, or value; that is, that a custom to pay a Twelfth,
Twentieth, or less, is good. This some also allow only in customs
immemoriall, which they suppose to have the force of a Papal privilege or
exemption. But their common and received opinion is, that in Prediall and Mixed,
no prescription or custom to pay any less part or value then the Tenth, or de
modo Decimandi, much less de non Decimando, can be good. (Which well agrees
with the Civil Law also. For by a rescript of the Emperor Anastasius C. tit de
Prascript. 30. vel 40. ann. l 6. comperit sed and vide ibid. Bald. Cyn. and
Salic^tum.
, no prescription may be of non payment of all or a less part of Tributes,
Subsidies, or other Rents of the public Treasury; that is, of such things as
are due to the Emperor in signum vniuersalis Dominij, as Tithes are supposed to
God and his Ministris.) Except only, where the certainty of some equal yearly
payment, without regard to every annual increase, may be adjudged to be
equivalent to a Tenth, by reason of the incertaintie of sterilitie or
fruitfulness. In this Gl. and Panormitan. ad c. in aliquibus extr. de Decimis,
alij.
case they allow a Custom, although the Tenth of every particular year be not
paid; because, Ecclesia, they say, potest se habere ad damnum vel Lucrum
indifferently. But those other common opinions of theirs are so frequently
obuious, that to cite Autorities for them, were but to imitate Rablais his
Bridoye. Yet we may specially remember, that the Doctors of the Rota (of Rome,
I think) according to their profession also above C. years since, determind,
Petr. Rauenn. apud Maiorem in sent. 3. did. 37. quast. 36.
quod quota Denaria est de iure Diuino hodierno die. But some Canonists withal
are, and those of no small note, that agree, the determination of the Tenth to
be only de iure Ecclesiastico, and that no more Ius Natural, or Diuinum
Morale, is in it, then what commands a competence of means to be given to the
Priesthood. So Variar. resolut. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Couuaruuias; so, some others. But few enough are of this opinion. All that are
of it, make no doubt of the right of Customs (provided always, that a
sufficient revenue be possessed by the Minister) but allow the payment of them
to be diminished or taken away by Custom or Prescription. But they are
generally against the possession of Feudall Tithes held by Lay men (which they
suppose, but falsely, to have all had beginning from the Church) although
Infeodated before the Council of Lateran. Yet indeed some of them express an
allowance of them; but that is rather in mingling common Laws with their
Canons, then writing as Canonists. The common Laws of all Nations (where
feudall Tithes are; and I think certainly, in all Christian Nations feudall
Tithes at this day are found) allow them now, and suffer the Canons to have no
power over them. And thence is it (lest they should grossly determine against
such possessions as the Church anciently, as well as the Laity, had by
Infeodations settled, and Posterity still maintaind) that some receive into
their Conclusions an admittance of what their own profession abhorres. Which
may not be amiss said also of such of them as maintain a Custom in the
quota, or the like. For that is done rather by striving to conform the Canons
to the common Laws, or secular Constitutions of the State where they live (as
our Ciuilians, in the practice of the ancient Canon Law, do here also) then by
judging according to the body of the Canons, that regularly allow no
sufficient exception against parochial payment of the whole prediall Tenth,
but only Papal authority, or a Title canonically settled in some other Church.
And the better to make these Infeodations stand with their opinions, they have
also a usual distinction of Ius percipiendi, and fructus Decimarum. The Ius
percipiendi, they say, cannot be transferd, nor ever was, by the old
Infeodations, because every lay man is incapable of it. but the fructus
Decimarum only, as they teach, is what passed, and is still possessed, in
consideration that the possessors should defend the Church from Heretics and
Tyranny. The sum of what the old Canons have, both against ancient and new
Infeodations, is in the former Chapter noted; and according to them, how that
distinction will hold, I see not. But, among them, great opinion is also, that
all Feudall Tithes are to be restored to the Church, and that he which holds
them, may not lawfully pass them over to another Lay man; but may only, with
assent of the Bishop, give them to some Church. Nec multum refert quae Ecclesia
habeat dummodo extirpentur a Laico, as Panormitan says. And to this, they
abuse that Canon Prohibemus, of the Council of Lateran, that was not indeed
made against Tithes then infeodated, but only against new Infeodations, as Pope
Innocent the fourth there well teaches. For, says he, Non loquitur de Decimis
infeodatis, sed de alijs male detentis. Which iustifies what is in the former
CCCC. years, against the received Interpretation, delivered.

III.
The Divines, of since the beginning of this time, have had their several
Determinations and Doctrines upon this point, and those may be, for method, put
chiefly in a Threefold difference; although rather the second Doctrine (as
presently will appear) were but an issue of the first. and the chief question
among them comes to this, Whether, by Gods immediate Moral Law, the
Evangelical Priesthood have a right to Tithes, as to their Inheritance, in
equal degree, as the Lay man has to his Nine; or if they have them only as by
human Positive Law, and so given them for their spiritual labor? that is, in
brief, Whether by original distributive Justice, or by commutatiue, they are
payable? although, in the Opinion which we shall here make the third, all
Positive or human Law be, for the most part, neglected; whereof, more
presently. But in that (which we here make the first of those three Opinions)
it has been held, that the Tenth considered quoad quotam partem, or, as it is,
a determined part, and denoted from that number, is due only by Law Positive
and Ecclesiastical; but, quoad substantiam suam, or Cleri sustentationem, or
in regard to it, as it denotes a necessary or competent part of the maintenance
of the Clergy, that is due by the Divine Moral Law. And to the purpose of
this distinction, they interpret the Leuiticall commandments of Tithes; and
deliver that quoad substantiam suam, or as it was generally for the maintenance
of the Minsterie in the Jewish Church, it is Moral or Natural, there being
(according to consideration of it so far) the very Character of it written in
the Tables of men's hearts; that is, that Spiritual Laborers are to be rewarded
with temporal bounty, as every laborer is worthy of his hire. But quoad
quotam partem, it is, they say, a Judicial (or Ceremonial, as some will) and
that it has been brought into the Law of the Gospel by Ecclesiastique
Doctrine and Constitutions (both which we have before related) proceeding from
it only per vim eius exemplarem, or by imitation of the Jewish state, ordered
by the Almighty; and not in that regard per vim obligatiuam, or any continuing
force of it under the Gospel. And that the Church was not bound to this part,
but freely might as well have ordained the payment of a Ninth, or Eleventh,
according to various opportunity. This is commonly taught by the old
Schoolmen, Hales, Aquinas, Henricus de Gandauo, R. de Media Villa, Cardinal
Caietan, and diverse others; (but fullest, in my judgment, by Ioh. Ad 3. Sent.
did. 37 quast. 36.
Mayor) and maintaind by great men, that in our times follow their ways of
disquisition. The first that expressly made this distinction, was that
Alexander Hales, that lived about M.CC.XXX. and thus Part. 3. q. 51. memb. 3.
determind, Praeceptum de Decimis est praeceptum Iudiciale, vnde non est
dicendum Morale, quia secundum suam determinationem (that is, secundum quotam
partem) non est scriptum in cord hominis, nec Ceremoniale, quia non est datum
principaliter in figuram significationis, sed Iudiciale quia datum simpliciter
in rationem aequitatis mutuae distributionis, vt sit aequalitas dati and
accepti inter seminantem spiritualia and dantem temporalia, secundum quod
possibile est, etc. And 2* 2. q. 87. art 1.
Aquinas; Determinatio Decimae partis soluendae est autoritate Ecclesiae; and
adds, that the ground of it, which he calls radix, is the text Epist. 1. ad
Carinth. cap. 9.11.
, If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we reap your
carnal things? The same is by Hen. de Gaudano Quodlibet 4. q 28.
expressed in these words, Adueniente Lege Euangelica and cessantibus Ceremonijs,
cessauit and solutio Decimae, pro quota illa: sed mansit pro illo quod in illa
erat iure Legis Naturae, and ad illud reduxit Lex Euangelica^ And delivers
accordingly the right of them to be partim de iure Naturae and Euangelij, that
is, quatenus vacantibus Diuino Ministerio communiter ab omnibus debet
prouideri; and, partim de iure humano Ecclesiastico, or Positiuo, that is,
quoad quotam partem. And to the same purpose, the rest. But whereas some make
that learned Hales the first Author of this doctrine; doubtless they err. For
howeuer Lex Diuina, Deus Praecepit, and the like, frequently denote the right
of Tithes in the former CCCC. years; yet first consider, what is there
admonished touching the practice of the time, and from thence you may, perhaps,
interpret their meanings to be otherwise, then as they are commonly (and
especially by the Canonists) taken. Could the Church have, before his time,
held clearly, that the Tenth was due by the Moral Law, and yet, against their
own consciences, generally, give way to, and practice also, those Conueyances,
which can have no power over that which the Moral Law, ever binding
uniformly, has ordained? And indeed some great Doctors teach, that the Ius
Diuinum, denoted in those passages of the body of the Canons, was no otherwise
understood, then only that we are bound to it by the Law Positive of the
Church, imitating the Divine Judicials (which retain still, as Cardinal
Caietan teaches, their vim exemplarem, though not obligatiuam) and is well
enough thence styled Ius Diuinum. Cum ergo dicitur (says the Cardinal Ad 2.
^. q. 87. art. 1.
) Lege Diuina, aut Deo iubente ad Decimas tenemur; intellige exemplariter.
Neither does he otherwise interpret other passages of the Fathers, which are to
that purpose. Neque aliud, are his words, sancti patres intellexerunt. and
remember also, that those Fathers affirm it not in disputation, but only in
exhortation to the people; which is specially obseruable to any that knows the
course of their writing. With Caietan also (in that the Law for Tithes is not
Moral) Bellarmin, Suarez, Malder Bishop of Antuerp, and late professor at
Louain, and others accord, and make it the communis opinio Theologorum; and
some will have it Ceremonial, rather then Judicial. but we dispute not
thereof. But also an example is brought out of S. Ambrose his use of Videsis I
Mayor. ad 4. sent. did. 15. quaest. 3.
Quadragesima diuinitus constituta, denoting the Ecclesiastique commandment of
Lent, that was but in a kind of imitation of our Sauiors abstinence. Which
shows, that what is from the holy Word exemplarily taken, is denoted sometimes
with such attributes, as might signify a Moral Constitution. And the truth is
also, that Ius Diuinum is very often, and was, about the time of the body of
the Canon Law published, taken for Ius Ecclesiasticum, or Ius Civil quod ad
Ecclesiae administrationem spectat. as you may plainly see in an Epistle of
Alexander the third, that liud till M.C.LXXX. where he directs, that a Church
having been in possession XL. years of Tithes growing in another Parish,
should have them still by that prescription, because in such case, de iure
diuino and humano melior est conditio possidentis. Who sees not, that he there
uses Ius Diuinum for Positive and human Law of the Church? What has the
prescription of XL. years, or primer possession to do with the direction of
Divine Moral Law? Or indeed, if he had meant, that Tithes, quoad quotam, had
been due for the Ministers Salarie by the Divine Moral Law, how could
prescription have had place against it? Part of that Epistle is Extr. de
Pr^script. c. 6. ad au^es.
in the body of the Canon Law. But because it is fuller, and indeed more
authentic, in a very In Ms. lib. 5. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
ancient Copy of Decretall Epistles (the most of them being of Alexander the
third) it shall thence be hither faithfully transcribed. Alexander Mauricio
Episcopo. Ad aures nostras, te significante, peruenit, duas Ecclesias saepius
sub examine tuo litigare super Decimis quas vna Ecclesiarum in alterius
Parochia XL. annis possedit, ac per hoc L. putat eius actionem extinctam
petit eius actionem extentam. Altera vero volens eas iure Parochiali euincere,
praescriptionem non debere sibi obesse proponit. Ideo quid iuris sit in hoc
casu, tua nos duxit fraternitas consulendos. Tuae itaque fraternitati literis
praesentibus innotescat, quod iure diuino and humano melior est conditio
possidentis, quoniam quadragenalis praescriptio omnem prorsus actionem
secludit. And, that Ius diuinum was in that sense taken in these Ages, appears
also by Hales; where, although Part. 3 q. 51. membr. 5.
he before held clearly, that the commandment of the quota pars was judicial,
yet he says, that Decima sicut Domini generalis cenfus is payable iure diuino,
that is plainly (in his meaning) by the Ecclesiastique Constitution of the
Church, imitating the Divine Judicials. Neither was the phrase otherwise used
in that of the General Council of Lateran, held before the time of Hales, in
the year M.CC.XV. Illae quippe Decimae necessario sunt soluendae, quae debentur
ex lege diuina vel loci consuetudine approbata. I know the Canonists miserably
wrest themselves about the interpretation of that place. but, when they have
done all in mistaking it, could the Council think, that loci consuetudine,
some were due, yet that all lege diuina; taking it for the Moral Law. for, if
any, then all, by the Moral Law. Clearly then the English Bellarm. etiam
optim^ interpretatur, lib. 1. de Cler* cap. 26.
of that was, Those are necessarily to be paid, which are due either by the
Positive Law of the Church (which extends not always universally) or Custom
of the Place. Some refer that ex consuetudine to personal Tithes, supposing
Vide Henric. Bowhic in tit. de dec. c. peruenit.
them due only by Custom or Positive Law. And that also might be a tolerable
interpretation, if at the time of the Council such a distinction had been
receiud twixt personal and prediall. But can it then stand for truth, that
Hales was the first that brought this opinion of the quota being due by human
determination in the Church, and not by the Divine Moral Law? Indeed he was
the first that accurately disputed the question as a Schooleman, and expressly
made the distinction, but clearly not the first that so held the point. To the
former Testimonies hereof, add that of Hugo de S. Eurdi^. Theolog. lib. 1.
part. 11. cap. 4.
Victore, who liud near C. years before Hales. He speaking of payment of
Tithes before the Law, under the Law, and since, concludes with, Primum igitur
ante legem, paruulos Consilio nutriuit (Deus) postea sub lege exercitatos
praecepto tentauit. Nouissime sub gratia perfectos in liberate spiritus
ambulare permisit. By this first Opinion of the Schoolmen, to which the
ancient Fathers are (you see) by some of them squared, no difference is to be
made of Prediall, Mixed, and Personal Tithes, how ever some scruples about that
difference, have been needlessely handled by them. For quoad substantiam
Decimae, or Decimam sustentationis, as they call it, or, as the laborer is
worthy of his hire, both are equally due. The Moral Law, according to them,
designs not out real possessions to be more subject here to the natural part
of commutatiue justice, then personal profit. And therefore also Alexander
Hales aptly determines, that Decimae tam personales quam praediales sunt in
praecepto, that is, both quoad substantiam, but neither quoad quotam. And, that
in Venice, and other such Cities, where no Prediall Tithes are, a Personal
Tenth is due by the Positive Laws of the Church, as, in them also, a sufficient
maintenance is to be had for the Clergy, by the Moral or Natural Law. In
sum, by this opinion, Customs of payment of less, of nothing, and other
Civil Titles, that have force against Ecclesiastique Law Positive, are allowd,
so long as the maintenance of the Minister be otherwise competent. Both
failing, then is that defect to be supplied (notwithstanding any Civil
exception) due by the Divine, Natural, or Moral Law; which, inscribd in all
hearts, admonishes, that reward is due to every laborer; much more to him of
the Spiritual Harvest. Other questions about Tithes are disputed in the
Schoolmen. but it is not hard to conjecture, how the most are to be determined
(according to them) by their resolution of this alone; therefore I omit them.
You see how opposite this Opinion is to that receiud among the Canonists, twixt
whom and the Schoolmen Ockam. lib. 1. dialog. 3.
was usually great dissension. It is not to be doubted, but that the Schoolmen
looked much further into all that they meddled with, then the Canonists could do.
And had the Canonists agreed herein with them, they might, with fewer
absurdities, have maintained diverse of their scrupulous Positions. And some of
Raynutius apud Hosti^^sem in sum. tit de decimis* number. 10.
them were so moved at the Schoolemens Disputations, about Hales his time
especially, that they knew not which way at all to determine it. This difference
of the Canonists and Schoolmen is rememberd by I. Mayor. Theologos hic (says
Ad Sent. 3. did. 37. quast. 36.
he) Canonistae Haereticos vocant, quia dicunt Decimas non esse de iure diuino.
But which are here the more competent Judges of the two, he tells you further,
in his answers to Peeter of Rauenna, a Canonist of his time. He lived about C.
years since.

IV.
The second Opinion in Divinity, is of those, that (having their first ground
out of the determination of the Schoolmen) held Tithes to be mere Alms, and
not to be paid to the Ministers of the Gospel by any Parochial right, as a
necessary duty to the Evangelical Priesthood, but that they might be
retained and disposed of at the owners will; especially if the Pastor See
Wicleues complunt to the K. and Parliament artic. 3.
well performed not his function. Of this, were both, some of religious Orders
in their Preaching, and also others opposite enough to them in Doctrine. The
Dominicans and Franciscans especially (who began both about the year M.CC.X.
and had in their Monasteries store enough of Schoolmen) made it a gainful
Doctrine to teach Lay men, that they were not bound to pay their Tithes to
their Ministers, as to whom, by any Law of God, that portion necessarily
belonged. For when the determinations had preceded, by which the quota was
concluded, not to be due Iure diuino, they of this side neglecting (for the
most part) the positive and human Laws made for them, and regarding only the
express Law of God, taught them due only as Alms, or as what debito
charitatis, not debito iustitiae, was to be dispensed. By this Doctrine the
Mendicants especially often got them to themselves (like the old Vide Zonar. in
Council. Gangr. Can 7.
Eustathians) as Alms to be arbitrarily disposed of to such as took any
spiritual labor. as also made their own detaining of them in Lands, out of
which they were Parochially due, to seem the less wrongful. but against their
detaining of Parochial Tithes a Canon was made in the General Clementin. tit.
de Decim. c. 1. Religiosi.
Council of Vienna, held in M.CCC.XL. and their Doctrine was taxed by Pope
Innocent the fourth about M.CC.L. writing Ad extr. tit. de Paroch c. vlt.
significauit.
upon the Decretals, where he calls them isti noui Magistri, and Praedicatores
qui docent, and praedicant contra nouum and vetus Testamentum. and Richard
Archbishop of In desensor. C^ratorum. and vide, si placet Alex. lib. 4. consil.
60.
Armagh, complains against them for possessing the people with an opinion that
the command of Tithes was not Moral, but only Ceremonial, and not to be
performed, by constraint of conscience, to the Minister; and that out of
whatsoever at least was given to any of the four Orders of Mendicants, no
Tithe was in conscience to be deduced for the Ministers. with these in
substance did others also at the same time agree, that otherwise were opposite
to the whole Nation of Friars. as with us John Wiclefe, Walter Brute, William
Thorp, and some such more whose Arguments for their opinions are at large in
Foxes Acts and Moniments of the Church of England, whither I had rather send
the Reader then stuff this place with them. Wiclefes Et videsis in Fascicul*
rer. expetendarum, page 143. in Wicleu^ Thesibus.
Position (for 20. Hen. 7. fol. 17.
which as for an Heresy some have been since questiond with us) is before
related, as it was condemned in the Council of Constance. and Thomas Walden
the Provincial Governor of the Carmelits in England, about the end of the
time of Henry the fourth, wrote against him in it, vindicating the duty to
the Church, but not so much, secundum quotam sed magis secundum substantiam, as
his Doctrinal. fidei tom. 1. lib. 2. Artic. 3. cap. 64. and 65.
own words are. Hereto may be added one of the articles of the Bohemians,
published about CC. years since, wherein a Divine right to Tithes since the Fox
in Hen. 5. page 602.
Gospel is denied. whereupon also they long since took all temporalties from
their Ministers, and brought them Ioh. Mayor in Sent. 3. Did. 37. q. 3^.
to stipends. Others have been possessed with this conceit, and among them you
may remember Gerardus Paul Grysaldus apud Camill. Borell. in Consiliorum part.
1. consil. 45. edit. a I. Baptist. Casare.
Sagarellus, before Wiclefe, burnt also for an Heretic. And the great Erasmus
gave the common exacting of Tithes by the Clergy of his time, no better name
then Tyranny. But that of his, diverse have sufficiently both reprehended and
confuted, and especially Albertus Pius Carpensis, in his labor against him.
With this may be reckond that of William Russell a Franciscan who under Henry
the fifth had publicly preached that the payment of personal Tithes to the
Pastor, were not in Gods Commandment; but that it was lawful for every
Christian to dispose of them arbitrarily to charitable uses. but of him, see
more in the next and third Opinion, where the words of his Doctrine are expressed
in a letter from the University of Oxford, to the Convocation of the Clergy.

V.
The third Opinion is of those who agree with the Canonists, that the right, of
the quota of Tithes, immediately is from the Moral or Divine Natural Law; some
impudently urging with a commandment given to Adam; others of them prouidently
restrayning all their arguments to such grounds for the Conclusion, as may be
had out of Abraham's example, referd to the application of it in the Epistle to
the Ebrews; but others also not so circumspectly, taking in the Leuitical
commandments of Tithes for their most sufficient authority. For the first kind
that talk of Adam; I think indeed that in the time of this light of learning,
none have durst venture their credits upon such fancies. yet, that it was some
opinion that had at least in pretense many autors in the Church of England, in
the blinder time of our ancestors; I thence collect, for that in a Penitential
made for direction of Priests in auricular Confession, and written (as my Copy
is) about Henry the sixth, the Priests examination and advise upon the point
of Tithing, is thus expressed. Have thou truly do thy Tithings and Offerings to
God and to holichirch? thou shall vndirstande that at the beginning of the
world, when there was but oo man, that is to sey, Adam, God chargyd him that he
should truly of al manner thing give God the Xth. part, and bad him that he
should teache his children to do the same manner, and so forth al men into the
worldis end. And forasmuch as there was that time no man to receive it of hem
in the name of holichirche, and God would not that they should have but IX
parties. Therefore he commandid hem that of every thing, the Tithe part should
be brent. I find that afterward Adam had two sons Caime and Abell, Abell
tithed truly and of the best. Caym tythed falsely and of the werst: at last the false Tyther Cayme slough Abell his brother. for he blamyd him and said that he
tythed euel, wherefore our Lord God accursid Caym and all the earth in his werk.
So ye mow se that falls tything was the cause of the first manslaughter that
ever was. and it was cause that God cursid the earth it is literally
transcribed as I find it. that writing of Cayme for Cain is ordinary in the
moniments of that age, as you may find in Wickleues works, Waldensis his
Doctrinal* and others of like nature. But see here the effect of perverse
opposition on both sides. Some Friars, providing only for their own wealth,
would have had them reckond mere Alms, and so have gotten them from the
Secular Priests. and others would have had them retaind by Lay men. The Secular
Priests on the other side would rather instruct the Laity with ridiculous
falsehoods (in the terms whereof they would not spare to abuse the holiest
Name) then not seem to say enough for their own gain. In those times they did
so. they saw the Friars dangerous doctrine to their revenues, and therefore
omitted no argument, no course in opposing it. a notable testimony whereof is
had also in that of Friar Ex. Arthium Arch. Cant. ha^sit V. C. Arth. Duck LL.
D. in vita Th. Chicheley Cant. Archepisc. page 73.
William Russell a Franciscan that in the Convocation of 5. Hen. 6. was
vehemently accused because he had preached, that Personal tithes were not
necessarily payable by Gods Commandment, but that every man might dispose them
at his pleasure in charitable uses. the sum of which was, that every man
might or should rather give them to the begging Friars. a doctrine of no small
prejudice to the Secular Priests, if once publicly received. This Russell was
by the Convocation enjoined to recant at Paul's Cross on a prefixed day, before
which he fled the Kingdom; and after public citations against him, was
solemnly pronounced an Heretic for it. his opinion also being condemned by
both the Universities. the letters then sent to the Convocation, from Oxford,
both show the determination of that University on the point and the particular
Tenet also of Russell. therefore we insert them. the direction is to the
Clergy of Canterburie-Prouince from the Vniuersitas studij Generalis Oxoniae,
after which follows a preface in general terms against such as forsook the
ancient ways and fell into new heresies. then they go on with sed quia in
multis nouitas (so are the words of it, as I have it faithfully transcribed Ex
Archiui^ Oxon. in^ Biblioth. Bedleiana.
to me through the courtesy of my most honored friend Mr. Thomas Allen of
Gloucester Hall; whose name it were not without offense in me, at all to mention
without special reverence, as well to his singular humanity as to his fullness
of learning and worth in good Arts) Sed quia in multis nouitas parit pericula,
in quibus antiquitas non peccabit, illud esse censemus inconcusse tenendum quod
ab antiquis patribus constat clarissime praefinitum. Verum quia nuper nobis
innotuit cuiusdam nouelli (that is of Russell) insana doctrina contra Decimas
personales (cuius miramur audaciam and dolemus insipientiam) sed eius
pertinaciam and Ecclesiae contemptum sustinere veremur, and ne nostra L.
Saciturnitas.
taciturnitate seu negligentia tacito consensui adscribatur, in ipsa materia
scribere curauimus quod concordes sentimus, and in euidens testimonium nostro
^igillo communire decreuimus, ad veritatis dilucidationem and obsequium
Ecclesiae, vt tenemur. then they deliver their determination thus. Dicimus and
firmiter concipimus quod Decimae personales tam ex praecepto iuris diuini quam
sanctorum Patrum traditionibus sub autoritate Ecclesiae in concordi iuris
iudicio debentur Ecclesijs and earum Ministris Curam animarum habentibus and
Sacramenta ministrantibus ex autoritate Ecclesiae. Magna namque est sacro
Sanctae Ecclesiae autoritas extra quam fides plane perpendit nullam posse
peruenire salutem fidelibus. Ne illie ergo resideat spiritus pestilens aut
opinio corrumpens vbi locus quaeritur fidei Orthodoxae, verba per aduersarium
praemissae nostrae sententiae praedicata, quae etiam sub Auaritiae subtili suco
deprehendimus palliata, reprobamus and tanquam erronea and haeretica
declaramus. Quorum demens tenor cum reprobo sensu sic sequitur, Catholica
damnatione fulminandus. Decimae personales (this was the doctrine of Friar
Russell) non cadunt sub praecepto diuino, saltem vt soluantur Parochiali
Curato; quare licet vestrum vnleuique, nisi consuetudo in contrarium fuerit, in
pios vsus pauperum eas dispensare. Et iterum. Personales Decimae sub diuino non
cadunt praecepto neque iure debentur, vbi solutionis non est consuetudo. But
they thus damn it. Quiscunque hanc sententiam tenuerit, and pertinaciter
defenderit apud reputationem nostram Haereticus est censendus, and quia a sana
doctrina Ecclesiae est diuisus, a corpore eiusdem Ecclesiae, velut membrum
putridum, est praescindendus. O honorabil^ fratres and Domini, O vniuersitates
Catholicae, and quicunque fideles scrutamini Scripturas, Canones inspicite ac
eorum naturales concipite rations. quam proditorium est tributum negare
altissimo? quam inhumanum a laborantibus abstrahere debitum? quam grave
schismatis exemplum autoritati Ecclesiae public and pertinaciter resistere? ac
etiam iustitiae obuiam contra praecepta Canonum res alienas invadere: nimis
cruenta ac sacrilegia est haec auaritia quae antiquissimi iuris Decimale
debitum solum Consuetudini adscribit, and in dubium revocat vt laborantium
victum just exhauriat. quod Ministris Ecclesiae ad eorum honestam
sustentationem firmum persisteret si Decimae possunt ad libitum conferri and
ius Decimandae ex Debito non esset? O vtinam aut resipiscant and ad Ecclesiae
gremium redeant, qui tanto facinori fauere conantur; aut asperrimis censuris,
ne simplices inficiant, mordaciter feriantur. Sic vnanimes in vera doctrina
Ecclesiae permaneamus vt ad eum tendere valeamus, de quo canit Propheta.
Quaerite Dominum and confirmamini, quaerite faciem eius semper. sic laetetur
cor quaerentium Dominum hic in via, quatenus ipsum quaerentibus dignetur esse
merces in patria, Amen They were, me thinks, somewhat vehement and very
confident in the point. Neither have I elsewhere seen so great authority against
Russell. If Russell were therefore an Heretic, doubtless he has had and now
has many fellow-Heretiques. for thus, many, nay the most of such as most
curiously inquire herein, and diverse Canonists also that are for the moral
right of prediall and mixed Tithes, deny that personal are otherwise due
regularly then as custom, or Law positive (which is subject to custom) directs.
But judge you of it, Reader. I only relate it, and return to their prosecution
against Russell. at length news came that he was at Rome, whither presently the
Convocation sent agents (to whom they allowd for an honorarie salarie, a
farthing out of every pound of Church livings) that might there question him
before the Bishop of Rome. a delegation of the Conisance of the cause was made
to a Cardinal, who adjudged him to perpetual imprisonment unless he
recanted. the Friar afterward brake prison and ran home again, where at Paul's
Cross (when nothing else could satisfy the secular part of the Clergy) he
solemnly abiured his heresy, as they called it. and to prevent the like in the
doctrine of other Minorits, Chicheley the Archbishop enioind them all that in
their public Sermons they should teach personal Tithes to be due by the Laws
of God and the Church. Of later time others have written for the divine right
and general duty of Tithes. you may see Albertus Pius Carpensis against
Erasmus, Baronius Ad annum Christi 75.
his digression touching them, others, but especially the diverse Treatises
written to that purpose of late by our Country men, which are read in every
hand. I purposely abstain from particular mention of their names. But neither
have only single autors been lately of that side for prediall and mixed. whole
Synods also of this age have in expres words been for them, through whose
authority and this ancienter before rememberd they might have fortified their
Conclusions with far greater names, then by citing some one or two late single
men, as they usually do. To omit the Council of Mentz held in the year
M.D.XLIX. where it is delivered that Decimae debentur iure Diuino (and some
other are to that purpose in the Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, collected by
Bochell) In Edictes and O^donuane^^ de France tom. 4. tit. 22.
an Edict of Henry the second of France in M.D.XLII. relation is of a
remonstrance made to him by the Bishop, Dean, Canons, Chapter and Clergy of
Paris, wherein they take it clear, that tithes and first fruits were
introduitees and instituees de droit divine and partant deussent estre pays
Loyauement and sans fraud. The like, of the Clergy of the Diocese of Troyes,
is mentioned in an edict of Charles the ninth, in M.D.LXII. in the same words.
and in the year before by a General Synod of all the Clergy of France at
Poissy, a complaint was made with that pretense in it. the words of the Edict
best show it, Charles etc. a tous ceux qui ces presents lettres Verront,
salut. De la part de nos chers and bien amies consiellers les Archeuesques and
Euesques de nostre Royaume et des deputez des Clergez, qui ont este n'aguerez
assembleza Poissy par nostre commandment, nous a este remonstre, que combien
que les Diximes and Primices, qui sont leur principal reuenu, soient
introduitees and instituees de droict divine, and partant deussent es^re payees
loyaument and sans fraud: ce neantmoins plusieurs Agricoles, proprietarees,
etc. with these may be reckond, that of the Clergies petition in the Rot. Parl
50. Ed. 3. art. 199.
parliament of 50. Ed. 3. wherein they begin with Licit Decima siluae,
presertim caeduae, de iure diuino and ecclesiastico Deo et ecclesiae sit
soluenda, etc.

VI.
But Although by this Opinion and that of the Canonists, Tithes be generally
due by the divine Law, and so not subject (if with them you take it for the
divine moral or natural Law) to Civil Exceptions as Customs and
Prescriptions, of discharges or of payment of less, or such more, whence also
real compositions have been condemned Append. ad Co^^il. Lateran. part. 4. cap
1.
quia Decimae cum temporalibus non sunt commutandae, as the words of an old
Pope were to the Bishop of Cusa; yet the practiced Common Law (for by that
name, as common is distinguished from sacred, are the Civil or Municipall Laws
of all Nations to be styled) has never given way herein to the Canons. but
has allowd customs, and made them subject to all civil titles, Infeodations,
discharges, compositions, and the like. Of Compositions no more shall be
spoken, seeing they consist rather in indiuiduals, then of any general course.
we only remember them here as one kind of discharge, among other that have been
allowd by common Laws. and where Customs, and Infeodations hold, no man can
doubt of the lawfulness of Compositions. But of Customs; in the Edicts made
by those Kings of France upon those remonstrances it appears, that, what ever
the Clergy supposed by their Dixmes introduitees and instituees de droict
divine: they complain of abuse only in due payment of Tithes out of lands suiets
and redeuables aux dits dixmes etc. that is, subject and liable to the payment
of Tithes. neither in other words do the Edicts and their verifications give
them remedy. And notwithstanding that it were once (according to sundry
Canons of that Church) thus commanded by an old Law of the year Edict and
Ordinances tom. 4. page 493.
M.CC.XXXVIII. made by S. Jews, Decimae quibus fuit longo tempore ecclesia per
malitiam inhabitantium defraudata, Statuimus and ordinamus quod restituantur
citius, and amplius laici decimas non detineant sed eas habere clericis
permittant; yet, in that state, against the whole course of the Cannon Law in
this kind, they have, what by reason of ancient Infeodations still continuing,
what through customs, allowed diverse lands to be not at all subject to any
Tithes payable to the Church. For their Infeodations (although none can be
there new created) such as were made before that Canon prohibemus of the
Council of Lateran, held under Alexander the third, are to Videsis Guido^om
^P. Decis. 2^8. and Cons^^t. Bitur^^^* ^it 10. de Custumes predial^^,. 11.
this day remaining, and are conveyed and descend as other lay inheritances;
excepting only such, as being discharged of feudall service, have been given in
to the Church. For, their Lawiers with the common opinion (but erroneously)
suppose that all such Infeodations came from the Church; and therefore they
agree if any feudall Tithes be conveyed into the Church Vide Carol Molin. in
Consu^^ Paris. de^ Fiefs. 68. page 1296. and seqq. and Bertrand. d' Argentr^ in
Consu^t. Britan. ^rtic. 266. page 1114.
freely by themselves (not as annexed to other fiefs, as castles, or manors,
nor subject to tenures reserved) that then they are in the Church, as it were
iure pos^liminij, or as we say, by way of remitter; that is, they are so
annexed, that they may not be transferd again into Lay-hands, more then any
other Tithes which are the ancient revenue of the Church. whence it has been
adjudged also in the Parliament of Paris in the case of the Bishop of Baieux,
that Tithes so conveyed are not I. Lucius Paris. Placit. Curia lib. 2. tit. 5.
2.
subject to the custom of droict de Retraict lignagier, that is, the right of
the heir apparants redeeming an inheritance sold by his ancestor within a year
and a day, or some such certain time. But this point of remitter, they ground
not so much upon the nature of the Tithe, as upon an old Law of S. Jews,
wherein liberty is given that all persons Decimas percipientes in nostra
terra, and in feudis mouentibus mediate vel immediate de nobis quas clerici
perciperent, si eas laici non perciperent, possint eas relinquere, dare and
alias quocunque iusto titulo, and licito modo ecclesijs concedere tenendas
imperpetuum, nostro vel nostrorum successorum assensu minime requisito, etc.
whereas (by the way) some of their lawiers Bacquit des droicts de Domaine tract.
4. part. 3. chap. 30.
say, that feudal Tithes there purchased by Clergy men, are at this day
subject to the doict de nouueaux acquests i. a kind of fines for alienation,
which I could not yet learn how it well stands with this of S. Jews. But they
commonly interpret it as an ordinance to this end, that when the Church (the
Parish Voyez Pasquier en (...) Recherche^ liu. 3. chap. 35.
Church only to which they are supposed to have been due) had gotten them free
by sale or gift or otherwise, they should be perpetually annexed to it. and were
it not for this ordinance, which interpretation has thus applied, their
Lawiers ought to have enquired more carefully about the original of every
Infeodation. for, where it began from a Layman, there, what cause is of
remitter? And these kind of feudall Tithes also of their own nature are mere
Lay possessions and determinable in that kingdom, only before the secular
Judge, as it appears, not only in an old Ordinance of Philip le Beau, touching
the jurisdiction of Tithes, and in the Protocolle or Register of the Chancerie
of France, but also in a late Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, where a Curat
sued before an Official for his Canonica portio (which has been there sometime
Code des D^cis. lib. 1 tit 10. decis. 15.
adjudged the fourth part. but is arbitrarily determined) against some other
Churchman that enioied the Tithes of the Parish, who pleaded to the
jurisdiction, that the Tithes were feudall, and desired that he would not hold
plea of what so much belonged to the Kings Court; but the Official first gave
sentence that the Defendant should bring in his proofs of the Tithes being
feudall; which failing, he proceeded to the point of the Action. thereupon by
appel comme d'abus it came into the Parliament of Paris, which after solemn
Argument gave Co^bin enles Loix de. a France Arrest 66. Et Code des decis. liu
1 tit. 10. decis. 17. and voyez Papou en Notaire vol. 2. liu. 8. fol. 551.
judgment that the Official had usurped over the Royal Jurisdiction, in that
he had at all proceeded after the simple allegation of Infeodation, which alone
binds the hands of the Ecclesiastical Judge that has no more power to enquire
of the infeodation or of Tithes as feudall, then of any other Lay inheritance.
and in the same case, reference is made to some other judgments of like nature:
and the reason given in the Arrest is mainly, because Tithes of their own
nature and originally are not otherwise spiritual, or belonging to a
spiritual Court, then only as they were annexed to a Church or some other
hallowed place. La raison est, are the words, que suyuant le doctrine de S^
Thomas, nous Tenons qu'en la loy de grace, les Dixmes sont deues non de droict
divine, mais positif; and l'esglise en naissant n'a este faict Dame de ce
droict, ains par le don and concession des Rois, Princes, and autres a qui de
droict il appertenoit. whence, if they were annexed to any Church, they were of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction that was given anciently for them; but being as
feudall inheritance, although they once were in the Church, yet a new Character
of being mere Lay is restored to them. Those Bertrand. d'Argentre in Cons.
Brit. art. 266. des Appropriances, page 1111.
Infeodations of Tithes are there very frequent, and in very many Parishes the
Tithes are taken only by Lay men. But for them, so much. Customs in payment
and non payment of the Tenth, have ever held in that Church, which might alone
be proved out of some passages in Gerson, and in Ad sent. 3. did. 37. quast.
36.
Johannes Mayor, who tells us that plurimi in Italia and Francia de multis
rebus quotam non dant. But it may more fully be manifested by Edicts of late
time. in one of Charles the ninth, and another of Henry the third; Dixmes se
leueront selon la Coustume des lieux and la cotte accustumee in iceux. Et ou la
dit Coustume serra obscure and incertaine, serra suiuie celle des lieux
circumuoisins. The French Customs (according to diverse vsages of their
Provinces) are frequent for paying a less part then the Tenth, and clearly
allowed Videsis Guidonem Papam Decis. 284. Code des decis. l. 1. tit. 10.
decis. 7.
by diverse Judgments. Neither is the Canon Law, which allows not Customs,
suffered to be there practiced. And for customs of paying none or de non
decimando; in some cases they hold there also; and that by force of that Lex
famigerata (as Du Ad Edict. Henr. 2. contra datas paris and abus. Curia Roma^a.
Molin calls it) their Philippine which is an Ordinance made by Philip le Beau
in M.CCC.III. (but it is falsely and diversely referd to other of their Philips)
commanding that no new exaction should be made of Tithes not accustomed to be
paid. Senescallus (it says) ad requisitionem consulum locorum quoruncunque,
defendat ipsos consules and vniuersitates and singulos a noua impositione
seruitutis facienda per Praelatos and alias personas Ecclesiasticas, and a noua
exactione decimarum and primitiarum and prestationis passatae, prout de iure
fuerit and hactenus est consuetum fieri. By this authority, whereas in the
Parish Code des Decis. li^ 1. tit. 17. Decis. 9.
of Branthel, in the Diocese of Meaux, the Prior and Covent de Nostre Dame de
Vaurart purchased certain Land that had formerly paid Tithe Corn to the
Rector, and made fish Ponds in it, the Rector afterward was bard in his Action
for Tithe of the fish; and one reason was upon this Philippine, because no such
Tithe had been used to be paid. so in Auuergne, in Berry, and other Provinces,
some customs of Et testatur e^ ij^ Conuarunias lib. 1 Var. Resolut. cap. 17.
non payment hold good. And ofttime the King there sends commands grounded upon
this Philippine, that new Tithes not usually paid should not be exacted by the
Clergy. Literae (says Carol. de Gr^ssallo Regal. Franc. lib. 2. iur^ 7.
my Author) dietim conceduntur in Cancellaria Regia super nouis decimis, ne a
Laicis exigantur per eorum Praelatos, quae fundantur in ordinatione Philippi
Pulchri Francorum Regis facta die Veneris ante Cineres, anno M.CCC.IV. Cap.
XXIX. huius tenoris, Item quod Senescallus etc. And expressly the customs of
Tit. 10. des Coustomes prediales,. 12.
Berry. Item par la Custom, disme est doibt paier seulement des chooses d'ont
est accoustume payer Disme, etc. where Boerius says, he has seen it
accordingly for other places often adjudged at Paris. and in an Edict of 10.
Hen. 4. of France touching the payment of Tithes by those of the reformed
Religion, the payment is commanded only, P. Matthew. hist. tom. 1. liu. 2. page
^25. in 8.
selon l'vsage and coustume des lieux. and accordingly diverse Arrests of
Parliament also have been. And although sometimes Customs have been there
disallowd, especially de non decimando; yet that has proceeded chiefly from
the usurpation of the Canons, where the secular Law was wrongfully neglected;
as you may see in the example of that of the Ecclesiastical court at In 3.
Sent. did. 37. quast. 36.
Rhosne, wherein the Laity were compelled adreddendas Decimas de faeno and
aliquibus alijs de quibus apud eos inconsuetum erat reddere decimas, as Majors
words are, who concludes, that had the Judge been other then a Canonist, he
would not so have adjudged it.

VII.
In Spain also some infeodated Tithes from ancient time are in Lay hands,
which the P. Matthew. ad Guide. Pop. decis. 2 8 ex Chronico Io^. 1. R. Castella,
and vide Petr Bellugam in Spec. tit. de Decimas.
Clergy about M.CCC.LXXX. would have had into their revenue, under John the
first of Castile and Lions; but could not. and in an Ordinance of the same
John, against all such as should vsurp the Ordennantas Reales de Castella lib.
1. tit. 5. leg. 1. and 3.
right of Tithes, a prouiso is that it should not extend to such Tithes or
Church Revenue, as the Crown or any subject had from ancient time enioied..
And a third part of Tithes due to the King, is menciond in their Recopilacion
por Philip. 2. lib. 1. tit. 5 and Gregorio Lopez du Partina 1. tit. 20 leg. 22.
Laws, as granted to him from the Pope, of which, at his pleasure new
Infeodations are made. And Petrus In 2.2. D. Thom. di^put. 40. memb. 1. (...)
^6.
de Lorca remembers, that the Pope Regibus Hispaniae co^cessit tertiam partem
Decimarum and alijs secularibus absque consensu singularum Ecclesiarum. among
these you may reckon those Tithes in the Crown, which by grant from the Pope,
King Ferdinand and Queen Isabel had in the Kingdom of Granado, in
consideration of their endowment of Churches there. and of them and their
jurisdiction, whereto they are subject, thus Practic. quast cap. 35.
Couaruuias an excellent Lawier of Spain. Semel, says he, ex literis regijs
vidi Decimarum causam tractari inter Ecclesiasticos apud Granatense Praetorium,
ex eo quod Reges Catholici Ferdinandus and Elisabeth Decimas huius Regni
Granatensis obtinuerint a Pontifice Maximo cum onere dotandi Ecclesias. that
is, the Judges held plea of them by Commission from the King, not by spiritual
power, which otherwise regularly has conisans of Tithes; although another
great Lawier Gregorio Lopez ad Partula 3. tit. 4. leg. 17.
of that Country deny that the Conisance of such Tithes lawfully belongs to
any other jurisdiction then spiritual. Neither has the Canon Law been so
powerful there, as to make Tithes payable against Customs, for payment either
of a less part, or none. And howeuer in an Ordinance of the year M.CC.XCIV.
Alfonso Fa^ro Real a Espanna lib. 1. tit. 5 y en Pragmaticas y leyes
recopilados por mandado de los etc. Ferdinando and Isabel.
the ninth, published his mandamos y establescemos por siempre, que todos los
hombres del nuestro regno den sus diezmos derechamente y cumplidamente a
nuestro Sennor Dios de Pan y de Vino y ganados y de todas las otras cosas que
deuen dar de rechamente segun manda sancta yglesia, wherein he seems to
establish, that whole Tithes without any Diminution should be always paid to
the Church, of Corn, Wine and Cattle and all other things (which Ordinance
also is exemplified and confirmed by John the second of Castile, and Ferdinand
and Isabel; and accordingly, Alphonso Diaz de Montaluo his gloss on it, makes
it to be consonant wholly to the Canon Law) and the whole course of their
ancient body of the Law, in their Partidas be agreeable with it. yet the
practice in that state has been and is, that if suit be commenced in the
spiritual Court for new Tithes, formerly not accustomed to be wholly or not all
paid, and such custom or prescription be pleaded, and the Official or
Ordinary allow it not, upon complaint to the Kings Court, the defendant shall
(as in case of Prohibitions in England) have his remedy. This is declared by
Practic. quast. 35.
their Couarruuias. Erit, says he, obseruandum, causam Decimarum quandoque in
his regnis (that is, France and Spain) tractari apud regios Auditores; nempe
cum Laici contendunt Decimas ab eis exigi, quae legitima Temporis
praescriptione (which is usually thought should be immemoriall, and so is their
Alfonso de Azeuedo in Reg. Constit. lib. 1. tit. 5. l. 5.
practice; although the most common time in other things be XL. years) minime
debentur, and sunt remissae; denique conqueruntur contra morem and
consuetudinem Decimas ab eis exigi. nam etsi condemnentur a iudice
Ecclesiastico nihilominus, ex quaerela, causa, retinetur apud Regia Praetoria.
Siquidem and literae Regiae passim dantur a supremo Senatu ad id vt Laici non
cogantur Decimas illas soluere quae solui legitima temporis praescriptione non
consueuerunt. And with him agrees Alfonso de Azeuedo, that writes upon their
Ordennancas Reales. But these kind of their prohibitions are grounded upon
their Ordinances, forbidding Decimas a Laicis exigi, quae per consuetudinem
contrariam non consueuerunt solui, as Couarruuias says; and to that purpose
was an Edict Couarru. Var. Resolut. lib. 1. c 17.
of their Charles the first (Emperor de fifth) at Toledo in M.D.XXV. and another
like of his at Madrid about three years after, and before four years were
thence past, at Segouia, and another at Villadolid. And upon these oftentimes
(says Alfonso de Azeuedo) Writs of Prohibition go out to the Ecclesiastical
Judges, that proceed super nouitate, to forbid that similes non permittant
nouitates, and processum causae Regio ipsi senatui originaliter mittant. Which
agrees with the very words of the Ordinances Recopilacion de las leyes por
mandado de Phil. 2. lib. 1. tit. 5. l. 6.
, that speak of Nouedades in exaction of Tithes against custom. And one
special use is there, that the Kings give their Partida 1. tit. 20. leg. 11.
and (...) Lopez.
Personal Tithes to their own Chaplains attending on them.

VIII.
Neither has the Canon Law wrought otherwise in Italy, but that there also
particular Customs, as well of Non Decimando, as in the Modus, are frequent.
Multis Italiae locis (says Caietan Ad 2.2. q. 87. art. 1. sic and Ioh. Mayor
ad 3. sent. 37. did. 36 quast.
) contingit ex consuetudine, that nothing at all is paid. And so is the
practice there, for the most Relation of the Religion used in the West parts,.
39.
part, at this day. the Parish Priests being sufficiently maintained by Manse
and Glebe, and the revenues that are in some places paid, as according to a
Modus. And of the Italians and others, where like Customs were, Aquinas thus;
Vide si placet Henric. Bowhic ad^ extr. de dec c. peruonit. Et Antoniu. sum.
part. 4. tit. 11. cap. de Decimis.
Haud laudabiliter ministri Ecclesiae Decimas Ecclesiae requirunt, vbi sine
scandalo requiri non possint propter desuetudinem vel propter aliquam aliam
causam. In Venice, says Ad c^n aliquibus tit. de Decimis.
Panormitan, non in vita sed in morte soluuntur Decimae personales de omnibus
mercantijs iocalibus and alijs mobilibus. And in the whole Seigniorie of
Venice, as my Author Francisc. Monabi^^ in part. 1. Consil. 46. number. 51. edit.
^. Baptistae Caesaris.
delivers, no Parish Church has through that name Decimas seu ius Decimandi,
but only another Stipend or Quartesium (as they call it) de possessionibus seu
terris consistentibus intra confines eorum curae. Neither have Infeodations of
Tithes into Lay hands been less known in Italy, then elsewhere. For example,
you may see the Maria Anguis. sola edit. dict. part. 1 Consil. 49.50. etc.
case of the Mutij, a Noble Family of Piacenza, who had by immemoriall
prescription and confirmation by Bulls, an ancient Infeudation of all Tithes
growing in the Territory of Verano, within the Diocese of Piacenza.

By the Constit. Sicul. lib. 1. tit. 7.
Ordinance of Frederique the second, about M.CC.XX. in the Kingdoms of Naples
and Sicily, a command is, That of all profits belonging to the Crown of those
Kingdoms, a whole Tenth should be paid, and that every subject should truly
pay all such Tenths as had been used to be paid in the time of William King of
Sicilie. Subiectis (are the words) nostris indicimus, vt Decimas quas de feudis
and bonis suis antecessores eorum praedicti Regis Guilielmi tempore
prestiterunt, venerabilibus locis, quibus Decimae ipsae debentur, cum
integritate per soluant.

In Germany, the Canonists note a Custom, that Gl. and Pano^mitan. alij item
ad c. in aliquibus tit. de Decimis.
pro Decimis soluunt certas mensuras sieve Coloni aliquid recolligant, sieve non.
And this by their Law they allow, because it stands indifferent, whether the
Church lose by it, or no. but also, some Lay men take Tithes of new
improuements by right of their Lordships. Status Imperij saeculares (says a
Thomas Michael in lib. de Iuris. Conclus. 49.
Judge of the Imperial Chamber) Decimas Noualium percipere iure Territorij
possunt. Which the Clergy complaind against, in a Diet at Norimberg, but in
vain. And of Zasius de s^nd. p. 4. and Vnlteius de Feud^, lib. 1. cap. 5.. 13.
those Tithes, Infeodations are there made, at the pleasure of the owners, into
Lay hands. Which was so in practice there also anciently, as is witnessed by an
old Hostiens. in sum. tit. de Dec. number. 13.
Canonist, that liud above CCC.LX. years since; where disputing the question,
Vtrum Laicus possit sine peccato Decimas percipere, and bringing the ordinary
Autorities for the negative part, he tells us, both for Germany and other
Countries, in these words, In contrarium potest induci generalis consuetudo in
Hispania and Francia and Burgundia and Alemania in plerisque locis. And in the
County of Flanders an Edict was Ord^nancion in Vlaenderen Bouck. 2. Rubric. 12.
made by Charles the fifth, dated at Malines in M.CCCCC.XX. which commanded,
that no Clergy or Lay man pretending right to Tithes, should exact or sue for
other Nouuelles Dismes aultres qu'ilz and leur predecesseurs ont accustume
prendre and auoir pass quarante ans and audessus. but that they should rest
content with what was due only, according to the former use of payment, saving
in case of new improuements, and such like, as it was explaned by another Edict
some ten years after. both together are the same almost as our Statute of 2.
Ed. 6. And in the General Council of Lateran of M.CC.XV. a relation is of
some Nations, who although Christians, yet secundum suos ritus Decimas de more
non soluunt; and, that other men leased their Land to them, because in regard
of no Tithe being paid by them, the greater rent might be reserved; against
which, remedy is there provided. The words are, In aliquibus regionibus
quaedam permixtae sunt gentes quae secundum suos ritus Decimas de more non
soluunt, quamuis censeantur nomine Christiano, etc. Whereupon Innocent the
fourth, that might well know the meaning of the Council, living so near it,
notes that the Christians, who by their own customs did not pay, were Greeks,
Armenians, and the like. and Summa part. 4. tit. ^1.
Antoninus expressly remembers the general non payment of them in the Eastern
Church as a thing not to be censured to be against Gods Law. Neiher indeed have
I met with any Canon Law of all that Church that ever commanded any thing
touching Tithes.

Among the Laws of Hungary, we find, Decimas In Euchirid. Artic. Decret.
Regni. Hungar. a Sambuco edito.
non soluunt Nobiles de proprijs terris, and Decimas non soluunt Rasciani,
Rutheni, Valachi, and Decimas non soluunt Iudices propter laborem eorum circa
decimandum. although for other persons generally they have strict Laws for
payment of them.

In the Statutes of Poland, it appears that I. Herbort in Stat. Polonia lit. D.
and Jacob. Prilusius leg. Pola^. lib. 1. ^ap. 4.
about M.CCC.LXX. under K. Cazimir the second, the Clergy (especially for the
Diocese of Cracow) made diverse Laws (with his consent) upon great differences
about the paying of Tithes. One in special is, that Tithe must be paid of all
that increases through the labor of the Plough, exceptis Rapis, papauere,
caulibus, cepis, allio, and quae his sunt similia in hortis. and Si quis
ligonisando plantauerit, Decima ab eo nullatenus exigatur. Some other
particulars they have about paying Tithe of Hemp and Flax (which happens
sometime to be more, sometime less then a Tenth; because the certainty is only
from the number of beasts vsd to the plough) and of other things. whence it
appears that the use of Tithing there is not consonant to the Canon Law. And
Theodor Zawake delivers it for a Law of this Country, that Decimae ex terris
vastatis accipi non debent, which I think is to be referd to a thirty years
liberty of non payment given especially by Bodantza Bishop of Cracow, to such
as were Tenants of Lands lately wasted by the Lituanians and Tartars which is
declared in the Law, remaining at large in the Collections of Herbort and
Prilusius. whither for more particulars I refer you.

In the Laws of Suethland and Gothland, the Text Ragwald. Ingemundi de Iure
Ecclesiastico, lib. 1. cap. 7.
is, Decimae separentur and reponantur in agro, quarum tertiam partem suscipiat
presbyter, and de reliquis duabus partibus capiat Ecclesia tertiam partem.
which I understand so, that the Parson is to have all saving a third part out
of the two parts, which were to be employed on maintenance of the Church.

In Scotland by a Law Statut. David 2 cap. ^2. n. 3.
of David the second about M.CCC.XL. it was constituted that no man should
hinder the Clergy in disposing Tithes: Sic quod suis Decimis possint pacifice
and cum integritate gaudere, sub paena Excommunicationis, quoad Clerum. and
December librarum penes Regem And Tithes there, have been (and in many Vide Parl.
22. Iac. 6. act. 9.
places are paid) Parochially, yet also granted, altered, and disposed of by
Vide Parl. 9. Jacob. 6. and 11. eiusd. cap. 29.
positive Law as in other Countries. in the late plantation of new Churches
ordaind by the last Parliament Parl. 22. Iac. 6. act 3.
there, manse and glebe and vitaile are assigned for maintenance to the
Rectors, but not Tithes. And after the Statut of Annexation in the eleventh
Parliament of our present Soueraign, whereby Church revenues (saving Parochial
Tithes, Manse and small glebe, and some other special possession) were resumed
to the Crown, an Act was made in the Parliament Parl. 12. Jacob. 6. cap. 1^9.
following against a kind of infeodations (which they call erections of
temporalties and teindes of Kirkland into temporal Lordships, saving such as
had been before erected. And for the particular course of setting out payment
of Tithes some special Laws of late time they have in Scotland, and in the
other States before spoken of* but they belong not so much hither, being not of
the essential part of the practice of payment nor of the received right of
Tithes. therefore I wholly omit them. One example of an Appropriation in
Scotland may be here not untimely added, which falls about the year M.CC.XC.
and shows a kind of arbitrarie disposition (even at that time) of Parochial
Tithes of lands lying there, in a conueyance of a lay man's made to the
Monastery of Giseburn in Yorkshire. The Grantor was that Robert de Bruis,
afterward King, and one of the Ancestors of our Soueraign. The Original thus
speaks. Seruatur autographum in Thesauro Cottoniano
Omnibus ad quos presens scriptum peruenerit Robertus filius Roberti de Brus
Dominus Vallis Anandiae salutem in Domino sempiternam Nouerit vniuersitas
vestra me concessisse and praesenti scripto confirmasse Deo and Ecclesiae
Sanctae Mariae de Giseburn and Canonicis ibidem Deo seruientibus and
seruituris, Ecclesiam de Anand cum terris, Decimis, and possessionibus ad eam
pertinentibus and Ecclesiam de Logmaban cum terris Decimis and possessionibus
ad eam pertinentibus, and Ecclesiam de Kirkpatric cum Capella de Logan and
omnibus suis pertinentijs and Ecclesiam de Rainpatric and Ecclesiam de
Cumbartres and Ecclesiam de Gre^enhowe cum omnibus pertinentijs earum; Tenendum
and Habendum Deo and praefatis Canonicis and eorum successoribus libere quiet
and honorifice, Ita quod liceat eis perpetuis temporibus de Decimis
praedictarum Villarum, libere disponere and ordinare pro voluntate sua, and
cuicunque voluerint eas ad firmam dimittere dare vel vendere, and alio
quocunque modo voluerint and vbicunque voluerint commodum suum facere sine
Impedimento mei and haeredum meorum and hominum nostrorum, etc. The seal, in
green wax, annexed to it, has impression of a Knight armd and mounted, as for
present onset in the wars, and is circumscribed with Esto Ferox vt Leo.

How the Laws of Ireland stand for Tithes, is best seen in the Statuts of that
Country of 28. Hen. 8. cap 17. of dissolutions, and 33. Hen. 8. cap. 12. of
payment according to ancient custom and recovery of Tithes, after the
dissolution, given into lay hands, in like manner as in England. And here may
be no unfit place to remember that ancient Law ordained by Rot. Pat. 14. Hen.
3. membr. 4.
Henry the third, within the Archbishoprique of Dublin, whereby it was
commanded that every man non expectato mandato Regis vel assensu, de gurgitibu^
and Piscarijs, Ecclesijs in quarum Parochijs sunt praedicti gurgites vel
piscariae, Decimas soluant. quia R. non vult in periculum animae suae,
huiusmodi Decimas detineant. We purposely omit particular mention of such of
the reformed Churches, as in this last age have brought their Ministry to
stipends, and alterd almost all the former practice of Ecclesiastique policy.
For the practice of payment, and other disposition of Tithes, and for the Laws,
and Opinions, touching the right of them, thus much. But whateuer this Kingdom
of England might have specially afforded, for Laws and practice of Tithing,
shall by it self, in its own singular order, be next delivered.

CAP. VIII. The Laws of England made in the Saxon mycel synodes or
itenagemotes, in Parliaments, and in the Counsels here held either National
or Provincial, or by the Pope, for the due payment or discharge of Tithes in
this Kingdom. Petitions or Bills in Parliament touching them, are inserted. all
in their course of time.
MOst of the English Laws, Constitutions, and Bills in Parliament, that are
reserud to this place and here collected, were originally written in Saxon,
Latin, or French. and the Saxon, for the most part, were anciently (but it
seems since the Norman conquest) turned into a barbarous latin that yet better
shows their meaning then a purer. Such as are found in Latin only I have
faithfully delivered according to the Copies that gave them. Neither durst I
suspect that any Reader fit for the matter should need an Interpreter. no
otherwise have I done in what is of the old French; it can hardly be any thing
but inexcusable sloth, that can trouble any Reader (that is fit also for the
matter) in the understanding it. But in regard the old Saxon is known at all to
few, and that hardly any better interpretation of the Laws written in that
language can be then the old barbarous Latin, I have joined always (where it
might be) both the Saxon and the Translation. To have left out the original,
had prevented some freedom of the Readers judgment, and tied it to the
translators. to have added no translation, had been as a purpose to have
troubled even the fittest Readers with a strange tongue; which also to have
otherwise interpreted, had been but to envy them the help of those Ancients
(that had better means to* know the interpretation of those Laws) and so make
them look only as through spectacles of mine new made. I was willing to give
all (as the course of the collection would permit) that herein might help to
make a ground of free judgment. yet also where I see cause of note I add it,
but refer all to able censure. The Laws and Constitutions thus succeed.

I.
An ancient Ms. in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
collection of diverse Canons written about the time of Henry the first, with
this inscription of equal age; Incipiunt excerptiones Domini E^gberri
Archiepiscopi Eburace Ciuitatis, de iure Sacerdotali, has these words, Vt
vnusquisque Sacerdos cunctos sibi pertinentes erudiat vt sciant qualiter
Decimas totius facultatis Ecclesijs diuinis debite offerant. and immediately
follows, Vt ipsi Sacerdotes a populis suscipiant Decimas; and nomina eorum,
quicunque dederint, scripta habeant, and secundum autoritatem Canonicam coram
testibus diuidant, and ad ornamentum Ecclesiae Vide supr. cap. 6.. 3.
primam eligant partem, scundam autem ad vsum pauperum atque peregrinorum per
eorum manus misericorditer cum omni humilitate dispensent; tertiam vero sibimet
ipsis Sacerdotes reseruent. If the credit of this be valued by the inscription,
then is it about DCCC.L. years old. For, that Ecbert liud Archbishop of York
from the year DCCXLIII. to DCC.LXVII. But the autorite of that Title must
undergo censure. Who ever made it, supposed, that Ecbert gathered that Law and
the rest ioind with it out of some former Church Constitutions, neither does
the name excerptiones denote otherwise. But in that collection some whole
Constitutions occur in the same syllbles as they are in the Capitularies of
Charles the Great, as that of vnicuique Ecclesiae Ansegis. lib. 1. cap. 91.
vnus mansque integer, etc. and some others which could not be known to Ecbert
that died in the last year of Pipin father to Charles. how came be then by
that? and how may we beleeu that Ecbert was the author of any part of those
Excerptions? unless you excuse it with that use of the middle times which often
inserted into one body and under one name Laws of different ages. but admit
that. yet what is secundum Canonicam autoritatem coram testibus diuidant? The
ancientest Canonica autoritas, for dividing Tithes before witnesses, is an old
Imperial, attributed in some Editions Edit. Viti Amerba^hij. cap. 7.
to the XI. year of the reign of Charles the great, being King of France, in
others Leg. Longobard. lib. 3. tit. 8.
, to the Emperor Lothar the first. But refer it to either of them, and it
will be diverse years later then Ecbert's death. And other mixed passages there
plainly show, that whose soever the Collection was, much of it was taken out of
the Imperial Capitularies, none of which were made in Ecbert's time. Perhaps,
the greatness of his name was the cause why some later Compiler of those
Excerptions might so inscribe it, to gain it authority. for he was both brother
to Edbert King of Northumberland, and the first also that, after Paulinus,
restored the name of Archbishoprique, and the Pall, to York. And the heads of
a Synod held in Ecbert's time, under King Ethelbald, and Cuthbert Archbishop of
Canterbury, are yet extant; but not any express mention is found in them of
Tithes, although most of the particulars of Church-gouernment are touched there.

II.
The Autors of the Centuries Conaur. 8. cap 9. page 583. edit. Basil. 1567.
have a Synod held in the year D.CC.LXXXVI. under two Legates sent from Pope
Hadrian the first with letters, for reformation and establishing of Church
Laws, to Offa King of Mercland, and Aelfwold King of Northumberland, and to the
two Archbishops. the particulars of the Synod are related in an Epistle to the
Pope from those Legates (which were the first that had so come from Rome hither
after Augustine) wherein it is related, that Gregory Bishop of Ostia, one of
the Legates, went into Northumberland, and Theophilact Bishop of Todi, the
other, to Offa, who with Kenulph King of West-Saxonie, called a Council for
the Southern patt, as Aelfwold for the Northern. Gregory says, That in the
Northern parts ad diem Concilij conuenerunt omnes Principes Regionis tam
Ecclesiastici quam seculares; and after many Institutions of Canon Laws there,
the XVII. Chapter is, de Decimis dandis sicut in Lege scriptum est: Decimam
partem ex omnibus frugibus tuis seu primitijs deferas in Domum Domini Dei tui
Rursum per Prophetam: Adferte, inquit, omnem Decimam in horreum meum vt sit
cibus in domo mea, and probate me super hoc, si non aperuero vobis cataractas
coeli and effudero benedictionem vsque ad abundantiam, and increpabo pro vobis
deuorantem qui comedit and corrumpit fructum terrae vestrae, and non erit vltra
vinea sterilis in agro dicit Dominus. sicut sapiens ait: Nemo iustam
Eleemosynam de his quae possidet facere valet, nisi prius separauerit Domino
quod a primordio ipse sibi reddere delegauit. Ac per hoc plerumque contigit vt
qui Decimam non tribuit ad Decimam reuertitur. Vnde etiam cum obtestatione
praecipimus, vt omnes studeant de omnibus quae possident Decimas dare; quia
speciale Domini Dei est; and de nouem partibus sibi viuat and Eleemosynas
tribuat. Et magis eas in abscondito facere suasimus quia scriptum est; cum
facis Eleemosynam, noli tuba canere ante te. The authority of this Canon, may
be known out of what is there further added. Haec Decreta, beatissime Papa
Hadriane, in Concilio publico coram Rege Aeelfwaldo and Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo
and omnibus Episcopis and Abbatibus Regionis seu Senatoribus Ducibus and populo
terrae proposuimus; and illi vt superius fati sumus cum omni deuotione mentis
iuxta possibilitatem virium suarm, adiuuante superna clementia, se in omnibus
custodire denouerunt, and signo Sanctae Crucis in vice vestra, in manu nostra
confirmauerunt, and postea stylo diligenti in Charta huius paginae exarauerunt
signum Sanctae Crucis infigentes. Then follow some subscriptions of Bishops, Et
His quoque saluberrimis admonitionibus, Presbyteri, Diaconi Ecclesiarum, and
Abbates Monasteriorum, Iudices, Optimates, and Nobiles vno opere, vno ore
consensimus and subscripsimus. After this so concluded in the Northern state,
the same Legate, together with Maluin and Pyttell, Ambassadors from Aelfwold,
take with them all those Decrees and Canons, and go to the Council held under
Offa for the Western parts, Vbi ( as the words are) gloriosus Rex Offa cum
Senatoribus terrae vna cum Archiepiscopo Iaenberchto (some call him Lambert)
Sanctae Ecclesiae Dorouernensis ( that is, of Canterbury) and caeteris
Episcopis Regionum conuenerat, and in conspectu Concilij clara voce singula
capita perlecta sunt, and tam Latin quam Teutonice ( that is, in
English-Saxon, which then was the selfsame with Dutch or Teutonique) quo
omnes intelligere possent, dilucide reserata sint: qui omnes consona voce and
alacri animo gratias referentes Apostolatus vestri admonitionibus ( the Legates
so write to the Pope) promiserunt se diuino adminiculante fauore iuxta
qualitatem viriu^ promitissima volu^tate in omnibus haec statuta custodire. And
Offa and his Bishops, Abbots, and some Princes subscribe with the Cross to it.
What Copy of this Synod the Centuriators had, or whence they took it, I find
not. But if it be of good authority, it is a most obseruable Law to this
purpose. being made with such solemnity by both Powers of both States, of
Mercland and Northumberland, which took up a very great part of England; and
it is likely, that it was made general to all England. In the relation of the
Legates to the Pope, mention is of Kenulph King of West-Saxonie, his joining
with Offa in calling the Council. but the confirmations of the Decrees have no
reference to him* But, by the way, if you examine it by story and
Synchronisme, Kenulph perhaps could not have at all to do with it. For some of
our old Monks expressly affirm, That in the second year Henric. Huntingdon,
lib. 4. page 197. and Reg. de Houed. p. 235. edit. Lo^din. sed vide etia^ Rog.
de Hou^den, sub ann. 786. and Acthelwerd lib. 2. cap. 20. and Flor. Wigorn* sub
ann. 785.
of Brithric, next successor after Kenulphs death, Pope Adrian sent his Legates
in Britanniam ad renouandam fidem quam praedicauerat Augustinus. And that they
then held their Synod at a place called Cealchithe. how could Kenulph be there
then, as the Legates relate? Believe the Monks as you will. but indeed, an
exactness here is not easy extracted out of the disturbed times of our
Chronicles. They talk also of a Synod held in Wicanhale for the North parts, a
year or two after. Doubtless they intend this same that is extant in the
Centuries; if at least it be of sufficient credit. Neither can it be suspected
by any circumstance in the subscriptions; which being so many, might have by
chance soon got among them a character of falsehood, had it not been genuine.
In the printed Houeden, Gregory, one of the Legates, is called Georgeus,
perhaps for Gregorius. but my Ms. has also Georgius. But if Henry of
Huntingdon and Roger of Houeden give us the time right of the Legates coming
hither, then is that mention of Kenulph, in their supposed Epistle to the Pope,
a plain character of falsehood, or ignorance, in some transcriber; who also,
in one place, has Oswaldus for Aelfwaldus King of Northumberland. But those
which speak of that Synod of these Legates, seem to suppose it extending
through the whole Kingdom. See also. VIII.

III.
In the Vide Fad. Edouard. and Guth^uni edit Lambard. cap. 6.
Laws made between K. Alfred and Guthrun the Dane (to whom the Provinces of
East-Anglia and Northumberland were given to hold of the Crown) and renewd also
between the same Guthrun and K. Edward, son to Alfred, about the year D.CCCC.
this occurres, Gif ha Teothunge forheold, gylde lashlite mid Denum, ite mid
Englum, that is, as the old Latin Translation has it, Si quis Decimam
contrateneat, reddat Lashlite cum Dacis, Witam cum Anglis. Lashlite denotes the
Danish common forfeiture, which, as it is thought, was in most offenses XII.
Ores (that was commonly XX. shillings, for XX. pence made an Ore commonly; and
sometime, according to the variation of the Standerd, Vide Regist. Burton. apud
Camden. in Belg. page 186. edit. Lat.
XVI. pence was an Ore. But in Oxfordshire specially, and Glocestershire in
Domes-day, XX. go to an Ore) as the English common forfeiture, or the Wite,
was XXX. shillings. The occurrence of these two names, is frequent in the Saxon
Laws; and it may seem by this, that some other Law preceded for the payment of
Tithes, or else that the right of them was otherwise supposed clear. For the
authority of this and the rest comprehended in those of Alfred and Guthrun,
observe that in their title; and tha itan eac the syththan aeron, often and
Unseldan that sealf ge^^odon and mid good gehyhton, that is, and the Wisemen
(or the Baronage) of succeeding times very often renewed that Council of
theirs, and in bonum adduxerunt, as in the old Translation those last words are
turned.

IIII.
It is reported of King Aethelulph, that in the year D.CCC.LV. Decumauit (as
Ethelward writes) de omni possessione sua in partem Domini and in vniuerso
regimine sui principatus sic constituit. The words of his Charter, whereby he
did it, are, Cum Concilio Episcoporum ac Principum meorum Consilium salubre
atque uniform remedium (he means remedy against those miseries which the
English had endured by Danish irruptions) affirmantes consensimus, vt aliquam
portionem terrarum haereditariam antea possidentibus omnibus gradibus sieve
famulis and famulabus Dei Deo seruientibus, sieve Laicis miseris semper Decimam
^. hydam, s^u s^^^liam.
mansionem vbi minimum sit, tum Decimam partem omnium bonorum in libertatem
perpetuam donari Sanctae Ecclesiae dijudicaui, vt sit tuta and munita ab
omnibus saecularibus seruitutibus etc. So is it reported in the Abbot of
Crowlands History, and varies not much in William of Malmesburie, and Nicholas
Ms. in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
of Gloucester, who both have it also at large. But in Matthew of Westminster, no
other Decima is mentioned in it, then Decima terrae Meae. Out of the corrupted
Language, it is hard to collect what the exact meaning of it was. How most of
the Ancients understand it, is best known by the words wherein they sum it.
Ingulphus thus of it; Omnium Praelatorum ac Principum suorum qui sub ipso,
varijs Prouincijs totius Angliae praeerant, gratuito consensu tunc primo cum
Decimis omnium terrarum ac bonorum aliorum sieve catallorum vniuersam dotauit
Ecclesiam Anglicanam per suum Regium Chirographum. And he tells us further,
that Aethelulph, in the presence of his Baronage, at Winchester, offered the
Charter upon the Altar, and the Bishops received it, and sent it to be
published in every Parish Church through their Diocesos. In Florence of
Worcester it is in these words abbreuiated. Aethelulphus Rex Decimam totius
Regni sui partem ab omni Regali seruitio and tributo liberauit, and in
sempiterno grophio in Cruce Christi pro redemptione animae suae and
antecessorum suorum vni and trino Deo immolauit. So also Roger of Houeden. An
old French fragment of the Ms. ad calcem Nich. Glocest. in Bibl. Cotton.
English History says, that he dismast la dime hide de tute Westsaxe, and
that it was pur pesire and vestre les pouures. The old Archdeacon of Huntingdon
thus; Totam terram suam ad opus Ecclesiarum decumauit propter amorem Dei and
redemptionem sui. And in the rythmes of In Bibl. Cotton. and apud V. C. Tho.
Alien. Oxon.
Robert of Gloucester. The King to holy Church thereafter ever the more drough,
And tithed well all his land, as he ought, well enough
If we well consider the words of the chiefest of these Ancients, that is,
Ingulphus, we may conjecture that the purpose of the Charter was to make a
general grant of Tithes payable freely and discharged from all kind of
exactions used in that time, according as the Monk of Malmesburie, and Ms. in
Biblioth. Cottoniana.
John Pike in his supplement of the History of England, express it. Decimam,
say they, omnium hydarum infra regnum suum a tributis and exactionibus regijs
liberam Deo donauit. that is, granted the Tithe of the profits of all Lands,
free from all exactions. for, the granting of the tenth part of the Hides or
Plough-lands, denotes the tenth of all profits growing in them, as well as
Decima acra sicut aratrum peragrabit, which is used for tithing of the profits,
in the Laws of K. Edgar, Ethelred, and Knout, and accordingly also is this, of
Ethelulph, related in the Saxon Msss. in Bibl. Cottoniana.
Chronicles of Peterborough, Canterbury, and Abingdon. he did tithe his lands
ofer all his rice good to lofe etc. as the words are. that is, his Lands over
all his Kingdom etc. and doubtless Ingulphus no otherwise understood it then
of perpetual right of Tithes given to the Church, where he remembers it by
tunc primo cum Decimis etc. So that the tithe of prediall or mixed profits was
given, it seems, perpetually by the King with consent of his States both
Secular and Ecclesiastique, and the tithe of every man's personal possessions
were at that time also expressly included in the gift, because (it seems) before
that, the payment of all Tithes had commonly been omitted. The ancientest of
Writers that has the Charter whole is that Ingulphus: but questionless it is
much corrupted especially in that of portionem terrarum hereditariam antea
possidentibus omnibus gradibus. for what may that signify? But in Matthew of
Westminster it is farthest from deprauation of language; where, after
portionem, follows terrae meae Deo and Beatae Mariae and omnibus Sanctis iure
perpetuo possidendam concedam; Decimam scilicet partem terrae meae vt sit tuta
etc. the privilege or liberty annexed to it is, that it should not be only free
from all taxes and exactions used then in the State, but also from that Vide,
si placet, Tit. Honor. part. 2. page 301.
trinoda necessitas (whereto all Lands whatsoever, were subject although
otherwise of most free tenure) by which they meant their expeditio or military
service, pontis extructio, and arcis munitio. this freedom of that time you
must it seems so interpret, that every man was from henceforth to be valued in
all Subsidies and Taxes according only to his nine parts of his Lands and
profits; and the profits of the tenth being due to the Church, were both in his
and their hands hereby discharged from all paiments and taxes whatsoever. But
should it be understood only for a particular consecration to the Church of one
time, and of the Land Sic intell^git, ni fallor, Foxus Hist. Eccles. Angl. page
123.
it self to be possessed by the Clergy or employed to other good uses of
charity, then had it no more due place here among the Laws of Tithes, then the
story Camden. In Belgis, ^ol. 173.
of Robert Earl of Gloucester his giving every tenth stone (of his provision
for the building of a Towr near to Bristow) to the erecting of a Chapel, or
Edward Idem, page 308. in Irinobantibus.
the Confessor his building Westminster Abbey with the tenth of one years
revenue, or Polydor. Virgil. Hist. Angl. lib. 4.
Offa's giving the Tithe of his estate to the Clergy and the Poor, or the
like. But I conceive it as is before declared. It is fit to add here also
another of Ethelulphs grants or Constitutions by the Parlamentarie consent of
that time, made to like purpose; and that at large, because it is not in any
published author. In the Mss. in Bibl. Cotton.
Chartularies of the Abbey of Abingdon it occurres in the one, with the title
of Priuilegium Aethelwlfi Regis, in the other with Quomodo Adelwlfus Rex dedit
Decimam partem regni sui Ecclesijs. then follows the Charter or Constitution.
Ego Aethelulf gratia Dei Occidentalium Saxonum Rex in sancta ac celeberrima
Paschali solennitate, pro meae remedio animae and regni posteritate and populi
ab omnipotenti Deo mihi collati consilium salubre cum Episcopis, Comitibus, and
cunctis Optimatibus m^is perfeci vt Decimam partem terrarum per regnum nostrum
non solum Ecclesijs darem, verum etiam and Ministris nostris in eadem
constitutis in perpetuam libertatem habere concessimus, ita vt talis donatio
fixa incommut abilisque permaneat ab omni regali seruitio and omnium secularium
seruitute absoluta. Placuit autem Aelhstano Episcopo Scirburnensis ecclesiae
and Swithuno Wentanae Ecclesiae Episcopo, and Ducibus communiter. Hoc autem
fecimus in honorem Domini nostri Ihesu Christi and beatae semper Virginis
Mariae and omnium Sanctorum and Paschalis festi reuerentiam, vt Deus omnipotens
nobis and nostris posteris propitiari dignetur. Scripta est autem hac Cartula
anno ab incarnatione Domini nostri Ihesu Christi DCCC.LIVE. indictione II. die
Paschali, in Palatio nostro qui dicitur Wiltun. Qui autem augere voluerit
nostram Donationem augeat omnipotens Deus dies eius prosperos. si quis vero
minuere vel mutare praesumpserit, noscat se ante tribunal Christi redditurum
rationem nisi prius satisfactione emendauerit. Ego Aethelwlf Rex. Ego Aelhstan
Episcopus. Ego Swithun Episcopus. Ego Wlflaf Abbas. Ego Werferd Abbas. Ego
Ethered and ego Alfred filij Regis consensimus. the ancientest hand wherein
this is written in the Chartularies, is of about Henry the second his time. and
for the credit of it, you must rely upon those Chartularies. It differs in
date both of place and time from the other. this is dated at Wilton, that at
Winchester. this in DCCC.LIVE. the second Indiction at Easter. that DCCC.LV. and
in some, the fourth Indiction, and in others, the third in November. such a
difference of Indictions may well be, if the Autors that deliver it, added that
note for the time that they conceiud it to be made in, not for the very
Characters of the Date of the Original instrument. for, November falling in
the fourth Indiction Imperial, may be of the third Indiction Pontificial. the
one beginning in September, the other in December following. that difference is
in the relations of it between Florelegus and the Abbot of Crowland. and the
Abbot perhaps reckond by the Pontificiall Indictions, and the other Monk by the
Imperial. if at least their Copies be not corrupted. But whereas in Malmesbury
the date of that first Charter is DCCC.XLIV. Indict. IV.V. Nonas Nouembris.
plainly it is false, neither could that Indiction be in the Character of the
year DCCC.XLIV. which fell in the seventh Indiction.

V.
In a Volume Ms. in Biblioth. Cottoniana cap. 65. and variis causit.
that belonged to the Abbey of S. Augustines in Canterbury, titled Statuta
Synodorum, written in a hand of about DCCCC. years after Christ, or somewhat
more, one Paragraph is de Decimis. But the Mosaicall commandment (for few of
the Judicials of Moses are wanting in it) and a passage in S. Augustine are the
only autorities brought for them. No Council or positive Canon is mentioned in
it to that purpose; although for other things, Synodus Romana, Synodus
Auraicensis, Narbonensis, and very often Synodus Hybernensis oecur in it. The
Autors used, by him that compiled it, are S. Augustine, S. Hierom, S. Gregory,
and Isidore, (which were in those middle times the Quod elitera fa. e^t ex
Leonis Epist. in Did. 20. cap. 1.
chief, almost the only Fathers of the Church that were read) and sometimes
Gildas and S. Patrike. whence it may seem that it was collected by some Briton
or Irishman. and certain Canons of that Abbot Adomann spoken of by Eccles.
Hist. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
Bid, are annexed to it. Neither did the Author of it doubt but that he had all
the Counsels of credit that preceded him, as his own testimony in his Preface
iustifies. there, after a short relation of the IV. most known and generally
received, of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, he adds: Hae
sunt quatuor Synodi principales fidei Doctrinam plenissime praedicantes. sed
and si qua sunt Concilia quae sancti Patres spiritu and diuino pleni sanxerunt
post istarum quatuor autoritatem, omni manent stabilia vigore, quorum gesta in
hoc opere condita tenentur. But to the same Volume is ioind another Collection,
with this inscription; Incipiunt Pauca Iudicia quae desunt de supradictis, in
which the old Canons of Rome (that is, the Codex Romanae Ecclesiae, or some
other in the nature of it, which was receiud into these Northern parts, as a
Director of the Church, in the eldest times of Christianity here, as you may
see in our Protuli eundem librum Canonem, ait Theodorus Cant. Arch. in Council.
circa ann. 670. apud Hertford celebrato. Bed. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 5.
ancientest Church-storie) is cited, and diverse autorities out of those Fathers
and a few of the elder Counsels. But, no denominated Pontificiall or Synodall
is rememberd there for Tithes. Only the Texts of Moses for Tithes, first
Fruits, the first Born, and such more are numberd together; and then follows a
Chapter de Diuisione Decimarum, with this declaration: Lex dicit; ipsi
Sacerdotes populi suscipiant decimas, and nomina eorum, quicquid dederint,
scripta habeant and secundum autoritatem Canonicam etc. in the self same words
as are before attributed to the Excerptions of Ecbert. The exact age of those
Statuta Synodorum, appears not. But they were collected about K. Athelstans
time. at least, then was the Copy that remains of them written, as may be
coniecturd alone (if other reasons failed) from the similitude twixt the
Character found in them and that of the Text of the holy Evangelists, which
King Athelstan caused to be fairly written, and consecrated to S. Cutbert. That
text with those Statuta are both yet preserved from the injury of time, among
those inestimable moniments of that noble Knight Sr Robert Cotton. For those
Pauca iudicia that follow; they are of a later hand then the Statuta; but of
what time, it sufficiently appears not. That Lex dicit in them may be referd to
the Canon Sup.. 1.
related out of the Excerptions of Ecbert. but whence that Canon is originally,
I have not yet learned.

VI.
King Athelstan Leg. Aethelst. edit. a Lambardo.
about the year DCCCCXXX. by advise and consent of the Bishops of the Land,
made a general Law for prediall and mixed Tithes, in these words. Ic
AEthelstane cyning mid getheahte ulfhelmes mines hihbisceipes. and othra minra
bisceopa bebeode eallum minum gereafum thuph ealle mine rice (on thaes
drihtaenes nama. and ealra halgena, and for mine lufu) that hi aerost mines
agenes tham teothe gesyllath. ge thaes libbendes ryfes. ge thaes gearlice
estmes; In Ms Cottoniano inseruntur illic haec verba: sa man rightast maege.
oththe gemetan, oththe gestellan, oththe aegan. i. in the iustest way that may
be; either by measure, number or weight.
and that ilce gedo eac tha bisceopas heora gehilcra. and eac mine ealdormanna.
and gereafa; and ic ille that mine bisceopes and gereafa thaes demath eallum
the hio gehyrsumian gebyrath. and that ilce to tham tide fulfremath the e hio
settath. and thaes sie to thaem daeg thaer beheafdunges Seint Johannes thaes
fulhteres; which is anciently thus turned In Historia Iornallensi Ms. in Bibl.
Cotton.
into Latin. Ego Athelstanus Rex Consilio Wulfhelmes Archiepiscopi mei and
aliorum Episcoporum meorum mando praepositis meis omnibus in toto regno meo,
and praecipio (in nomine Domini and Sanctorum omnium and super amicitiam meam)
vt inprimis de meo proprio reddant Deo Decimas tam in viuente captali quam
mortuis frugibus terrae. and Episcopi mei similiter faciant de suo proprio and
Aldermanni mei, and Praepositi mei. Et volo vt Episcopi and Praepositi mei, hoc
iudicent omnibus qui eis parere debent, and hoc ad terminum expleant quem eis
ponimus, i. decollatio S. Iohannis Baptistae. and the example of Jacob, with a
Text or two out of holy Writ and S. Augustine, is added to move devotion. That
translation agrees wholly enough with the Saxon, saving in those words mortuis
frugibus; the Saxon being yearly fruits, which also another Vet. Leg. ibid. Ms.
Copy of this translation expresses by ornotinis frugibus, corrupted plainly
from hornotinis frugibus, i. the fruits of one and the last year, or the yearly
increase. and perhaps some ignorant Monk finding ornotinis, and not
understanding it, because he would be sure to square it to his own ability of
learning, made it mortuis. which kind of changing has examples enough in bold
but ignorant Criticisme. that which the old Translator calls viuens captale,
is, libbendes yrfes i. living cattle, in the Saxon; which has often Ina Leg.
cap. 37.40. and 42.
ceap also for chattels, and sometimes specially for living cattle, but the old
In dicta historia Iornallens. Ms.
Latin of the Saxon Laws turns ceap also into captale, whence cattalla is like
enough to have descended. and the first stock of Cattle which by King Ina's
Cap. 38.
Laws was to be given to Orphans, was called frumstole in Saxon, but primum
captale in the old translations. In Brampton's Dict. Hist. Iornall^nsi.
History (which is full of the Laws of the Saxon times) after those
constitutions of Grateley, part of which are in Lambard's (...), follows a
thankful acknowledgment to K. Athelstan for this Law of Tithes, in these
words. Karissime; Episcopi tui de Kent and omnis Kentsirae, Thayni, Comites and
villani tibi Domino dulcissimo suo gratias agunt, quod nobis de pace nostra
praecipere volusti, and de commodo Nostro perquirere and consulere; quia magnum
opus est inde nobis diuitibus and egenis. Et hoc incepimus, quanta diligentia
potuimus, consilio horum sapientum quos ad nos misisti. Vnde, Karissime Domine,
primum est de nostra Decima, ad quam valde cupidi sumus and voluntarij and tibi
supplices gratias agimus admonitionis tuae.

VII.
About D.CCCC.XL. Edmund King of England in a Micelne Synod, that is, a great
Synod, or Council, a kind of Parliament, both of Lay and Spiritual men (which
are expressed by godcundra and orldcundra) held in Londan, made this Leg. Edmund.
apud Lambard. cap. 2.
Act. Teothungum e bebeodath aelcum Cristenum men be his Cristendome. and
cyricsceat, and aelmesfeoh; Gif hit ha don nylle. ry he amansumod. Which is
anciently In Dict Hist. Iornallinsi.
turned; Decimam praecipimus omni Christiano super Christianitatem suam dare;
and emendent Cyrycsceatum i. Ecclesiae censum, and aelmesfeoh i. Eleemosynae
pecuniam. si quis hoc dare noluerit, excommunicatus sit. And all agrees with
the Saxon, saving only, that nothing answers to the word emendent. That
Cyrycsceat is a Church-rent of Corn, or the first fruits of Corn yearly in
those times, and regularly payable at S. Martins day to the Church Videsis Ina
leg. cap. 4. and 62. and apud Malmesbur. lib 2. c 11. Cnutonis R. Epist. ad
Anglos. and Lambard. in explic. verb. in Primitiae. and Canuti leg. c. 10. and
Edgari leg. cap. 2. and 3.
; and is sometimes written Curcscet; sometimes otherwise. And in an old Ms.
Exposition of Law-terms, occurres, Cherchesonde, vne mesure de Ble que checun
homme soleit enuoier a Seint Esglise en temps de Bretons. Plainly, Church-Corn
is understood; and Cyrksceat, that is, Church-rent is the original whence
Cherche sonde is there corrupted. And among Articles Annal. Monast. Burtonens.
Ms. apud V.C. Thom. Allen. Oxoniens.
inquirable by every Escheator in 44. Hen. 3. about the Profits, Estate, Tenue,
and Issues of the Kings Tenants, one is of Cherchescot tam in blado quam in
Gallinis, and in alijs exitibus. It is Circset often in the book of Domesday.
Where it is found belonging sometimes to Abbeys, sometime to Parish Churches,
sometimes to others. It was still as first fruits. And this old testimony is
for the antiquity and continuance also of payment of it here. Churchesset
^leta Ms. lib. 2. cap. 47.
certam mensuram bladi tritici significat quam quilibet olim sanctae Ecclesiae
die sanctae Martini tempore tam Britonum quam Angloram Supple seluebant.
: Plures tamen Magnates post Normannorum aduentum in Angliam illam
contributionem, secundum veterem Legem Moysi, nomine primitiarum dabant, prout
in breui Regis Knuti ad summum Pontificem transmisso continetur, in ^. quo.
quibus illam contributionem appellat Chirchsed, quia semen Ecclesiae. But what
the Author means by that Letter or Brief of King Knout, sent to the Pope, I as
little know, as why he cites that for authority to prove what the Baronage did
after the Normans. Indeed, an Epistle is Apud G. Mal. mesbur. lib. 2. c. 11.
extant, which Knout sent into England (by Living Abbot of Tauis^ok) as he was
taking his journey homewards from the Pope. and therein, mention is of this
Curc scet. of any other I am yet ignorant. That Aelmesfeoh, or Almes-money, was
the Peeter-pence, due yearly at the first of August, by institution, as some
will, of King Ina, as others, of King Aethelulph. And they were called also
Romefeoh, Romescot, Heorthpening.

VIII.
Of the same time, some Constitutions are extant, Ms. compact. In Vol. quod
Codex Eccles. Landau. diettur in Bibl. Cotton.
made by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury (yet not, for aught appears by them, in
a Synod) with this Preface, Ego Oda humilis and extremus diuina largiente
clementia, almi Praesulis and Pallij honor ditatus, quaedam documenta omni
Christicola non indigna, quae a praecedentibus illustrium virorum Praeceptis
certissima comperi, ad consolationem Domini mei Regis scilicet Aetmundi
omnisque populi excellenti Imperio eius subiecti, in ista cartula, coadunare
decreui. Vnde deuotissime obsecro and clementissime hortor audientum mentes vt
si quando haec recitanda audiant interius videlicet and in cord, frequenti
meditatione plantent, and multiplici bonae operationis munere ex eo fructum
pacatissimum in tempore messis sibi colligant. Primo capitulo praecipimus and
mandamus vt Sancta Dei Ecclesia etc. And so goes on with some particulars which
belong to Church Discipline; the X. and last Chapter being only for Tithes in
these words. X. Capitulo mandamus and fideliter obsecramus de Decimis dandis
sicut in Lege scriptum est. Decimam partem ex omnibus frugibus tuis seu
primitijs deferas in domum Dominij Dei tui. Rursum Propheta, Afferte, Malach. 3.
inquit, omnem Decimam in horreum meum, vt sit cibus in domo mea and probate me
super hoc si non aperuero vobis cataractas coeli and effudero benedictionem
vsque ad abundantiam and increpabo pro vobis qui comedit and corrumpit fructum
terrae vesirae. and non erit vltra vinea sterilis. Vnde and cum obtestatione
praecipimus vt omnes studeant de omnibus quae possident dare Decimas; quia
speciale Domini Dei est; and de nouem partibus sibi viuant and Eleemosynas
tribuant. Where note, the syllables are of that which in the Centuries is
referd to an English Council of D.CC.LXXXVI. before in. II. For this of Odo,
although no express Occurrence denote, that it was in a Council, yet you may
much incline to believe it was in one, if you compare it with De gest. Pontis.
lib. 1. fol. 114. a.
what you find in the Monk of Malmesburie of him.

IX.
King Edgar about the year D.CCCC.LXX mid his itena getheahte, that is, with
the advice and counsel of his Wisemen, or Baronage, ordained, That the Church
should enjoy all her Liberties, and Leg. Edgari cap. 1.2 and 3. apud Lamb.
man agyfe ylce aelc teothunge to thaem ealdan mynstre the seo hyrnesse to
hyrthe; and si thonne sa geleast. aegther of thaegnes inland. ge of neatland.
sa his sulh gega;

2. Gif ha thonne degna sy. the on his boclande eyrican haebbe the legerstoe on
sy. gesylle he thonne thritdan dael his agenre teothunge into his cyrican;

3. Gif ha cyrican haebbe the laeerstoe on ne sy. thonne do h of thaem nygan
daelum his reost that that he ille;

4. And sy aelcre geoguthe teothunge gelaest be Pentecosten; and thaera eorth
aestma be Em^ihte;

5. Gif ha thonne tha teothunge geleastan nelle sa e ge-caeden habbath. fare
thaes Cyningesgerefa to. and thaes Bisceopes. and thaes mynstres maessepreost.
and niman unthances the one teothen dael to thaem minstre th hit to gebyrrige.
and taecan him to thaem nigothon dael; and to daele mon tha eahta daelas on
ttha. and fo se Land hlaford in Ms.
hlaford to healfan. to healfan se bisceop. sy hit cyninges man. sy hit
thegenes;

that is, in the old Apud Brampton in Hist. Iornall. fol. 54. in Biblioth.
Cottoniana.
Latin Copies: 1. Et Reddatur omnis Decimatio ad Matrem Ecclesiam cui Parochia
adiacet, de terra i. Baronum seu liber^ tenentium.
Thainorum and Villanorum, sicut Vide infra. IX. and X.
aratrum peragrabit.

2. Si quis Thainorum sit qui in feodo suo Ecclesiam habeat vbi caemiterium
sit, det ei tertiam partem Decimae suae.

3. Si non sit tibi atrium (but the Saxon has here the same word as before for
caemiterium, that is, laegerstoe) det, ex suis nouem partibus, Presbytero, quod
vult.

4. Et omnis Decimatio Iuuentutis reddita sit ad Pentecosten; and Terraefrugum,
ad Aequinoctium.

5. Si quis Decimam dare sicut diximus noluerit, adeat Praepositus Regis and
Episcopi and Sacerdos illius Ecclesiae, and reddant Ecclesiae cui pertinebit
Decimam suam; and Nonam partem dimittant ei qui Decimam suam detinuit, and octo
parts in duo diuidantur dimidium Domino, dimidium Episcopo; Sit homo Regis,
sit homo Thaini.

This Latin agrees well enough with the Saxon; although in this last. si quis,
for Episcopi Vide. XII. and XVII.
Sacerdos, Lambard has and Episcopus and Sacerdos illius Ecclesiae etc. But
whereas the Translator uses the word Ecclesia only for Church; in the Saxon,
that which he calls Matrem Ecclesiam, is denoted by ealdan mynstre, and that
Ecclesia, in. 2. si quis Thainorum, by Cyrican; whence, our word Kirk, or
Church, is framed. For the difference of Church and Minister here, somewhat
where anon we speak of Parishes of that time.

X.
A Council or a kind of Parliament held under King Ethelred, by the advice of
his two Archbishops, Elfpheg and Wulfstan, (about the year M.X.) is yet extant,
wherein Laws are for Tithes. But because it remains only a Manuscript of about
the time of the Norman Conquest, the Preface of it shall be here first noted,
that thence the authority of it may be the better understood. It is inscribed
with Ms. in Biblioth. Cottoniana. in (...) quo Ordo Corona^^^ is qui (...)
Saxonico in vsu erat* narratur.
Incipiunt Synodalia Decreta. then begins with; Quodam tempore contigit vt
Regis Aethelredi edicto concrepante, Archipraesulumque Alfeagi and Wulfstani
hortatu instigante, vniuersi Anglorum Optimates die Sancto Pentecostes ad locum
ab indigenis Eanham nominatum acciti sunt conuenire. Collecto itaque ibidem
Christicolarum coetu venerabilium quamplurimorum de Catholicae cultu Religionis
recuperando, deque etiam rei statu publicae reparando vel consulendo plura and
non pauca vtpote diuinitus inspirati ratiocinando sermocinabantur. Then follows
some Constitutions about Monks, Abbots, Canons, and other of the Clergy. After
which, the Council goes on with, Post haec igitur Archipontifices praedicti
Conuocata plebis multitudine collectae, Regis Edicto suprascriptae omniumque
consensu Catholicorum omnibus communiter praedicabant vnum Deum colendum esse
debere, Patrem videlicet etc. And diverse Canons succeed; and among them
occurres, Nec Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae Decimis vel alijs possessionibus
priuentur ita vt nouis Oratorijs tribuantur; which very words are found in an
elder Council of Mentz, and in the Imperial Capitularies. Then immediately
follows, Decimationes Frugum and Vitulorum and Agnorum, necnon and Aratrales
Eleemosynae, Ecclesiasticaque munera Domino per singulos annos temporibus
rependantur congruis. Eleemosynae videlicet Aratrales quindecim diebus post
Pascha peractis; Vituli quoque and Agniculi Decimales erga Pentecosten, Frugum
vero terrae Decimationes circa omnium festiuitatem Sanctorum Ecclesijs
persoluantur opportunis. To it, is ioind the most part of it Exemplar item
Saxonicum reperitur in Codice vetust^ts Legum Sax. in ^aep^us laudata
Bibliotheca.
in Saxon. but that Preface is wholly therein wanting. neither does any thing
in the Saxon answer to that, Nec Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae etc. But
those Tithes are there reckond among gods gerightas, that is, things due unto
God. and the Saxon text for them is; geogothe teothunge be Pentecosten. and
eorth aestma be ealra halgenamaessan, that is, the Tithe of young cattle is to
be paid at Whitsontide, and of fruits of the earth at Alhollows. and according
to this, in an old Saxon Ms. inter Leg. Saxonicum Bibl. Cottoniana.
collection of Christian duty, AElc man, (says the Author) teothunga gelaeste
mid rihte, that is, Let every man pay his Tithes justly. Those Aratrales
Eleemosynae were called sulh aelmessan, that is, Plough-almes; which was a penny
to be paid of every plough-land. and the Ecclesiastica munera were only the
first fruits of Corn paid at S. Martins day; whereof before. VIII.

XI.
In some Laws of K. Ethelred remaining in Abbot Brampton his History, we read.
Histor. Iornallens. ibid. fol. 65.
Omnis Thainus Decimet quicquid habet. and Praecipimus vt omnis homo super
dilectionem Dei and omnium Sanctorum det Cyricsceatum and rectam Decimam suam
sicut in diebus antecessorum nostrorum fecit quando melius fecit, hoc est,
sicut aratrum peragrabit, decimam acram, and omnis consuetudo reddatur super
amicitiam Dei ad matrem nostram Ecclesiam cui adiacet, and nemo auferat Deo
quod ad Deum pertinet, and praedecessores nostri concesserunt. The inscription
of those Laws among which these are found, is, Haec instituerunt Ethelredus
and Sapientes eius apud Habam. By this, and that of Edgar before cited, it
appears that the Tithe of every tenth acre according to the order of tithing
the whole Farm, was to be paid to the Church. which also is made more plain in
the next Law of King Knout.

XII.
Gelaeste man (are the ords of Leg. Canuti, cap. 8.
one of K. Knouts Las made about M.XX.) gods gerihta aeghilc gear rightlice
georne; thaet is sulhaelmesse fiftene niht ofer Eastran. and gegothe teothunge
be Pentecosten. and eorth aestma be ealra halgena maessan; and gif ha thonne
tha teothunge gelaestan naelle. sa e gecedan habbath. that is se teotha aecer.
eal sa se sulh hit gegath. thonne fare to aes Cyninges gerefa. and thas
biscopas, and thaes land rican, and thaes minstres maessespreost. and niman
unthances thonne teothan dael to tham minstre he hit to gebyrige. and teacum
him to tham nigothum dael; and to daele man tha eahta daelas on ta. and fo se
landhlaford to healfum, and to healfum se bisceop; sy hit Cyninges man. sy hit
thegener; this is In historia Iornallensi fol. 71. b. M^ Bibl Cotton. sed
optimum harum legum exexemplar. extat in Bibliotheca. Sereniss. Principis
Magnae Brit. ad D. Iacobi.
anciently thus turned; Reddantur Deo Debitae rectitudines annis singulis, hoc
est Eleemosyna carucarum, XV. diebus post Pascha, Decimae de nouellis gregibus
in Pentecosten, terfenorum fructuum in festo omnium Sanctorum. Si quis hanc
Decimam dare nolit sicut omnium nostrum commune est institutum, hoc est Decimam
acram sicut aratrum peragrabit, eat praepositus Regis and Episcopi and Domini
ipsius tetrae cum Sacerdote and ingratis auferant and Ecclesiae cui pertinebit
reddant. Nonam vero partem relinquant ei qui Decimam dare noluit. Octauas
parts reliquas in duo diuidant and sit vna medietas Episcopi, alia terrae
Domini, sieve sit homo Regis sieve Thaini. with this Latin, the Saxon agrees. and
it is almost but a repetition of King Edgars Law for Tithes. and those two
Paragraphs in King Edgars, the one touching a conueyance of a third part of the
tithes to a Church that had right of Sepulture, the other concerning a Church
that wanted that right, are also repeated (as many other Laws of the former
ages) in those of King Knouts; which are called Lege In Biblioth. d.
S^renissimi Principis.
Anglicae generally in the ancientest Latin Copies that I have seen.

XIII.
The Copy of the Laws of Edward the Confessor, that bears this title; Leges
boni Regis Edwardi quas Guilielmus Bastardus postea confirmauit, has this Leg.
Edward. Con^^ss. cap 8. and in Reg. de Honed^n. Annal. 2 pa. 343. b
for Tithes: De omni annona, Decima garba Deo debita est and ideo reddenda. Et
si quis gregem equarum habuerit, pullum reddat Decimum. Qui vnam vel duas
habuerit, de singulis pullis singulos denarios. Similiter qui vaccas plures,
habuerit, Decimum vitulum. Qui vnam vel duas, de vitulis singulis obolos
singulos. Et qui caseum fecerit, det Deo Decimum. si vero non fecerit lac
decima die. similiter agnum Decimum, vellus Decimum, caseum Decimum, butyrum
Decimum, porcellum Decimum. De Apibus vero similiter Decima commodi. Quin and
de bosco, de prato and aquis and molendinis, parcis, viuarijs, piscarijs,
virgultis and hortis, and negotiationibus and omnibus rebus quas dederit
Dominus. Decima pars ei reddenda est, qui nouem parts simul cum Decima
largitur. Qui eam detinuerit per Iustitiam Episcopi and Regis (si necesse
fuerit) ad redditionem Forte adigatur.
arguatur. Haec enim praedicauit B. Augustinus, and concessa sunt a Rege
Baronibus and populo. But howeuer those Laws are attributed to the Confessor;
it is certain that as the Ordinary Copies of them are, and as they speak in
the published Volume of Saxon Laws, they are not without many mixtures of
somewhat later transcribers.

XIV.
In a Synod, Recens Ms. apud V. C. Rob. Cotton.
written in Saxon, and held about the Conquest, diverse Laws preceding, about the
punishment of crimes by fasting VI.VII.X. years together with bread and water,
a persuasion follows for Alms etc. in it we read teothge on gods gods est
eal that he age. that is, Let Tithe be paid of all that is possessed though the
Lords bounty.

XV.
Out of a Ms. of Excester I have seen In Excerptis M^. apud eundem.
transcribed a Canon of a Council held at Windsore, some years after the
Norman Conquest (I think under Lanfrank) in these words: Vt Laici Decimas
reddant sicut scriptum est.

XVI.
In a Convocation at Westminster Apud G. Malmesb lib 2. de gest. Pontific. fol.
129. b. (...) 1102.
held in 3. Hen. 1. under Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, and Girard
Archbishop of York, for both Provinces, it was ordaind Vt Decimae non nisi
Ecclesijs dentur. It was not only a Synod of the Clergy; but Royal authority
with the assent of the Baronage (at least of the greater Nobility) was ioind
with it. for thus speaks the Monk of Malmesburie relating it. Anno Dominicae
Incarnationis 1102. quarto autem praesulatus Paschalis summi Pontificis, tertio
regni Regis gloriosi Henrici Anglorum, ipso annuente, communi consensu
Episcoporum and Abbatum and Principum totius regni, adunatum est Concilium in
Ecclesia beati Petri in Occidentali part iuxta Londoniam sita, in quo
praesedit Anselmus etc. and then. Huic conuentui affuerunt, Anselmo
Archiepiscopo petente a Rege, Primates regni, quatenus quicquid eiusdem
Concilij autoritate decerneretur, vtriusque Ordinis concordi cura and
sollicitudine ratum seruaretur. Sic enim necesse erat; quia multis retro annis,
synodali cultura cessante, vitiorum vepribus succrescentibus, Christianae
religionis feruor in Anglia nimis refrixerat. and agreeing to this reason is a
passage in the Apud Eund. lib. dict. fol. 117. b. and in Epist. Lanfranci Ms.
in Bibl. Cottoniana.
Synod of London, held under Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury in 9. Will. 1.
Et quod (are the words) multis retro annis in Anglico regno vsus Conciliorum
obsoluerat, renouata sunt etc. that Canon seems to have been made against
arbitrarie consecrations of Tithes then practiced, whereof anon largely.

XVII.
The Laws In lib. Rub. Scaccari^ Ms. cap. 12.
of Henry the first have one title, De placitis Ecclesiae pertinentibus ad
Regem, and under that, are these words: Si quis rectam Decimam superteneat,
vadat praepositus Regis and Episcopi and terrae Domini cum Presbytero and
ingratis auferant and Ecclesiae cui pertinebit reddant, and nonam partem
relinquant ei qui Decimam partem dare noluit. according to those of King Edgar
and King Knout. IX. and XII.
before related.

XVIII.
Alberique Bishop of Ostia, Legate in England to Pope Innocent the second, in 3.
of King Stephen, held a Synod at London; and in that (as I have seen it In
Excerpti^ Ms. in Biblioth. Cotton.
transcribed out of a book of Worcester) this Canon is, De omnibus Primitijs
rectas Decimas dari Apostolica autoritaee praecipimus, quas qui reddere
noluerit anathematis in eum sententia proferatur. Primitiae must, it seems, be
here understood for every new years increase.

XIX.
Under Henry the second a Pontificiall Decree was sent to all the Bishops of
the Province of Canterbury (about the year M.C.LXX.) by Pope Alexander the
third commanding Extr. tit. de Dec. c. 5. peruenit and in App. ad Con^il. Lat.
tit. de Decim.
them that they should admonish all men in their several Dioceses, and si opus
fuerit, as the words are, Sub excommunicationis districtione compellere, vt de
prouentibus Molendinorum, Piscariarum, Faeno, and Lana, Decimas Ecclesijs,
quibus debentur, cum integritate persoluant. the direction of it was,
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo and eius suffraganeis. To this you may add that
other Extr. d. tit. c. 6. Nunci^s.
of the same Popes to the Bishop of Winchester: Mandamus, quatenus Paraecianos
tuos de Apibus, and de omni fructu Decimas persoluere Ecclesiastica
districtione compellas. Both these were afterward made part of Gregory's
Decretalls, and are of force to this day in the Canon Law of the Church of Rome.

XX.
In 21. of the same King Henry the second, Richard Archbishop of Canterbury
held a Provincial Synod at Westminster, in which were near all the Bishops and
Abbots of his Province, as also the two Kings, the father and the son. there,
diverse Constitutions out of old Counsels and Popes Decrees were published to
be observed in his Province. among them, one is out of a Synod at Rosne, in
Apud R^gerum de Houeden in Annal. part. 2. fol. 311. ^.
these words: Omnes Decimae Terrae sieve de frugibus sieve de fructibus, Domini
sunt and illi sanctificantur. sed quia multi modo inueniuntur Decimas dare
nolentes; statuimus, vt iuxta Domini Papae praecepta admoneantur semel,
secundo, and tertio, vt de grano, de vino, de fructibus Arborum, de foetibus
animalium, de lana, de agnis, de butyro and caseo, de lino and canabe and de
reliquis quae annuatim renouantur, Decimas in egre persoluant. quod si
commoniti non emendauerint, anathemati se nouerint subiacere.

XXI.
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury by his power Legatin, receiud from Pope
Caelestin the third, in 6. Rich. 1. held a Provincial Council for the
Province of York; and therein Apud eundem part. 2. fol. 430.
one of the Canons thus speaks for Tithes. Cum Decimae sint tributa egentium
animarum and ex praecepto Domini dari debeant, non est reddentis eas diminuere.
Statuimus itaque vt de his quae renouantur per annum, cum omni integritate
Decimae debitae and consuetae conferantur; ita vt inprimis Decimae absque vlla
diminutione Ecclesiae dentur, postmodum de nouem partibus mercedes messorum and
aliorum seruientium pro arbitrio soluentis tribuantur.

XXII.
The same Archbishop Hubert in 2. of K. John, Apud eundem part. 2. fol. 457 b.
and 460. c.
Generale celebrauit concilium Lundonijs apud Westmonasterium contra
prohibitionem Galfridi filij Petri Comitis de Essexe tunc temporis summi
Iustitiarij Angliae. for it appears that in those elder times there Consulas
litt. de 10 Ed. 2. in vol in quo Turgotus Dune mensi^ reperitur in Bibliothec.
V.C. Tho. Allen. Oxon. and 41 Hen 3 in Annal Burton apud in eundem.
was great controversy between the King, in whose right the Chief Justice of
England here sent out his prohibition, and the Archbishop touching this point;
whether the Archbishop, either as Archbishop or as Legate, might hold a
Provincial or National Council without authority from the Crown; but that is
now declared clear Stat. 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19.
and so practiced that he may not. In that Council, notwithstanding the
prohibition, he ordaind thus for tithes. Cum Deo and Sacerdotibus Dei Decimas
dandas, Abraham factis, and Jacob promissis innuent, and autoritas veteris and
noui Testamenti necnon and sanctorum Patrum statuta declarent Decimas de
omnibus, quae per annum renouantur praestandas; id inuiolabiliter decernimus
obseruandum, ita quod occasion mercedis seruientum vel messorum decima pars
non minuatur, sed potius integre persoluatur. Habeant etiam Presbyteri
potestatem ante autumnum excommunicandi omnes fraudatores decimarum suarum, and
eosdem secundum formam Ecclesiasticam absoluendi. Huic adijcimus sanctioni, vt
de terris nouiter cultis, non alias dentur decimae quam Ecclesijs Parochialibus
infra quarum limits terrae illae de quibus Decimis perueniunt excoluntur.
Detentores vero Decimarum, iuxta Rothomagensis Concilij constitutum, si semel
secundo and tertio commoniti, excessum suum non emendauerint vsque ad
satisfactionem condignam anathematis vinculo feriantur. saluo in omnibus
S.S.R.E. honor and priuilegio. which Saluo is to every of his Canons.

XXIII.
Among the Decretall Epistles of Pope Innocent the third, one Innoc. 3. in
Epist. Decre^. lib 2. page 452 edit. Coloniens.
is directed Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, vt Ecclesijs Parochialibus just
Decimae persoluantur; and thus speaks. Peruenit ad audientiam nostram quod
multi in Docesi tua Decimas suas integras, vel duas parts ipsarum non illis
Ecclesijs in quarum Parochijs habitant, vel vbi praedia habent, and a quibus
Ecclesiastica percipiunt Sacramenta persoluunt: sed eas alijs pro sua
distribuunt voluntate. Cum igitur inconueniens esse videatur and a ratione
dissimile, vt Ecclesiae quae spiritualia seminant, metere non debeant a suis
Parochianis temporalia, and habere; fraternitati tuae autoritate praesentium
indulgemus vt liceat tibi super hoc non obstante contradictione vel
appellatione cuiuslibet, seu consuetudine hactenus obseruata, quod Canonicum
fuerit ordinare, and facere quod statueris per Censuram Ecclesiasticam firmiter
obseruari. Nulli ergo etc. confirmationis etc. Datum Lateran. II. nonas Iulij.

XXIV.
In a collection of diverse Constitutions for the English Church, out of
Counsels and others, titled only In vol. in quo Annal. Burton. apud V.C. Tho.
Allen. Oxon.
Constitutiones cuiusdam Episcopi, and written about Hen. the thirds time, one
of Tithes occurs. Decimas de omnibus quae renouantur per annum and maxim
consuetas, dandas decernimus and potissime de molendinis and piscarijs and
faenis and apibus and de terris arabilibus and ad prata postea vel ad pasturam
redactis, ita vt occasion mercedis seruientum vel messorum decima part non
frustrentur quo minus eam plene percipiant. Detentores vero earundem Decimarum
si semel, secundo, and tertio commoniti excessum suum non emendauerint;
concedimus quod per capellanos locorum vsque ad satisfactionem congruam
excommunicationis vinculo feriantur. Cum autem hi qui decimas detinuerint vel
subtraxerint ad poenitentiam accesserint, non admittantur nisi per se vel per
manum sacerdotis ei, cui decimae debentur, satisfaciant competenter.

XXV.
A Constitution for due payment of Tithes Consti^. Eb^ra^. Ms.
was made about 30* Hen. 3. by Walter Gray Archbishop of York. I have only a
note of it which I took out of the Ms. but the words I could not now transcribe
for want of the Copy. the Copy it self I once saw in the Library of Mr.
Henry Sauill who is now with God.

XXVI.
The chiefest of the English Canon Laws, made for Tithes (both prediall and
personal) is that commonly attributed to a Council of Robert Winchelsey
Archbishop of Canterbury, held in 23. Ed. 1. at London; some Copies Vide
Lindw. in Prouin^ Constable tit. de De^. c. quoniam propter in praefationem.
referring it to Archbishop Boniface and the time about 30. Hen. 3. or to an
old Synod of Merton. But in the Synod of Merton held 42. Hen. 3. no part of it
is extant. That I examined in the Ms. apud V.C. Th. Allen* Oxon.
Annalls of the Abbey of Burton where the Canons of that Synod are at large
collected. yet in the Pupilla Part. 9. cap. 5.
oculi, written by John de Burgo Chancellor of Cambridge in M.CCC.LXXXV. it is
called Constitutio facta apud Merton per omnes Episcopos Angliae. These are the
words of it, as it remains in the body of the Prouincial Constitutions. Quoniam
propter diuersas consuetudines in petendo Decimas per diuersas Ecclesias inter
rectores Ecclesiarum and Parochianos suos, rixae, contentiones, scandala and
odia maxima multoties oriuntur. Volumus and statuimus quod in cunctis Ecclesijs
per Cantuariens. Prouinciam constitutis, vniformis sit petitio Decimarum and
proventuum Ecclesiarum. Imprimis volumus quod decimae de frugibus, non deductis
expensis, integre and sine aliqua diminutione soluantur: and de fructibus
arborum: and de seminibus omnibus, and de herbis ortorum nisi Parochiani
competentem fecerint redemptionem pro talibus decimis. Volumus and statuimus
etiam quod decimae de foenis vbicunque crescant, sieve in magnis pratis sieve in
paruis sieve in cheminis exigantur, and prout expedit Ecclesiae persoluantur. De
nutrimentis autem animalium scilicet de agnis; Statuimus quod pro sex agnis
and^ infra, sex oboli dentur pro decima. Si septem sint agni in numero,
septimus agnus detur pro decima rectori, ita tamen quod rector Ecclesiae qui
septimum agnum recipit, tres obolos in recompensationem soluat parrochiano a
quo decimam illam recepit. Qui octauum recipit, det denarium. Qui vero nonum,
det obolum parochiano vel expectet rector vsque ad alium annum donec plenarie
Decimum agnum possit recipere si maluerit: and quum ita exspectat semper exigat
secundu^ agnum meliorem vel tertium ad minus de agnis secundi anni: and hoc pro
expectatione primi anni. Et ita intelligendum est de Decima lanae. Sed si oues
alibi in hyeme and alibi in aestate nutriantur diuidenda est decima. Similiter
siquis medio tempore emerit vel vendiderit oues, and certum sit a qua parrochia
illa oues venerint: carundem diuidenda est decima sicut de re quae sequitur duo
domicilia. Si autem incertum fuerit, habeat illa Ecclesia totam decimam infra
cuius limits tempore tonsionis inueniuntur. De Lacte vero volumus quod decima
soluatur dum durat; videlicet de casco tempore suo. Et de lacte in autumno and
hyeme nisi parochiani velint pro talibus facere competentem redemptionem, and
hoc ad valorem decimae and commodum Ecclesiae. De prouentibus autem
molendinorum volumus quod decimae fideliter and integre soluantur. De pasturis
autem and pascuis tam non communibus quam communibus statuimus quod decimae
fideliter persoluantur: and hoc per numerum animalium and dierum vt expedit
Ecclesiae. De piscationibus and apibus sicut de omnibus alijs bonis just
acquisitis quae renouantur per annum, statuimus quod decimae soluantur and
exigantur debito modo. Statuimus etiam quod decimae personales soluantur de
artificibus and mercatoribus scilicet de lucro negociationis* Similiter de
carpentarijs, fabris, cementarijs textoribus, pandox atricibus, and omnibus
alijs operarijs stipendarijs, vt videlicet them Decimas de stipendijs suis nisi
stipendarij ipsi aliquid certum velint dare ad opus vel ad lumen Ecclesiae si
rectori ipsius Ecclesiae placuerit. then a word or two of Mortuaries; after
which, Sed quoniam inveniuntur multi Decimas sponte dare nolentes; Statuimus
quod parochiani moneantur primo secundo and tertio vt decimas Deo and Ecclesiae
fideliter soluant. Quod si non emendauerint primo ab ingressu Ecclesiae
suspendantur, and sic demum ad solutionem decimarum per censuram Ecclesiasticam
si necesse fuerit compellantur. Si autem dictae suspensionis relaxationem vel
absolutionem petierint: ad ordinarium loci mittentur absoluendi: and debito
modo puniendi. Rectores autem Ecclesiarum seu Vicarij aut Capellani annui qui
predictas decimas predicto modo propter formidinem hominum seu fauorem, timore
Dei postposito, vt predictum est, cum effectu non petierint: pena suspensionis
innodentur donec dimidiam marcam argenti pro sua inobedientia Archidiacono loci
persoluant. And then follow two other Constitutions, under Winchelsey's name,
for some more peculiar order in payment. But that first referd to him, is in a
Ms. In Biblioth. autoris.
(written of about the time of Henry the sixth) of the English Episcopal
Constitutions, severally thus titled, Constitutio Domini Stephani de Langtone
Archiepiscopi edita de modo Decimandi. Stephen of Langton was Archbishop under
King John. But it is not extant in the Synod of his time.

XXVII.
In a Council at London under Simon Mepham, Archbishop of Canterbury, held in
3. Ed. 3. a Extat. in Constit. Prouinc. lib. 3.
Canon is against such as hindered Churchmen from taken their Tithes, either
by keeping them and their servants from entering into the Land, or by exacting
Conquer tur etiam de hac iniuria Io. de ^thona in Constit. Othoboni c. mandata
Dei. vero. Iustitiam favor expellit.
Gloves, Stockings, or some such bribes, before they would permit them take
that right, which God, as it is there inserted, in signum vniuersalis Dominij
sibi reddi praecepit, and pro suo cultu Clericis assignauit. All such offenders
are branded with Excommunication: and another Constitution of a Council of
Paul's, held in 17. Ed. 3. under John Stretford Archbishop of Canterbury, is to
the selfsame purpose.

XXVIII.
For Tithe of Copis Wood, or Silua caedua, also in that of Stretford, was a
Extat. in Bl.
Canonin these words: Quanquam exsoluentibus been Decimas Deus frugum omnium
abundantiam and possessionum promiserit vbertatem: tamen dolentes referimus
quod nonnulli nostrae Prouinciae contra testamenti veteris atque noui doctrinam
de syluis suis caeduis and lignis arborum caeduarum excisis circa quae minus,
quam circa fructus agrorum, laboris impendunt, Decimas Deo and Ecclesijs quibus
debentur notorie, propter hoc quod ipsas in praeteritum non dederunt, soluere
contradicunt. quod estimant idcirco licere quod Legem moris de longa inualuisse
consue^udine arbitrantur, in dubium etiam reuocantes quid silua caedua sit
censenda. Nos igitur aduertentes quod si sua portione Ecclesia sit defraudata
diutine, crimen praeterea non minuitur sed augetur: ac fames and penuria
omniumque rerum egestas opprimunt been Decimas non soluente; huiusmodi
declaramus pouisione Concilij Siluam Caeduam, illam fore quae cuiuscunque
existens generis arborum in hoc habetur vt cedatur, and quae etiam succisa
rursus ex stirpibus aut radicibus renascitur; ac ex ea Decimam vtpote realem
and praedialem Parochialibus ac Matricibus Ecclesijs persoluendam; nec non
siluarum possesso res huiusmodi ad praestationem Decimarum lignorum ipsorum
excisorum in eis, sicut feni and bladorum omni censura Ecclesiastica fore
Canonice compellendos. By this, Tithe of all kind of Wood was payable. But in
the Rot. Parl. 17. Ed. 3. art. 28.
Parliament with which that Convocation was held, a Petition was exhibited by
the Commons, Que null home soit tret en plee en Court Christien pur Dismes de
bois ou de south bois si nonn en lieux ou tielx Dismes soloient estre donez.
And the Answer was, Soit fait de cella auxi come il ad este fait einz cez
heures.

XXIX.
And the year following, in the next Parliament, a Rot. Parl. 18. Ed, 3. art. 9.
complaint was against that Constitution by the Commons. Item pria le Commen
que come Constitution soit fait per les Prelates a prendre Disme de chescun
mannere de Bois quel chose ne fuit vnques vsee, and que niefs and femes poent
fair testament que est contre reason. que plese per lui and per son bon conseil
ordainer remedy, and que son people demoerge en mesme l'estate qu'ils soloient
estre en temps de touts ses progenitors, and que Prohibitions soie^t grantes a
touz ceux que sont empledes de Dismes de bois sans auoir consultation. Which was
no otherwise answered, but with, Le Roy voet que ley and reason ent soient faits.

XXX.
Three years after, in Rot. Parl. ^1. Ed 3. art. 48.
21. Ed. 3. a Petition was touching the same matter put thus in by the Commons.
Item monstre la Commune come nadgairs Lerceuesque de Cantirbiry and les autres
Prelates ordenerent vne Constitution a doner Dismes de subbois venduz tant
solement, la ou auant ces heures nulles Dismes furent donez, ore les gentz de
Seint Esglise per force de la Constitution pernent and demandent les Dismes
auxibien de gros bois come de subbois venduz and nient venduz econtre oe qu'ils
ont vsez puit temps de memoire, a grant damage de la Commone de quoi ils prient
remedy del un point and del autre. To this is answered. L'erceuesque de
Cantirbiry and les autres Euesques ont responduz que tiele Disme nest demandee
per reason de la dit Constitution forsque de subbois. But I well conceive not
why they complain of the Constitution, as made only for the Tithe of Wood sold.
no such thing appears in it, that iustifies their supposition.

XXXI.
This tithing of Wood, and of such other things as were not of Custom paid,
still vexed the Commons. And therefore again in a Parliament Rot. Parl. Fest.
Hill. 25* Ed. 3. art. 37.
of 25. Ed. 3. they exhibit this Petition. Item pria la Commone, que si la
Clergy en droit des Dismes de haut bois and southbois ou d'autre chose riens
demandent ou attemptent de nouel forsque solement ceo and en les lieus d'ont
ils ont este d'aunciens temps seisis come en le droit de lour Esglises, que
pleise a nostre Seigniour le Roy ent granter Prohibition sans Consultation a
touz ceux que le voillent demander en tiel cas, and que les dites gents de S.
Esglise soient defenduz a demander Dismes de gross bois. Here the Commons
would have had such a liberty of discharge of Tithes not usually paid, as the
Philippine in France, and the like Edicts of some other Nations give the
subject. But the answer was, Le Roy and son Conseil se voillent de ceste
Petition auiser.

XXXII. But upon new Petition, by the Lords Temporal and Commons in the
Parliament of 45. Ed. 3. it was enacted (as you see in the published Statutes,
agreeing with the Record) That Tithe should not be exacted of great Trees,
being of XX. years growth, or above. and that upon a Suit commenced in the
Spiritual Court for such Tithes, a Prohibition should be granted, as it had
been in former time also used. but that use, it seems, had been somewhat
discontinued, through a reverence given to that Synodall Canon of Archbishop
Stretford. Although in 50. Ed. 3. fol. 10. b. Belknap says, That it was never
seen, that Tithes had been demanded of great Trees and of Timber. This Statute
Plowd. Comm. fol. 470.9. Nen. 6* fol. 56. etc.
has had still force in practice to this day.

XXXIII.
Yet, notwithstanding this Statute, the Clergy were not so contented; but
under pretense that it was not indeed, by sufficient authority, made a Statute,
but only an Ordinance (the contrary whereof appears both in the Roll and in
the consent of following time) often times afterward brought the Temporaltie in
question upon their Canons; insomuch, that in the Parliament of Rot. Part. 47.
(...). 3. art. 21.
47. Ed. 3. a Bill was put in by the Commons, reciting that of 45. Ed. 3. and
then relating, that les persons de Seint Esglise entendants que cel Ordinance
ne restreint my lour aunciene accrochements, surmettants que ce ne fuist my
afferme pur Estatut, font occasions in Court Christien a contrary del
Ordenance suisdit a grant damage del people, per qui pleise a nostre Seignior
le Roy d'afermer la dite Ordenance pur Estatut a durer pur temps auener, and
que Prohibition especial sur mesme Lestatut de ceo soit fait en la
Chancellerie defendant que eux ne ^ignent plee en Court Christien des Dismes de
bois del age auantdit, that is, of XX. years. The answer hereto was, Soit
tiele Prohibition grantee come ad este use d'auncien temps. Thus did the
Clergy and Commons so differ touching the execution of the Canons; and
insomuch, that afterward also the Commons put in a Bill, Rot. Parl 51. Ed. 3.
art. ^6.
Que null Estatute ne Ordenance soit faite ne grante au Petition du Clergy si
ne soit per assent de voz Commens. Ne que vous dites Commens ne soient obligez
per nulles constitutions qu'ils font pur lour auantage sanz assent de voz dites
Commens. Car eux ne* veullent estre obligez a null de voz Estatutz ne Ordinances
fa^tz sanz lour assent. But the answer was only thus, Soit ceste mature declare
en special. This by the way.

XXXIV.
Here may be Regist. Orig. fol. 4. a.
rememberd thatagreement in the Parliament at Salisburie, Quod consultationes
fieri debent de silua caedua, eo non obstante quod non renouatur per annum. But
to what Parliament to refer that agreement, expressed by Concordatum fuit coram
Consilio Regis in Parlamento etc. I sufficiently know not, unless to that of
7. Rich. 2. held at Salisburie, the Rolls whereof has nothing of it.

XXXV
^ In 5. Hen. 4. a Bill was put in by the Rot. Parl. 5. Hen. 4. art. 65.
Commons, against the exaction of Tithes of Quarries of Stone and Slatt. Thus
it speaks. Item priont les Commens que come plusors lieges nostre Seignior le
Roy sont souent foits vexiz and trauaillez per Persons and Vicaires de Seint
Esglise per Citations and Censures de Seint Esglise pur Dismes de Peers and
Sclattes oueres and trahez horse de Quares de sicomne null Disme de null tiel
Pierre ne Sclatte vnques ne feust demand de nulle Disme ent pay, que pleise a
granter que si ascun Prohibition soit fait en le cas que null Consultation soit
grant a contrary. Hereto the answer was, Le Roy s'aduisera. But you may see
hereof more in the ancient Opinions of the Judges, delivered in the Orig fol.
59. b.
Register and Not. Br. fol. 53. C. G.
Fitzherbert.

XXXVI.
In 27. Hen 8. chap. 20. it is enacted by Parliament, That through all the Kings
dominions, every subject according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinance of
this Church of England, and after the laudable Vsages and Customs of the
Parish or other place where he dwells or occupies, shall yield and pay his
Tithes etc. And some other special courses for recovery of Tithes, are in
that Act ordained.

XXXVII.
By the Statute of Dissolution of Monasteries of 31. Hen. 8. chap. 13. it was
enacted, That the King and his Patentees should hold the Possessions of the
dissolved Monasteries discharged and acquitted of payment of Tithes, as freely,
and in as large and ample manner, as the Houses of Religion held them at their
time of the dissolution.

XXXVIII.
After the dissolution of Monasteries, to which, diverse Tithes and Parish
Churches had been appropriated, and were now settled in the Crown, and thence
conveyed into Lay hands, an Act was made in 32. Hen. 8. cap. 7. commanding
every man, fully, truly, and effectually, to divide, set out, yield or pay all
and singular Tithes and Offerings, according to the lawful Customs and Vsages
of the Parishes and Places where such Tithes or Duties shall grow, arise, come,
or be due. And remedy is given for Ecclesiastique persons before the
Ordinary; and for Lay men, that claimed appropriated Tithes by grant from the
Crown, in the secular Courts, by such actions as usually Lay possessions had
been subject to.

XXXIX.
By the Acts of 27. Hen. 8. cap. 21. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 12. and the Decree made
upon them, the Citizens and Inhabitants of London and the Liberties were
commanded to pay their Tithes to the Parsons, Vicars, and Curats of the City,
according to a rate of the rents of their houses; that is, two shillings nine
pence for every pound. and that if no rent be reserved, the Tithe should be
duly paid, according to what their houses had been last letten for. and
according to that also, are owners bound to pay. But a Prouiso is in the
Decree, That where a less sum then after two shillings nine pence the pound
has been accustomed to be paid for Tithes, in such places the former custom
should be continued. And some other particulars are in it, which are too long
to be here transcribed. you may easily see it whole. But anciently, in London,
on every Sunday and other principal Feast day; the chief maintenance of the
Ministers was increased, by a farthing offered out of every ten shillings of
rent. Ex Ordinatione antiqua, says Lindwood In Constit. Prouin^. tit. de Dec.
c* Sancta,. Nego^^ationum.
, (and that Ordinance, as I have heard, was either made by Roger Niger Bishop
of London, in 13. Hen. 3. as a new one, or as a confirmation of former use. as
which of these, I purposely abstain here to enquire) in dicta Ciuitate,
tenentur singulis Dominicis diebus and in principalibus Festis and Sanctorum
Apostolorum and aliorum quorum Vigiliae ieiunantur offerre pro singulis X.
solidis redditus domus quam inhabitant vnum quadrantem. And the LII. farthings
so yearly paid on Sundaies only, came so near to the just Tenth of the rent,
that they were thought on as a Tithe paid; the other being reputed rather by
the name only of Offerings. Which you may see in the same Lindwood; where he
disputes the question, whether those farthings excused the Citizens from
personal Tithes of their gains; and concludes, that they did not. But before
these Acts and the Decree, no Tithes, as Tithes, were generally paid in that
City. in some places Vide 16. Ed. 3. quare impedit 147.38. Ed. 3. fol. 13. a.
Grants case in Report. 11. fol. 16. a.
they were, as in the liberty of S. Martins le Grand, which is rather in
London then of it. neither can I but here remember that custom of the Eastern
Church thus maintaind chiefly with Offerings, or (...), as they called them,
which specially appears in the answer of Theodore In Respons. 57. inter
monimenta Iuris Gra^^-Romani edit. a Leunclauio and Frahe^^.
Balsamon Patriarch of Antiochia, to Mark Patriarch of Alexandria, touching the
quantity of what was to be offered. He tells him, that no certain quantity is
appointed by the Canons, and that through inequality of men's estates (none of
them giving any such part to the Church as that it could discover their
abilities) which permits not a regular certainty, they were contented with
what custom and free bounty of the giuers bestowed. (...) (says he) (...).
which is in substance the same before in English.

XL.
In 2. and 3. Ed. 6. chap. 15. it was enacted that all prediall Tithes should
be thenceforth paid as of right they had been within forty years next
preceding, or according to custom ought to have been, with allowance of
Privileges lawful Prescriptions or Co^positions real. and personal Tithes of
gain by merchandise and artifice in such places, and as within XL. years
preceding they had been accustomably used to be paid, are commanded to be paid
yearly at or before Easter. Other particulars and the remedies given by the Act
may be easier found in it, then I can transcribe them.

XLI.
To these may not amiss be added those Laws for Tithes, proposed by the VIII.
persons chosen to begin a new body of Canon Law for England in 5. Ed. 6.
according to the first purpose of the Statut of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19. (which was
seconded also by the Statut of 3 and 4. Ed. 6. cap. 11.) whereby XXXII. persons
assigned by the King should have made it. neither were those VIII. to have
given sufficient authority to it according to those Statuts, without
approbation of XXXII. afterward that should have censurd their reformation. The
VIII. were Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bishop of Elie,
Richard Cox the Kings Almosner and Peter Martyr Doctors of Divinity, William
May and Rouland Tailor Doctors of Law, and John Lucas and Richard Gooderik
Esquires. In what they proposed, is found a constitution in the Kings name that
all predial tithes should be paid in kind to the Ministry integre and explete
(with an exception of timber Trees of XX. years growth) as also of the profits
of Milles, of Turbaries, Cole-mines, Quarries of stone and all other of like
kind. Of all Agistments also Tithes are there paiable, and of the increase of
all kind of beasts, wild and tame; of fish, of butter, cheese, milk, wool, wax.
and the Statut of 2. and 3. Ed. 6. for Tithes is there receiud for so much of
it as is not against a general payment which they would have had ordaind. But
these as the rest in the Volume with them, were only intended for Laws, but
never had sufficient authority or confirmation. The intent was first that those
Canon Laws only, which according to the purpose of the two Statuts of Hen. 8.
and Ed. 6. should be compiled, might have authority in the Universities, and
force in practice; but so, that there might still be praeseruatio legum
nostrarum communium in suo vigore remanentium, as the words are in the Patent
of Ed. 6. that authorizes the VIII. persons to consult about them.

For our Laws of Tithing either made or desired, thus much. But before we speak
of the Practice, it is requisite that we enter into some disquisition touching
Parishes or Parochial right according whereto at this day from ancient time the
payment of Tithes is regularly performed.

CAP. IX.
I. Of Parishes in the Primitive Church of the Britons.

II. Parishes in the Primitive Church of the English Saxons. first limited only
in regard of the Ministers function, not of Parochial profits. all the profits
of every whole Diocese, first made a common treasure to be disposed of by the
Bishop and his Clergy, of the same Diocese. Residence of the Bishop and
Clergy in those times. The great regard then had to every Clergy man.

III. Of division of our Parishes. whether Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury
first divided them. Parochia or Paroecia diversely taken.

IV. Lay-foundations of Parish Churches; from whence chiefly came Parochial
limits in regard of the profits receiud to the singular use of the Incumbents.
Limitation of Tithes by K. Edgar to the Mother Parish Church, or Monastery.
Monasteries preferred before other Churches for burial. Mortuaries. Minstre. a
third part of Tithes (according to K. Edgars Law) must be given to a new-built
Church that had right of Sepulture by the Founder. Sepultura and Baptisterium.
Capella Parochialis. a Parish commanded to be made (out of another that was too
large) by the Pope. one Parish ioind to another by the King.

IN consideration of our Parish Churches and Parochial limits, the times of
the Britons first, then of the English-Saxons and foreward are to be thought
of. that is, the elder times of their Christianity.

I.
For the Britons; little or no Testimony of credit is extant that discouers the
Ecclesiastical policy used by them, in their primitive times, or declares the
possessions of their Hierarchy. And we omit here wholly what might be collected
out of that fabulous tale of Augustine preaching at Cometon in Oxfordshire,
whereof more in the next Chapter. Although K. Lucius had instituted XXVIII.
Bishops, and III. Archbishops (as the British story tells us) yet, how in
those Dioceses any distinct Parishes were, appears not expressly. But we may
very well think that such kind of Parishes only were in those Bishopriques as
we have already Chap. 6.. 3.
showed to have been in the Primitive Church elsewhere. neither is it likely that
in those times, the custom of this Island therein should differ from what was
even uniformly receiud through those parts of Christendom, whereof we have best
testimony remaining. But if all ancient authority were of credit, Parish
Churches expressly mentiond of about the time of CCCCXC. and endowd as at this
day might be found among the Britons. For when Dubritius was made Archbishop of
Southwales which they called Dextralis Britannia, and his See appointed at
Landaff under Mouris Prince of that Wales, diverse Churches with their
endowments of Tithes, Oblations, and other profits were appropriated to him and
his successors; by the relation of an old Author. Propter sanctitatem suam ( are
his Anonym. Ms. de primostatu Landauens. Ecclesiae in Bibl. Cottoniana eadem in
Codice Landau. qui Tilo dicitur habentur. Recens autem exscriptus Tilo
reperitur in eadem Biblioth.
words) and praedicationem praeclaram Beati Pastoris and regalem parentelam
suam plures Ecclesiae cum suis dotibus, Decimis, oblationibus, sepulturis,
Territorijs and libera communione eorum datae sunt sibi and successoribus suis
omnibus a Regibus and Principibus totius regni Dextralis Britanniae. and then,
Videns autem sanctus Dubritius Largifluam potentum manum erga sibi comissam
Ecclesiam, partitus est discipulos mittens quosquam discipulorum suorum per
Ecclesias sibi datas, and quasdam fundauit Ecclesias, and Episcopos per
dextralem Britanniam coadiutores sibi, ordinatis Parochijs suis, consecrauit.
But this Author wrote not before about the beginning of the last CCCC. years
from Christ, and spoke of these things in the phrase of his own time. the hand
and context and their relations in him justify it. he talks, you see, of
Churches endowd and appropriated and founded, as if he meant no other then such
as now are conueiable by Patrons and Ordinaries in the course of appropriations
used in later ages, and filled with Incumbents that had in them like estates
and particular interest in the profits as Parsons at this day. indeed, that in
those times Churches were built here, no doubt can be made; neither is it to be
conceiud how 1. Ad Cor. cap. 11.22. Sed v^desis Isidor. Pelusi^t. lib. 2.
Epist. 246.
Christianity could he in any Nation much ancienter (if generally receiud, or
by any number) then Churches or some convenient Houses or other places in the
nature of Churches, appointed for the exercise of devotion. and express
mention Beda Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 26.
is of a Church built here in the time of the Romans, to the honor of S. Martin
in which Augustine and his followers when they came first from Rome, made their
holy assemblies, and others also they repaired. and says Gildas, of the
Clergy of his time, that is about D.LXXX. Ecclesiae domus habentes, sed turpis
lucri gratia eas adeuntes. But I guess, that under Dubritius few or no parish
Churches were otherwise erected then for convenient places for such Ministers
as the Bishop out of his Clergy arbitrarily sent thither, and that the
offerings and other profits there receiud were to the common treasury of the
Diocese, and to be dispensed as is before declared, where we speak generally of
those elder times. and in regard no more certainty of the establishing of the
endowments, or places of residence in the British Hierarchy, may be found, I
willingly permit to every man his own conjecture.

II.
For the age of the Saxons; we read that Augustine and his company, when they
first came to K. Ethelbert in Kent, began there to imitat Beda lib. 1. cap. 26.
Apostolicam primitiuae Ecclesiae vitam, ea tantum quae victui necessaria
videbantur ab eis quas docebant accipiendo, and, that after they had converted
the King, they builded and repaired Churches. maiorem praedicandi per omnia,
and Ecclesias fabricandi vel restaurandi licentiam accipiebant. So Ethelbert in
his Charter of foundation (if you will believe the authority Cart. Antiq. l. 8.
in arc^ Londin.
whence we have it) of his Abbey in Canterbury, talks of alias quas fabricaui
Ecclesias. And doubtless those Churches which they built, or repaired, as also
the Temples of the Gentiles which by advise of Pope Gregory to Mellitus were
not to be destroyed, but converted to Christian service, had some kind of
limits of adioining Villages or Towns, and so were in that respect Parochial.
But those limits and Churches were variously chosen and assigned to ministering
Priests, according to the conuenience of the assembling of the
Neighbour-inhabitants; but not so ordaind that every Parishioner was bound to
keep his devotion within the limits of this or that parish church. that is,
Parishes were then limited only in regard of the ministering Presbytery (whence
they were called scriftscyrean i. circuits, within which the Priests exercised
their shriuing) but not in regard of the profits receiud from the Parishioners.
For the whole Diocese (first of Canterbury, the^ of the other elder
Bishopriques, as they were instituted) was indeed the only limited Parish, in
regard of the Parishioners profits. and the Clergy of the Bishop, that is, his
family of Church men, were the Curats in inferior Churches, according as the
Bishop appointed and altered them; and whatsoever they received through
devotion of good Christians, made up a common treasure for the whole Diocese
(whence it followd, that it was not material at what church any Parishioner
offered his Christian bounty, so he did it within the Diocese) which was both
consonant to what is found to be the use of other Churches in the Primitive
times, and is also confirmed by that Augustine in his question to Pope Gregory,
touching Bishops. he demanded qualiter cum suis Clericis conuersentur? vel de
his quae fidelium oblationibus accedunt Altari, quantae debeant fieri
portiones? whereto the Pope answers that the custom is generally to make a
quadripartit division for the Bishop, for his Clergy, for the Poor, and for
reparation of Churches. but he admonishes him, that in the tenderness of the
English-Saxon Church, he and his Clergy should still imitate the community of
all things used in the Primitive times under the Apostles. The Saxon of that
question Extat in Beda exemplatis Saxonici Ms. lib. 3. in Bibl. Cottoniana
is obseruable. AErest be Bisceopum; hu hie mid hiora geferum drohtian and
lufian scylen. Oththe in thaem lacum geleaffumra the hie to eofodum, and to
gods cyricum brengath, hu monige daelas thara beon scyle,, that is, first
concerning Bishops. how they should bear themselves among their Clergy, or how
many parts they should have in the offerings that good Christians brought to
Altars and to Gods Churches. here it is more plainly expressed, that whateuer
came to any Altar or Church, within the Diocese, was one common profit to be
divided or employed, as Pope Gregory answers; where he tells him also that the
Bishop and his Clergy Videsis B^dam Hist. Eccles. lib 4 cap. ^7*
must live together, Sed, says he, quia fraternitas tua Monasterij regulis
erudita, seorsum viuere non debet a Clericis suis in Ecclesia Anglorum etc. So
that you may collect that in these Primitive times of the English-Saxon Church
the Bishop and the whole Clergy of the Diocese were as one body living upon
their endowments (bestowd on the Bishoprique) and their treasure that came from
the sundry places of devotion whither some one or other of them at the Bishops
appointment, was sent to preach the Word and minister the Sacraments. every
Clerk having his dividend for his maintenance. Neither in these elder times, I
think, did any of these of his Clergy or Chaplains usually reside elsewhere
then with him at his Bishoprique (as Deanes and Chapters at this day) or in
some Monasteries whence they might as occasion required, at certain times go
into those Parishes which were distinguished only for several functions of
those Chaplains, lest want of such distinction might the sooner have caused
also a want of special discharge of this or that Cure. so that there were
singularum Ecclesiarum Presbyteri Synod. Anglic. c. 1. and ^. ann. 786. C^ntur.
8. cap. 9.
qui populum erudire debent, and they were particularly ordaind for the Title
of this or that Church, and every one was bound by our canons of that time not
to leave the Church for which he was so ordained. And from their residence with
the Bishop, or out of the Parish in Monasteries, came it, as it seems, that
they were but rarely seen abroad among the people. for so rarely were they seen
abroad, that when ever any of them were espied in the Country, the people used
presently to flock about him, and with all reverence humbly to beseech his
Benisons, either by signing them with the Cross, or in holy prayers for them;
and, with all earnestness of attention, they heard what he preached. This is
that Vide eum hist. Eccles. ^ib. 3. c. 26. and lib 4. c. 27.
which Bid teaches, when he tells us, that si quis Sacerdotum in vicum forte
deueniret, mox congregati in vnum vicani, verbum vitae ab illo expetero
curabant. And again, Erat quippe moris ^o tempore populis Anglorum, vt,
veniente in villam Clerico vel Presbytero, cuncti ad eius imperium verbum
audituri constuerent, libenter ea quae dicerentur audirent, libentius ea, quae
audire and intelligere poterant, operando sequerentur. How long this community
in every Diocese between the Bishop and his attending Clergy (which is denoted
often by the name of Episcopi Clerus) continued, fully appears not. But, that
it was not out of use till past more then C. years after Augustines coming,
that is, till past D.CC. years from Christ, may be coniectured out of those
testimonies of Bid, which extend as far.

III.
Yet it is commonly receiud, that Honorius, the first Archbishop of Canterbury
after Augustine, about the year D.C.XXX. first divided his Province into
Parishes. And in the late history of the Archbishops of Canterbury, written
by Mr Ioscelin, it is thus delivered of him. Neque solum Episcopos tanquam
superiores turrium custodes Ecclesiae superimpo suit, sed etiam, Prouinciam
suam primus in Parochias diuidens, inferiores Ministros ordinauit. And
according to this, have some of our greatest and most learned Writers related.
But I doubt much how it can at all stand with truth. For if Parochiae be here
meant only for such as were assigned Limits for those which were sent
arbitrarily from the Bishop, out of the number of his Chaplains, or his Clerus,
residing for the most part, in those elder times, with him at his Bishoprique;
then clearly, Honorius was not the first that made division of them. Such kind
of Parochiae are even near as ancient as Bishopriques; and questionless, in
Augustines time. how could otherwise, Gods Service be orderly had in the
Infancy of the Church? And when ever several Churches for Christian Service,
or other places for holy Assemblies, began, then began such Parochiae. And that
Churches were built here before Honorius his time, is before manifested. If, on
the other side, Parochiae be taken for what it is usually understood, that is,
for such Limits as now make Parishes, bounded as well in regard of the profits
receiud from the Parishioners (due only to the Minister of that Church) as of
the Incumbents function and residence; how will that stand with the community
of Ecclesiastique profits, and the Bishops and his Clergies living together,
that may be without much difficulty discovered out of Bid, to have continued
after Honorius also? But where ever that testimony of his dividing Parishes
was first found, I doubt it was misunderstood, through the various
signification of Parochia. For in those ancient times, Parochia usually denoted
as well a Bishoprique, or Diocese, or bisceope scyre, as the Saxons called it,
as a less Parish. That signification is very obuious in the old Counsels of
both Tongues (as it is also specially observed by the learned Filesacus in his
Paroecia) and in the moniments of this Kingdom. For it is related of King
Cenwalch, that he divided Beda Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Prouinciam in duas Parochias, when he made a new Bishoprique at Winchester,
that was taken out of the Diocese of Dorchester. And in the Council of
Hertford, held under Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, one Canon is Ibidem
lib. 4. c. 5. and videsis c. 16. q 2. c. 6. san^.
, Vt nullus Episcoporum Parochiam alterius inuadat sed contentus sit
gubernatione creditae sibi plebis. So in Florence of Worcester, under the year
D.C.LXXX. Merciorum Prouincia in quinque Parochias est diuisa, that is, into
five Bishopriques. And the truth is, that it may be said properly enough, that
Honorius was the first under whom his Province was divided into such Parochiae,
or Bishopriques. that is, No other Bishopriques (except Canterbury, London,
and Rochester) were in his Province until his time; those three being almost
of one antiquity. But under him, Byrinus was made first Bishop of the
West Saxons, and had his See or Bisceop setle (as they called it) at Dorchester,
and Foelix the Burgugnone was likewise ordaind first Bishop of the East Angles
at Dunwich. Which two Ordinations, in regard the like had not been in this
Province of Canterbury from Augustines time till this Honorius, were perhaps
the cause why it might be related, that Honorius primus Prouinciam suam in
Parochias diuisit. Which, although it were to be conceiud of such Parishes as
at this day we call by that name, yet could not extend to all his Province.
For not till long after his time, was Christianity receiud in the Kingdom of
Sussex, which was first converted by Wilfrid, first Bishop of Selsey, in the
year D.C.LXXIX. Hitherto then, for aught can out of ancient Moniments be
proved, no Limits Parochial, in regard of the profits to be receiud from the
Parishioners, and spent by this or that Minister only, were assigned. But the
ancient course of a kind of community of all profits of the Diocese, with the
Bishop and his Clergy, remaind still in use. Neither was the interest of many
Churches, it seems, as yet here in any Lay-founders. But the Bishops, as I
think, had both the interest and governance of the Churches built by the King,
and took care for building new in their own endowments, and hallowing old
ones, that had been either profaned since Christian Service used in them among
the Britons, or formerly consecrated only to Heathenisme. So may you understand
that of Byrinus, first Bishop of Dorchester. Factis dedicatisque Ecclesijs
multisque ad Dominum, pro eius labor, populis aduocatis, migrauit ad Dominum,
as Bedes words are; in the Saxon of which it is expressed, that the Ciricean
orhte and gehalgode, that is, made Churches, and hallowed them.

IV.
But afterward, when devotion grew firmer, and most Lay men, of fair estate,
desired the Countrey-residence of some Chaplains, that might be always ready
for Christian instruction among them, their Families, and adjoining Tenants;
Oratories and Churches began to be built by them also: and being hallowed by
the Bishops, were endowed with peculiar maintenance from the Founders, for the
Incumbents that should there only reside. Which maintenance, with all other
Ecclesiastique profits that came to the hands of every such several Incumbent
(in regard* that now the Lay-founder had, according to the Territory of his
Demesnes, Tenancies, or neighboring Possessions, made and assigned both the
Limits within which the holy Function was to be exercised, and appointed the
persons that should repair to the Church, and offer there, as also provided a
special Salarie for the performance) was afterward also restraind from that
common Treasury of the Diocese, and made the only revenue, which became
perpetually annexed to the Church of that Clerk who received it. Neither was it
wonder, that the Bishops should give way to such restraint. for had they denied
that to Lay founders, they had given no small cause also of restraining their
devotion. Every man, questionless, would have been the vnwillinger to have
specially endowd the Church, founded for the holy use chiefly of him, his
Family, and Tenants, if withal he might not have had the liberty to have
given his Incumbent, there resident, a special and several maintenance; which
could not have been, had the former community of the Clergies revenue still
remained. Out of these Lay foundations chiefly, doubtless came those kind of
Parishes, which at this day are in every Diocese. their differences in
quantity being originally out of the difference of the several Circuits of
the Demesnes or Territories possessed by the Founders* And after such time as
upon Lay foundations, Churches had their profits so limited to their
Incumbents, no doubt can be, but that the Bishops, in their Prebends, or
Aduowsons of Parishes, both in Cities and in the Country, formerly limited
only in regard of the Ministers Function, restraind also the profits of every
of their several Churches, to the Incumbents; that so a uniformity might be
received in that innovation of Parochial right. At what time these Lay
foundations began to be frequent, plainly enough appears not. But some mention
is of them about the year D.CC. as you may see in Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 4.
and 5.
Bid, where he speaks of one Puch, a Saxon Noble man, that had built a Church,
and entreated John, Bishop of Hangulstad, to consecrate it; and the like also
of one Addi. Alio item tempore, says he, vocatus ad dedicandum Ecclesiam
Comitis vocabulo Addi. Some such more, of about that time, may be found. But
about the year D.CCC. many Churches, founded by Lay men, are recorded to have
been appropriated to the Abbey of Crowland, as you see in the Charters of
Confirmation made by Bertulph King of Mercland, and of others, to the same
Abbey, reported by Ingulphus. Whence it may be observed, that by this time Lay
foundations were grown very common, and Parochial Limits also of the
Parishioners devotions. And in a Council held in D.CCC.XVI. under Wilfrid,
Archbishop of Canterbury, we find, Vbi Ecclesiae aedif^centur, a propriae
Diocesis Episcopo sanctificentur. And a Canon of the M* (in Biblioth.
Certoniana) c. 10.
same Synod ordains, That upon the death of every Bishop, Statim per singulas
Parochias in singulis quibusque Ecclesijs, pulsato signo, omnis famulorum Dei
caetus ad Basilicam conueniat. Ibique pariter XXX. Psalmos pro defuncti anima
decantent, and postea vnusquisque antistes and Abbas DC. Psalterios and CXX.
Missas celebrare faciat, and tres homines liberet, and eorum cuilibet tres
solidos distribuat etc. with other Ceremonies of Fasting and Prayer (according
to the time) for the soul of the Bishop. Here, it may seem, Parishes limited
as at this day, are understood. But the first express mention of limitation of
profits (other then of the endowing) to be given to this or that Church, is in
those Laws of King Edgar, made about D.CCCC.LXX. where a threefold division is
of Churches. the first is called Ealdan Mynstre, that is, Senior Ecclesiae,
which Leg^ Franci^. apud ^i^^sacum, lib. de Pa^^^ci^.
name anciently was given to Cathedral Churches; the second, a Church that
has Legerstoe, or place for Burial; the third, a Church that has no
Legerstoe. Where it is ordaind, that every man, having not erected a Church of
his own, should pay his Tithes to the Ealdan Mynstre the seo hyrnesse to hyrth;
that is, to the ancientest Church or Monastery where he hears Gods service.
Which I understand not otherwise, then of any Church or Monastery, whither
usually in respect of his Commorancie or his Parish (determined according to
the Farms, Houses and Lands, occupied with those Houses or Farms) he
repaired; that is, his Parish Church or Monastery. For we must remember, that
in those times, Monasteries (which somewhat before Edgar Regular. Concordia
Anglica Nationis Monach. Sanctimonialiumque Ms. in Bibl. Cotton. and Malme^bur.
lib. 1 de gest. Pontific. fol. 115.
were for the most part filled with secular Clerks, who also, as other Clergy
men took pains abroad in the spiritual Harvest; and under him by Archbishop
Dunstans procurement were restored only to Cloister Monks or Benedictines)
as well as other Churches erected either by Bishops or Lay men, were in many
places the only Oratories and Auditories that the near Inhabitants did their
devotions in, and perhaps were in regard of burial most commonly preferred
before other Churches whatsoever. which may be collected from a Canon of an In
Statut. Synod* Ms. in sap. dict. Biblioth. cap. 9.
old Synod of Ireland held about these elder times of the English Church.
neither is it likely but that the manners of these Northern Churches in that
age were enough agreeable to each other. In that Synod it appears that any man
might have bequeathed his burial to what Abbey best pleased him, and that the
Abbot to whose Monastery the bequest was made, should have the Apparel of the
dead, his Horse and his Cow for a Mortuarie, although he had before solemnly
given all that he had to any other Abbot. whence may easily be coniectured that
Monasteries were in chiefest reputation for Videsis c. 16. quaest. 1. c. 1^
Agap^tus and 13. q. 2. c. 6. vbicunque. sed and vide Append. ad Council. Later.
part. 43. cap. 4.
burial, and had a right of it before any other kind of Parochial Church, if
the dead made choice of any of them. and by the way for that course of payment
of a motuarie (which the Saxons, Vide Canuti Leg. cap. 13.
I think, called salsceat) the same Synod affirms, that Omne corpus sepultum
habet in iure suo Vaccam and Equum and Vestimentum and Ornamentum sui Lecti;
nec quicquam horum reddetur in alia debita, quia corpori eius tanquam vernacula
debentur. and although the certain age of that Synod appears not, yet it was
after such time as Parishes were limited in regard of the Parishioners
repairing to one certain Church and giving their devotions there only. for in
it also are these words: quicunque discesserit de sua Ecclesia and in alia
Ecclesia sepultus fuerit etc. what can sua Ecclesia be but such a kind of
Parish Church, as at this day is titled so? that is, one limited in regard of
the Parishioners and their profits received from them. But, in that of Edgars
ealden Minstre, it is plain that although Minstre specially denote a
Monastery, yet all other Parish Mother Churches are understood by it. and
indeed dyric and Minstre are frequent, as Synonomies in the Saxon moniments.
But as the first part of his Law that gives all Tithes to the Mother Church of
every Parish, meant in them a Parochial right to Incumbents, so also the
second part, that permits a third portion of the Founders Tithes to be settled
in a Church new built, whereto the right of Sepulture is annexed, makes a
dispensation for a Parishioner that would build such a Church in his Bocland or
land possessed optimo iure, or as inheritance derived from a Charter of
feoffment. And howeuer that second part also of this Law, is iterated by King
Knout, yet I doubt not but that such new erections within old Parishes bred
also new divisions which afterward became whole Parishes, and by conniuence of
the time, took (for so much as was in the Territory of that Bocland) the
former Parochial right that the elder and Mother church was possessed of. For,
that right of Sepulture or having a legersto, was, and regularly is a Character
of a Parish Church or Ecclesia, as it is commonly distinguished from Capella.
and anciently if a quare impedit had been brought for a Church, whereas the
defendant pretended it to be a Chapel only, the issue was not so much whether
it were Church or Chapel, as whether it had Baptisterium or Sepulturam, or
no. so it appears in a case of Trinit. Placit. 23. Hen. 3. rot. 15. in arce
Londinensi.
23. Hen. 3. where William of Whitanston in his count against the Archbishop of
Canterbury, expresses, Ecclesiam de Hey in Sussex to be of his aduowson, and
the Archbishop pleads that what he calls a Church, non est Ecclesia, imo
Capella pertinens ad matricem Ecclesiam de Terringes, ita quod non est ibi
Baptisterium neque Sepultura imo omnes qui nascuntur ibidem baptizantur apud
Terringes, and similiter omnes qui ibi moriuntur, sepeliuntur apud Terringes
etc. and thence was it also that the whole Clergy of England put the inquiry
of such an issue among their grieuances, when in 21. Hen 3. they desired Otho
the Popes Legate, among other freedoms, to get for them of the King, Quod In
Ann^l. Ms. Monasterij Bur^onc^sis* su^ anno 1237. apud V.C. Tho. A^len. Oxon.
iudices seculares non decidant causas Ecclesiasticas in soro seculari, nec
tales homines determinent vtrum talis Capella debeat habere Baptisterium and
Sepulturam an non. For, if it had the right of administration of Sacraments in
it and Sepulture also, then differd it not from a Parish Church, but might be
styled Capella Parochialis, by which Lind^ood in tit. de Censibus ^quamuis Lex
naturae ve^b Vna Ecclesia and in tit. de cel^^r. M^sser. c essr^^at 1. and v^de
B^act fol. 241. b and (...). lib. 5. cap. 14. and B^cton fol. ^26. b
name some Chapels are with us known. and in the Saxon times also we find
Coemiterium In^ulphus fol. 489. b.
Capellae, for the burial place of a Chapel, which must be understood of a
Church that had the like right as that which is mentiond. in the second part of
Edgars Law. and those other churches which in his and K. Knouts Laws are spoken
of, that is, Churches without burial places, feldcyrican, or field-Churches,
are only what at this day we call Chapels of ease, built and consecrated for
Oratories, but not diminishing any thing of the Mother Churches profits. But
also besides those original Lay foundations, some Parishes have had other
beginnings since from alterations made in regard of the inconvenience of their
former limits. And this by direction or authority both from the Pope, or
Bishops, according as they saw occasion exacted; and from the King. For the
Pope; we may see in the example remaining in the Decretals Extr. tit. de
Eccles. adificand. c. 3. ad audient^am.
, where Pope Alexander the third sends his Decree to the Archbishop of York,
reciting that in a complaint made to him, he had heard that a certain Town in
his Province was so distant from the Parish church, that it was very difficult
for the Inhabitants to repair thither, especially in winter, and withal that
the Church revenue of the Parish (although that Town were exempted) was not
insufficient for the Minister of the Mother Church, wherefore he commands the
Archbishop to build in that Town a Church, and with assent of the Founder of
the Mother Church, to institut at the Presentation of the Rector an Incumbent
there, that might have to his own use all Ecclesiastique profits increasing in
the limits of the same Town, and so acknowledge a superiority to the Mother
Church, and that he should do it also whether the Rector of the Mother Church
would assent or not. For the King; an old Pat. 13. Me^. 3. part. 1. membr. 7.
example is in 13. Hen. 3. where because the Church of S. Peeters in Chichester
was very poor, and that only two Parishioners were in it, the King at request
of Ralf Neuill then Bishop there and Chancellor of England, grants, quod eadem
Ecclesia demoliatur and praedicti duo Parochiani qui spectabant ad ipsam
assignentur imperpetuum Hospitali S. Mariae, quod eidem Ecclesiae est vicinum,
vt ibi deinceps percipian^ spiritualia and sint Parochiani eiusdem Hospitalis.
And such like commands, occasions, and conueniences, doubtless have alterd and
made the limits of diverse Parishes eueriewhere, both in the Country and
Cities, which have to this day many of small Territory, but of large number of
Communicants. For Parochial limits, thus much.

CAP. X.
I. The Practice of Tithing. Of K. Cedwalla's Tithing, being no Christian. the
custom of the German-Saxons, in sacrificing their tenth captive to Neptune.
Decima used for a less part also in ancient moniments.

II. The Practice of Tithing in the Christian times of our Ancestors. the tale
of Augustine and the Lord of Cometon touching non payment of them. the Tithe of
every dying Bishops substance to be given to the poor, by an old Prouincial
Synod: Tithes how mentiond in Domesday. Testimonies of payment of them. Henry
the thirds grant of the payment of tithe of Hay and Mils out of all his
demesnes. The beginning of Parochial payment of Tithes in common and
established practice in England. How that common assertion; that every man
might have disposed his tithes at his pleasure, before the Council of Lateran,
is true and to be understood.

THe Laws of this Kingdom for payment of Tithes, and the original of
Parochial right to profits accruing within the limits of every Parish Church
(which were, after Lay foundations grew common, distinguished according to the
adjacent possessions and tenancies of the Founders, and their Farms, Manors,
Towns, and the like) being hitherto declared; the Practice of the times
remains to be also discovered.

I.
In that, something also is obseruable among the Ancients of this Kingdom of a
kind of Tithing, related to have been where Christianity was not yet received.
Some of them tell us of Cedwalla King of the West Saxons, that before his being
made Christian (about the year DC.LXXXVI.) he tithed all his spoils of War
to the Deity. So the Monk of Malmesburie. Arduum memoratu est, says he,
quantum etiam ante baptismum inseruiret pietati, vt omnes manubias, quas iure
praedatorio in suos vsu^ transcripserat, Deo decimaret. neither, if he did so,
was it without some example of his Ancestors the German-Saxons (whence England
was chiefly filled) who were wont to sacrifice to Neptune (I think) the Tenth
of all captives taken in their pyracies and incursions made by Sea upon the
Gauls specially* so says my Author, that liud about the time of the
German-Saxons first arrival here. his Sidon. Apollinaru lib. 8. Epist. 6.
words, of them are. Praeterea priusquam de continenti in patriam vela
laxantes, hostico mordaces anchoras vado vellant, mos est remeaturis Demimum
quenque captorum per aquales and cruciarias poenas, plus ob hoc tristi quod
superstitioso ritu, necare super que collectam turbam periturorum mortis
iniquitatem sortis aequitate dispergere. Talibus se ligant votis, victimis
soluunt: and per huiusmodi non tam sacrificia purgati quam sacrilegia polluti,
religiosum putant caedis infaustae perpetratores, de capite captiuo magis
exigere tormenta quam pretia. Neither, I think, is any other express mention
of this their Tithing, among ancient moniments. and, for that their sacrificing
to Neptune; indeed the Author Apollinaris here mentions him not. but, it being
done at Sea and per aquales (for so is the true reading, although some there
read aequales poenas) you may well conjecture it was to Neptune or to their
supposed Deity of the Sea. and thus the most learned and noble Monsieur
Sauaron in his notes upon Apollinaris, expressly also makes it a sacrifice to
Neptune. and although it be true that among their gods we find none namd, that
is denoted to answer to Neptune, yet, that some Deity of the same nature, that
is some great Sea god was in their superstitions, may be easily collected not
only from this relation of their cruel devotions, but also from their wondrous
and accurat observation of the ebbs and floods (called by them Ledons and
Malins) which were the Videsis Joseph. Scalig. de Emendat. Temp. lib* 2. and
lib. 1. de Mirabilibus S. Scripturae D. Augustino (...) iptum etc.
chief Directors of their account of times, as the Sun and Moons motion has
ever been to other Nations. which doubtless was no small cause that the Sea
was to them reputed a Deity, as the Sun and Moon also, before other
Creaturers, in the ancient Theology of the Gentiles. But for that of Cedwalla;
let it be upon Malmesburie credit, that he tithed his spoils. Bid, who might
better have known it then Malmesburie could, relates no such thing of him. He
says only, that when he conquered the Isle of Wight, according to a vow that
he made to the Deity, he gave for the Lords use, the fourth part of the Isle
(that is, CCC. Hides or Plough-lands of M.CC.) and of his Martial gains, to
Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, then being in those parts in banishment, and
Bishop of Seseley. And Ms. in Biblioth. Cotton^ de quo apud Malmesbur. lib. 1.
de est. Pontif. fol. 114. a.
Fridegod, that in the Saxon times wrote the life of Wilfrid in Verse, says
hereof only by Apostrophe to Cedwalla, Tu quoque Pontificem multa tellure
beasti, and mentions no more in particular. That which in the Latin Bid, in
this story, is called Familia, is hyd in the Saxon. And perhaps only such a
kind of giving a fourth, or any part, upon vow to the Lord, was in that passage
of Malmesburie understood for Tithing. Why might it not, as well as the four
Thraues of Corn of every Plough-land, in the East Riding of York, given by
King Athelstan to the Church of S. John of Beuerley (which came, on the other
side, not near to the Tenth) are styled Decimae in a Bull of one of the Pope
Gregory's (I think the ninth) which I have seen transcribed. As if Decimae in
one notion had signified any kind of revenue, devoutly offered to holy uses.
as, upon other reason, (...) denotes also (...) among the Greeks. Those four
Thraues of every Ploughland were, before that Grant, payable into the Kings
Auenarie Fulcardus Derobornens. de vita and mi^ac I. de Beuerlaco recens Ms. in
Biblioth. Cotton.
by custom of the Country. And in Athelstans Charter (as I Ms^ in eadem
Biblioth.
found it transcribed) they were thus expressed, tha forne thraue by heaven cyng
Of ilc a plou of Estreding.
And for that more general notion of Decima or Decimatio, I have seen the
transcript of a Deed made Chartular. Ms. Monasterij de Giseburne in dict. bib.
by Robert de Hesel to the Monastery of Giseburne in Yorkshire, wherein he
gives duas garbas de tota terra quam de nouo colui in Territorio de Hesel
postquam illam tenui aut quam ego de caetero colam vel haeredes mei, ita vt
Decimatio haec cedat in fabricationem Ecclesiae nouae de Giseburne. Here the
gift of two Sheaues is called Decimatio.

II.
For the practice of payment among Christians, both Britons and Saxons; might
we believe the common tale of that Augustine, the first Archbishop of
Canterbury Province, his coming to Cometon in Oxfordshire, and doing a most
strange miracle there, touching the establishing of the Doctrine of due payment
of Tithes, we should have as certain and express authority for the ancient
practice of such payment, as any other Church in Christendom can produce. But
as the tale is, you shall have it, and then censure it. About the year (they
say) DC. Augustine coming to preach at Cometon, the Priest of the place makes
complaint to him, that the Lord of the Manor having been often admonished by
him, would yet pay him no Tithes. Augustine questioning the Lord about that
default in devotion; he stoutly answered, That the tenth Sheaf doubtless was
his that had interest in the nine, and therefore would pay none. Presently
Augustine denounces him excommunicate, and turning to the Altar to say Mass,
publicly forbad, that any excommunicat person should be present at it, when
suddenly, a dead Corpse, that had been buried at the Church door, arose (pardon
me for relating it) and departed out of the limits of the Churchyard, standing
still without, while the Mass continued. Which ended, Augustine comes to this
liuing-dead, and charges him in the name of the Lord God to declare who he
was. He tells him, that in the time of the British State he was huius villae
Patronus, and although he had been often urged by the Doctrine of the Priest to
pay his Tithes, yet he never could be brought to it; for which he died, he
says, excommunicat, and was carried to Hell. Augustine desired to know where
the Priest that excommunicated him, was buried. this dead showed him the place;
where he makes an invocation of the dead Priest, and bids him arise also,
because they wanted his help. The Priest rises. Augustine asks him, if he knew
that other that was risen. he tells him, yes; but wishes he had never known
him. for (says he) he was in all things ever adverse to the Church, a
detainer of his Tithes, and a great sinner to his death, and therefore I
excommunicated him. But Augustine publicly declares, that it was fit mercy
should be used toward him, and that he had sufferd long in Hell for his
offense (you must suppose, I think, the Author meant Purgatory) wherefore he
gives him absolution, and sends him to his grave, where he fell again into
dust and ashes. He gone, the Priest new risen, tells, that his Corpse had lien
there above C.LXX. years; and Augustine would gladly have had him continue upon
earth again, for instruction of Souls, but could not thereto entreat him. So
he also returns to his former lodging. The Lord of the Town standing by all
this while, and trembling, was now demanded if he would pay his Tithes; but he
presently fell down at Augustines feet, weeping and confessing his offense; and
receiving pardon, became all his life time a follower of Augustines. Had this
Legend truth in it, who could doubt, but that payment of Tithes was in practice
in the Infancy of the British Church? The Priest that rose here from the dead,
liud (if he ever liud) about CCC.XXX. after Christ, and would not surely have
so taxed the Lord of this Manor only, if the payment had not been usually
among other good Christians here, not taught only, but performed also. Neither
need I admonish much of the authority of it. the whole course of it directs you
how to smell out the original. Beside the common Legend of our Saints, it is
in some Volumes put alone, for a most obseruable Moniment. and I found it bound
up at the end of the Ms. life of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury,
written by John de Grandisono. and it remains in the public Library of
Oxford. There also you have it related in Ioannes Anglicus Ms. part. 1. lib.
17. cap. 72.
his Historia Aurea, and, in the Margin, are noted to it these words: Hoc
miraculum videbitur illis incredibile qui credunt aliquid Deo esse impossible.
sed nulli dubium est quod nunquam Anglorum durae ceruices Christi iugo se
submisissent nisi per magna miracula sibi diunitus ostensa. But let the truth
be as it will, I do not believe, that the fable can be found, nor any steps of
it, above CCCC. year old at most. But, to leave such testimony, no doubt can
be, but that some practice of payment was here used very anciently, which
(beside the devotion to be supposed in Christians, and the Doctrine of ancient
Fathers, which, very likely, wrought here as in other Western Churches) might
be collected, by good probability, out of those Laws alone of the Saxon times
which questionless were not without some effect, being so often renewd.
Neither is the memory of some use of payment here, in these more elder times,
omitted in the relics of antiquity. In the Ms. life Jn Bibl. Cott.
of the British Saint Cadoc, among some Laws of his Church of Lhancaruan, which
seem to be attributed to his time (which falls about our Augustine or before)
one is, Quicunque decimauerit, debet diuidere in tres parts. primam dabit
Confessori, secundam Altari, tertiam orantibus pro eo. but the Author of this
whence we have it, wrote not till after the Norman Conquest. And it is reported
also of Eadbert Bishop of Lindisfarn or Holy Island, that he was Eleemosynarum
operatione (as Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 29.
Bedes words are) insigni ita vt iuxta legem omnibus annis Decimam non solum
quadrupedum, verum etiam frugum omnium and pomorum necnon and vestimentorum
partem pauperibus daret. which words are almost repeated also by Turgot Prior
of Durham, Ms. in Biblioth. Cotton. and apud V.C. Th. Allen. Oxon.
that wrote the story of that Bishoprique. But here no custom of the place or
common use is noted, but only a special devotion of Eadbert. and for that of
iuxta legem; you must understand it of Moses Law. and so is it expressed in the
Saxon Copy of Bid, where I read that he did it aefter Moses ae, and that is,
according to the Law of Moses. Neither is the regard in those times had to a
tenth (although not yearly) to to be paid as for a souls ransom, to the poor,
after the death of every Bishop out of his estate, to be here wholly neglected.
Out of this regard may be inferd that therein also the Tenth was reputed as a
sanctified part. And we learn it out of a Council Ms. (compact. inter
Monimenta Eccles. Landa^. in Biblioth. Cott.) cap 10.
held in DCCC.XVI. In loco famoso ( as the words of it are) qui dicitur
Celichyth, Praesidente vero Wlfredo Archiepiscopo caeterisque adsedentibus
australibus Anglorum Episcopis, which has this Canon. Iubemus, and hoc
firmiter statuimus ad seruandum, tam in nostris diebus quamque etiam futuris
temporibus, omnibus successoribus nostris qui post nos illis sedibus ordinentur
quibus nos ordinati sumus, vt quandocunque aliquis ex numero Episcoporum
migrauerit de seculo, tunc pro anima illius praecipimus ex substantia
vniuscuiusque rei Decimam partem diuidere ac distribuere pauperibus in
eleemosynam sieve in pecoribus and armentis seu de Ouibus and Porcis vel etiam
in Cellarijs, necnon omnem hominem Anglicum liberare qui in diebus suis sit
seruituti subiectus, vt per illud sui proprij laboris fructum retributionis
percipere mereatur and indulgentiam peccatorum. And for the succeeding times of
the Saxons; we may well conjecture a practice of payment out of King Knonts
Epistle sent in M.XXXI. as he departed homeward from Rome, by Living Abbot of
Tanystok to Athelnoth and Alfrique, the two Archbishops by name, and to the
rest of the Bishops and Baronage of England. he therein straightly charges them
all, that according to the ancient Law they should take care that Tithes were
duly paid among other Church revenues, wherein if he found default at his
coming they should expect severe punishment. the words were: Nunc Apud G.
Malmesbur. de gest. Reg. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 11.
igitur obtestor omnes Episcopos meos and regni mei praepositos per fidem quam
mihi debetis and Deo, quatenus faciatis vt antequam in Angliam veniam, omnium
debita, quae secundum legem antiquam debemus, sint persoluta, scilicet
eleemosyna pro aratris, and Decimae animalium ipso anno procreatorum, and
Denarij quos Romam ad sanctum Petrum debetis, sieve ex vrbibus sieve ex villis,
and mediante Augusto Decimae frugum, and in festiuitate S. Martini primitiae
seminum ad Ecclesiam sub cuius Parochia quisque degit quae Anglice Cur^scet
nominatur. Haec and alia, si cum venero, non erunt persoluta, regia exactione
secundum leges in quem culpa cadit districte absque venia Forsan Compensabit.
comparabit. and the Monk that relates it, adds, nec dicto deterius fuit
factum. But what ever may be out of these testimonies concluded, it is noted
among the Laws attributed to Edward the Confessor, that what through the
coldness of devotion, what through the neglect of demanding Tithes by the
Clergy, that were otherwise grown very rich in real endowments, the practice
of payment of them was much diminished. Sed postea instinctu diaboli (are the
words which follow immediately what is before in the Chapter of Laws. XIII.)
multi Decimam detinuerunt, and Sacerdotes locupletes negligentes non curabant
inire laborem ad per quirendas eas, eo quod sufficienter habebant suae
necessaria vitae. Multis enim in locis modo sunt tres vel quatuor Ecclesiae vbi
tunc temporis vna tantum erat, and sic ceperunt minui^ but we are not sure that
this addition to the Law is as ancient as the Confessor. I think it indeed
rather of somewhat later time. yet doubtless the general practice of payment
according to those ancient Laws, howeuer it might be in elder times, was about
the Norman Conquest, much discontinued, which may be specially observed out of
that book of Domesday (the original Copy whereof yet remains in the Receipt
of the Exchequer) in which the Possessions and Revenues both of the Clergy and
Laity were accounted and valued, by the oaths of Enquests taken in every
County upon commission, and so returned thither about the end of the
Conquerors reign. There, frequently enough, Churches are mentioned by the words
of Ibi Ecclesia and Presbyter, or such like; and how many Carues or Hides of
land, how many villans, and other endowments and revenues belongs to them, are
reckond, with their values. But very rarely any Tithes among those Church
revenues are there found. if none at all had been namd, it might have been
thought that they had been omitted as a more sacred profit, then was fit to be
taxed in such a Description. But some, although very few, occur in it. as
under Terra Osberni Episcopi in Boseham in Sussex, you may there find that
Decimam Ecclesiae Clerici tenent, and valet XLs. where the lest value of the
Manor is made at XLli. per annum. in Hampshire under Terra Osberni Episcopi,
you read Ecclesia S. Michaelis de Monte tenet de Rege in Basingestoches
Hundred, vnam Ecclesiam cum 1. hida and Decimam de Manerio Basingestoches. Ibi
est Presbyter. So in the same Shire under Terra Regis; Ipse Rex tenet Wallope
etc. ibi Ecclesia; cui pertinent vna hida and medietas Decimae Manerij and
totum i. Church sce^.
Curset, and de Decima villanorum XLVI. denarij and medietas agrorum. Ibi est
adhuc Ecclesiola ad quam pertinent VIII. acrae de Decima. for these VIII. acres
of Tithes, see before in the Chapter of Laws. IX.X. and XI. And in the same
Shire also among the Abbot of Lire's possessions, the Tithe of Cladford is
reckond, as also of Adrintone. and also the Tithes of Stanham are possessed
there by one Richerius Parson of the Church of Stanham. and under Terra
Canonicorum de Tuinham, is found, Ad hanc Ecclesiam pertinet tota decima de
Twinham, and tertia pars Decimarum de Holchest. and in the Isle of Wight there,
VI. Churches, belonging to the Abbey of Lire, Decimas habent de omnibus
redditibus Regis. So in Bedfordshire the Church of S. Marie de Cormelijs, has
diverse Tithes among its revenues. But the mention of Tithes where Churches are
nevertheless spoken of, is but very seldom through that whole Description.
and indeed in certain Counties as Somerset, Deuon, Cornwall, and some few
others, you shall rarely have a Parish Church noted, but in others, very often
Churches are, but very few examples of their having Tithes. sometimes also
grants of Tithes by Lay owners are there mentiond, out of the use of which it
may be well thought that the moities or third parts of tithes belonging to this
or that Church, had their beginnings. But thereof more particularly in the next
Chapter, where we speak of arbitrarie Consecrations. And in most Appropriations
of Parish Churches made in the Saxon times (the ancient course being to grant,
in appropriating, Ecclesiam cum Decimis) no mention is of Decimae, but other
possessions of the churches granted are most particularly inserted in the
instruments; of which some examples are published in Ingulphus Abbot of
Crowland, and very many occur in Chartularies of old Monasteries. Ms. in
Bibl. Cott.
But see also for this matter the autorities anon brought to another purpose in
the XIV. Chap.. 2. For the following age (besides some examples related in the
next Chapter, out of which some kind of known payment at least, to some
Churches, may be without difficulty collected) that we may here omit also the
diverse Appropriations, in the Ante ^lla V^u monumenta co^s^las si placet
Ca^t^l. Roffensi^ Ecclesia, ibid.
times presently ensuing the Conquest, of Ecclesiae cum Decimis, which denotes
either some payment or interest of Tithes settled by Consecrations in them; In
the life of S. Cutbert Bishop of Lindisfarn written by some Monk under Hen. I.
it is related, that in that Autors time a great penury of food being in
Lindisfarn (that is, in Holy Island) the Sea left upon the shore LXV. fishes,
whereof every one was a sufficient draught for a yoke of Oxen; and that a Monk
came to the Lord of the adioining soil, and desired the Tenth of that
abundance so sent by the hand of God. Saltem Decimas (as the words are) quod
Legis and Prouinciae consuetudo exigebat, Ecclesiae requisiuit, sed omnibus
negatis rubore simul and dolor confusus discessit. here the practice of
payment is noted by Prouinciae consuetudo. and about the same time the fashion
about Abingdon was to pay the Tithes to the Abbey (due either as it was an
ealder Minstre by K. Edgars Law; or as they had been consecrated; whereof more
in the next Chapter) by whole Hides and Acres. His diebus, says the
Chartularie of that Abbey, raro a quoquam Decima messium vt lege praecipitur in
Abbatia ipsa dabatur, sed aut de Hidagio XL. manipuli quos vulgo garbas vocant,
aut Decima suae culturae Acra porrigebantur. and for the time under Henry the
second; an Epistle sent from Rome by Pope Alexander the third, to the Bishops
of Worcester and Winchester, recites the general institution (which may be
understood for custom) of the Church of England to be that every Parishioner
should pay his Tithe corn to his own Parish. Cum homines (so it In Append ad
Council. Lat^r. part. 4. cap* 4.
speaks) de Hortuna secundum generalem Ecclesiae Anglicanae institutionem, de
frugibus suis nouem partibus sibi retentis Decimas Ecclesiae cuius parochiani
sunt sine diminutione soluere teneantur etc. wherewith agrees the preamble of
his Decretall, remaining yet in the body of the Canon Extr. tit. de Decimis c.
5. peruinit.
Law. there he begins with Quod cum Parochiani vestri (that is all the
Parishioners within the Diocese of Canterbury) Decimas bonorum suorum
consueuerint Ecclesijs, quibus debentur, cum integritate persoluere; nunc tam
laudabili consuetudine praetermissa quidam ex eis de lana and de faeno, and de
prouentibus molendinorum and piscariarum Decimas ipsis Ecclesijs subtrahere non
verentur. hereto add that of one of his predecessors Ibid. c. 4. Commissum est.
Hadrian the fourth to the Archbishop of Canterbury, where a Parochial
payment of Tithes seems to be spoken of as of known right. and in a composition
made by the Abbot In Regest. Mon. Leonmin^t. sine Rading in Bibl. Cotton. and
vide App. ad Council. Lat part. 48. cap. 1.
of Euesham a Judge Delegat from Pope Honorius in M.CC.XX. it is taken clear
that certain Tithes de iure communi pertinent ad Ecclesiam de Leonminstre eo
quod sitae sunt infra limits Parochiae Ecclesiae de Leonminstre, according as
the Texts of the Canon Law of about that time expressly also affirm. The
composition was between some of the Diocese of Hereford, and the Abbot of
Wigmore. like admissions of that Law are in other instruments, in the Ledger
book of Reading, for the Church of Lemster. But conclude not out of them for
practice, without observation of the examples of the next Chapter. And it
appears that in 11. Hen. 3. a special grant was made by the King, that Tithes
of Hay and Mills should be paid from thenceforth in all his demesnes lands
(that is al occupied either by his Villains or Bailifes, or by Lessees that
came in after the grant) which before then had not bin paid. Dominus Rex, says
the Rot Claus. 11. Hen. 3. part. 1. membr. 9 in Dorso. and Rot. Claus. 12. Hen.
3. membr. 7. in Dorso. and Claus. ^7. Hen. 3. Dors. 16. and Dors. Claus. 20.
Hen* 3. membr 24. and Claus. 21. Hen. 3 membr. 10.
record, de Concilio Archiepiscoporum and Episcoporum suorum concessit vt
Decimae faeni and molendinorum de singulis Dominicis suis in regno suo de
caetero praestentur. Et mandatum est balliuis de Corsham quod de Dominico suo
de Corsham Decimas faeni Ecclesiae de Corsham dari faciant. T. R. apud
Westmonast. XVIII. die Maij. and according to this, were diverse close Writs
sent out in the following years. Of the times afterward, we find more certain
testimonies showing the common right of Tithes and that Parochial; as the Writ
of Indicauit, grounded upon the Statut of Circumspecte agatis, made in 13. Ed.
1. discouers, that in and before that time the Parochial Tithes were most
known revenue of every Church, with which agrees the ancient and present form
of the Count, in a Writ of Right of Aduowson of a Parish Church, wherein the
Esplees are chiefly laid in Tithes, because the Aduowson of the whole Tithes,
is no other then the Aduowson of the Church, as Judge Stoner 4. Ed. 3. fol. 27.
^.
says in Corbets case. And by the practice of the Kingdom, it became clear
Law (as it remains also at this day) that regularly, if no other title or
discharge, to be specially pleaded or showed in the Allegation of the
Defendant, might appear, every Parson had a common right to the Tithes of all
annual increase (prediall and mixed) accruing within the limits of his Parish,
without showing other title to them in his Libell. That appears frequently in
our Yeer-books, where the Issues, taken upon Parochial Limits, are reported.
But we may here not untimely remember an occurrence in the Petitions In Codic^
Vet Ms. apud V.C.I. Borough. Scrinior^^ in Arce Land. prafectu^^^
of the Parliament of 33. Ed. 1. touching the Tithes of Cornwall, challenged by
the Parsons and Vicars there. De Personis and Vicarijs (says the entry)
petentibus Decimam in Cornubia, vbi Rex soluit annuatim Episcopo Exoniensi pro
Decima praedicta; ita responsum est. Fiat sicut consueuit tempore Comitis and
Regis. The Earl and the King there meant, are that great Richard, and Henry
the third. But this must not be understood of the Tithes generally in the
County, although the words might import as much, as if the Bishop had receiud
them all. It was doubtless for the Tithe of the Stannaries only. For it is
true, that the Bishop of Exceter had the Tithe of the profits or rent of the
Stannaries there anciently given and paid him. and thereof testimony enough
Vide R^t Fin. 4. Hen. 3. membr. 1. and C^aus. 5. Hen. 3. membr. 6.
is upon record. and to that purpose also is that Marginall Note, in the Book
of those Parlaments, Stagmen Cornubiae. clearly, that goes for the Stannum
Cornubiae, as Stagminatores for those of the Works. For the time of Edward the
third and Richard the second (beside that of the Tithes of Silua caedua, or
Copis Wood, whereof enough before, in the Laws that belong to it) you may
remember those complaints of Chaucers Plowman against the Clergy of his age.
Their Tithing and their Offering both
They clemeth it by possession,
Thereof nil they none forgo,
But robben men by ransom.
And then, of Parish-Rectors. For the Tithing of a Ducke,
Or an Apple, or an Egg.
Aye,
They make men swear upon a Book,
Thus they foulen Christ's fay.
And, He woll have Tithing and Offering,
Maugre whosoever it grutch.
And in the Freres Tale, And small Tithers they were foul yshent before the
Archdeacon. To these (for Personal Tithes) you may add that of Mortuaries,
payable in Beasts regularly before the Statute of 21. Hen. 8. which were
reputed due upon the general presumption of every Defuncts negligence in
payment of his Personal Tithes. The Mortuarie was therefore (by the Canons) to
be presented with the body at the Burial, as a satisfaction of omission, and
negligence in paying to the Church Lindw^ tit. de consuetudine, c. statutum,
lit. f. and 21. Hen. ^. cap. 6.
those Personal Duties. And thence was it styled Corse-present; according
whereto, I have seen a Justification in the Eire of Derby of 4. Ed. 3. to an
Action of Trespass brought by Thomas of Goustill against the Parson of Whitwell,
for the taking of a Horse; in which the defendant pleades, that it was the
Horse of one I. Leyer his Parishioner that died, Et que le dit Chiual
ensemblement oue autres chooses fust mesnes and present al Esglise come en nosme
de Mortuarie deuant le corpse mesme le iour etc. and il come Parson les prist
and resceut auxi come custom de la terre and de Seint Esglise est etc. These
show plainly the received and acknowledged Parochial right, in the practice of
those times, which has to this day continued. neither is it at all necessary
to add more for the uniform continuance of it. Saving only, that where any
Statute has made a discharge, or Prescription or Custom has settled a Modus
Decimandi or certain quantity payable, though never so little, for the Tithe,
there, by the Laws of the Kingdom, the owner is not bound to pay other Tithe,
then the Statute or Custom or Prescription binds him to. Which yet must be so
understood in the case of Lay men, that Custom or Prescription founded in
their possessions as Lay, cannot wholly discharge the Tithe, or be de non
Decimando, but may well be de modo only; otherwise is it in the case of
spiritual persons, that may by the common Law be by Prescription wholly,
discharged and prescribe de non Decimando. And this is regularly clear Law. But
at what time this Parochial and common right became first settled with us in
practice, is not so clearly known. and though those Decretals, before cited,
suppose it a thing of custom here in Henry the II. his time, yet if credit
might be given to the report of those English Monks, which (as we have before
related) referd the ordaining of Parochial right in Tithes to the General
Council of Lions, held under Gregory the tenth, then we might conclude the
right of it no ancienter then about the beginning of our Edward the first. But
whateuer they meant, it is certain, that some, both Synodall and secular Laws
of this Kingdom, had, before that time, ordained this right. Yet indeed it
will be found, that the Practice of it here (as also in other Countries) was
not settled till some M.CC. years after Christ, or, at lest, was, for many years
before, and some after, discontinued. Which may partly be collected out of that
Decretall of Pope Innocent the third, sent into this Kingdom, and dated in the
Lateran; which is before at large in the Chapter of Laws,. XXIII. For howeuer
the recitals are in those of Alexander the third (the one speaking of Generalis
institutio for Parochial payment, which, as it may denote common custom, so
also may be understood for some Law of the Kingdom, as that of Edgars, Knouts,
the Confessors, or some other before related; the other, of Consueuerint
Ecclesijs quibus debentur, which does not of necessity include a general
practice of Parochial payment, but may as well denote the duty that comes
from arbitrarie Consecrations; of which, in the next Chapter) it is most
certain, that before about the year M.CC. after Christ, that is, about the time
of King John, it was most commonly practiced by the Laity, to make arbitrarie
Consecrations of the Tithes of their possessions to what Monastery or Church
they would, sometimes giving half, sometimes a third part, and at their
pleasure all, in perpetual right, or otherwise, according to the nature of
those Consecrations in other Countries; of which, enough is before related.
Neither does express testimony hereof want in that Decretall of Innocent the
third, made against these kind of arbitrarie Consecrations. Multi (says he)
in Diocesi tua (that is the Province of Canterbury) Decimas suas pro sua
distribuunt voluntate. Neither may you understand it, as if it had bin done by
the waiward opposition of some only against the receiud and allowd Laws of the
Kingdom. For notwithstanding all those Ordinances, both Secular and Synodall,
anciently here made for due payment, it is clear, that in the time before about
that Innocent, it was not only usual, in fact, for Lay men to convey the right
of their Tithes, as Rents-charge, or the like, to what Church or Monastery
they made choice of, but by the course and practice of the Law also of that
time (both Common and Canon, as it was here in use) such conueyances were
clearly good, and what was through them so acquired, was continually, and is to
this day (except some particulars, which either the Popes authority of later
time, or new Co^positions or Grants, or the like, have altered) enjoyed by the
Churches, that, yet remaining, had portions so anciently given them, or by the
King or his Grantees of impropriated Tithes; very many of which, had their
chief original from those arbitrarie Consecrations (which you may well call
Appropriations of Tithes) and not from the appropriating only of Parish
Churches, as some out of gross ignorance, with too much confidence, deliver.
But thereof you may see more in the examples of the next Chapter. where, for
most apparent proof of the practice of arbitrarie Consecrations in those
times, Moniments enough are collected. This arbitrarie disposition, used by the
Laity as well de iure (as the Positive Law, then received and practiced, was)
as de facto, is that which Wicclef rememberd in his complaint to the King and
Parliament under Richard the second. His words are: A Lord God, Why is this
reason, or is this reason.
where this be reason, to constrain the poor people to find a worldly Priest,
sometime unable both of life and cunning, in pomp and pride, couetise and
envy, glottonie, drunkenness and lechery, in simonie and heresy, with fat
Horse, and jolly and gay Saddles and Bridles, ringing by the way, and himself
in costly Clothes and Pelure, and to suffer their wives and children, and their
poor neighbors, perish for hunger, thirst, and cold, and other mischiefs of
the world. A Lord Jesus Christ, since within few years, men paid their Tithes
and Offerings at their own will free to good men, and able to great worship of
God, to profit and fairness of holy Church fighting in earth. Why is it
lawful.
Where it were lawful and needful, that a worldly Priest should destroy this
holy and approved custom, constraining men to leave this freedom, turning
Tithes and Offerings into wicked uses. But what he calls a few years, will
fall out to be about CC. for he wrote about the year M.CCC.XC. With him well
agrees some passages in our Yeere-bookes of the times before him. As in 7. Ed.
3. fol. 5. a. Parning truly affirms, that in auncien temps deuant un
Constitution de nouelle fait per le Pape, un Patron d'un Esglise puit granter
Dismes, deins mesme le Paroche a un altre Paroche. And Herle there in his
answer seems to admit it clear. So also (touching others as well as Patrons)
Lodlow, Judge of Assise in 44. Ed. 3. fol. 5. b. En auncien temps chescun home
purroit graunter les Dismes de sa terre a quel Esglise il voudroit. Quod verum
est, says Judge Brook, in abridging the case. But what new Constitution of
the Pope is meant there by Parning? some later Vide 10. Hen. 7. for. 18. a. 7.
Ed 6. Dyer fol 84. b. and Coke Report 2. fol. 44. b.
Books tells us, that from the Council of Lateran the first alteration of that
course of arbitrarie disposition came. But plainly, no Council of Lateran
has any Canon that alterd the Law in it, except that under Alexander the
third, before spoken of in the end of the sixth Chapter, may have place here:
which, indeed, the Canonists will not endure, unless you restrain it only to
ancient Feudall Tithes. And they suppose, every man might have arbitrarily
conveyed, before that Council, his Feudall Tithes to what Church he would. And
so expressly says our Tit de locat and conducto^. licet. verb. portiones.
Lindwood. Ante illud Concilium been potuerunt Laici Decimas in feudum retinere
and eas alteri Ecclesiae vel Monasterio dare; non tamen post tempus dicti
Concilij. But if those which with us talk here of the Council of Lateran,
mean that under Alexvnder the third, and apply it generally to arbitrarie
Consecrations of new Tithes, not feudall, I doubt they are much nearer the true
meaning of that Council then any of the Canonists. especially while they
speak of this Kingdom. for arbitrarie Consecrations before about the time of
that Council are found here infinite, as presently shall be showed. But of
ancient feudall Tithes (howeuer they were common in other States) scarce any
mention at all or taste is with us. but thereof more in the XIII. Chapter. And,
it may be, that when, from the Canonists, some of our Lawiers had learned that
feudall Tithes might have been conveyed before that Council arbitrarily by the
owner; and saw withal that scarce any sign was of feupall Tithes in this
Kingdom, yet an abundance of old arbitrarie Consecrations, the use whereof
ceased about the time of the Council; in the words of it no regard or mention
being had of feudall but only Tithes in general; they concluded (who sees
enough why they might not?) that before that Council every man might have
arbitrarily disposed of his tithes. that is such tithes as were not formerly
settled by any civil Title. But if this will not be allowd for the Law of
change of those arbitarie conueiances; why may it not first be that Parning by
his Constitution de nouelle fait per le Pape, meant that Quam vide supr. cap.
8.. 23.
of Pope Innocent the third, sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury in King
John's time (and perhaps it was soon after receiud into the Province of York
either by imitation or through the power Legatin, which the Archbishop of
Canterbury commonly exercised through the whole Kingdom) to command a
Parochial payment? For also by the name of a Constitution newly made by the
Pope, some such thing rather then a Canon of a general Council, is perhaps
denoted. And then why might it not happen that the Decretal of Innocent the
third, bearing date in the Church of Lateran should be thence denominated, and
that afterward those which truly understanding it, called it therefore a
Lateran Constitution, gave cause of mistaking to others that took it for a
Constitution of a general Council of Lateran? especially too because it was
about the time of the general Council of Lateran (held under the same Pope
that sent it) of which more notice has been taken in our Law then of any other
of that name. and indeed he that affirms that before the Council of Lateran
Lay owners might have disposed their Tithes, cuicunque Ecclesiae secundum
meliorem deuotionem, as Dyers words are, speaks true enough, if his words may
receive this easy interpretation. that is, that till about that Council of
Lateran they might have done so; not that the Council under Pope Innocent
restraind it, but that either the next Council of Lateran before, that is
under Alexand. the III. or the Pope by a Constitution, received here from Rome
and dated in the Church of Lateran, about the time of that Council of the year
M.CC.XV. ordaind the contrary. so that in this last way the name of the
Council may be a note only of the time about which it was restraind, not of
the authority whence it was forbidden. Perhaps those Canons of Pluralities, of
Exemptions, of the three orders, and some such more which we receiud from that
Council under Innocent, were brought into England at once with this Decretall
Epistle; and if so, then also it was no more strange to have the Decretall
afterward titled by the name of a Co^stitution of the Lateran Council, then it
happend in the denomination of the Statuts of Aid de Roy and Voucher, made in
4. Ed. 1. every of which are styled by the name of Statutum de Bigamis. yet
only one Law de Bigamis receiud out of the general Council of Lions, is among
those Statuts; and that is even as much a stranger to the rest of the
Constitutions bearing the same name with it, as Pope Innocents Decretall was to
the whole Council of Lateran. Howeuer, it is most clear (let froward ignorance
as it can continue to oppose the assertion) that for CC. years at lest before
about the time of the Council of Lateran, held under the same Pope, arbitrarie
Consecrations of Tithes with us were frequent, and practiced as well of positive
right (if we may take that for right, in things subject to human disposition,
which general consent of the state allowd; as no man that knows what makes a
positive right, can deny) as of fact; which because they are best conceiud of
by the particular testimonies and precedents of them, in the following Chapter
many shall be transcribed; that are all (except one or two in the Province of
York; neither is it likely that in every place here, and by every man the
intent of that Constitution was suddenly observed, and perhaps also it was not
so soon alterd in York Province as in this of Canterbury, in regard that the
Decretall was sent only to Canterbury Province) of the time before that
Decretall and taken out of the most choice and authentic moniments, that may
afford help to the disquisition of this point so little, so not at all vulgarly
or indeed any where publicly discovered.

CAP. XI.
I. Arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes (before about the time of the most known
Council of Lateran) by conueiance from the owner of all or part to any Church
or Monastery at his pleasure, in examples selected out of moniments of
infallible credit.

II. A Writ in the Register intelligible only from those arbitrarie
Consecrations. a like example to it out of the book of Osney.

III. The liberty of the Baronage anciently challenged to build Churches in
their Territories. Parochial right to Tithes settled in Practice.

IV. Of Tithes of increase in lands not limited to any Parish. How by the
common Law they are to be disposed of.

BEsides the many testimonies that may be had out of the Portions especially
possessed by some Churches or Monasteries, many of which had no other beginning
then from arbitrarie Consecrations, made by owners of Tithes, in two parts, or
third parts, or otherwise at their pleasure to any Church or Monastery; the
frequent memory of Instruments of such Consecrations (made according to the
practiced Law of the time chiefly interceding from the year M. till some years
after M.CC. of our Savior) is to be principally observed in this disquisition.
The original moniments of those elder ages afford us plenty of the^. And in
regard of the easier connection and more compendious way of delivery, we shall
rather severally follow the singular courses of every of the Chartularies or
other moniments, which tell us of those kind of consecrated Tithes, then
dispose together every arbitrarie Consecration according to the order of time.
The several Titles of books whence we have them shall chiefly direct in the
general order. but neither shall the particular time, of every of these
selected examples of Consecration, be omitted.

I.
The Chartularie of the Abbey of In bibl. Cottoniana.
Abingdon shall obuiously have first place. In it, in the time of K. William
the second and Rainald Abbot, occurres; that Viuente praedicto Rainaldo Abbate,
trium Decimationum, Ecclesiae huic facta est vna ab Herberto de villa sua
Lakine, appellata Henrici de Ferrarijs L. Militis.
Milite; scilicet frugum, agnorum, caseorum, vitulorum, and porcellorum. Quod
and Robertus filius eiusdem post patris mortem confirmans, concedente Domino
suo praedicto Henrico, Abbendoniam venit, pro patris and sui suorumque salute
praefatam hic Decimationem perpetualiter tradidit; sibi fratribus suis germanis
Huberto and Stephano in his fauentibus; etiam istis amicis suis videntibus
Quirio de Mo^nais, and fratre eius Hugone and Roberto filio Aldulfi de
Be^retuna. Altera a Seswaldo de villa sua Hildeslea caseorum scilicet and
vellerum suarum ouium. Quod and haeres and filius eius Frogerus post eum denote
confirmauit. Quae vtraeque Decimationes luminaribus and ministerijs Altaris
Sanctae Mariae ab eo die specialiter delegatae hucusque in hoc expenduntur.
Tertia a Rotberto cuius erat cognomen Marmiun, and a filio ipsius Helto de
villa sua Henreda, frugum omnium suae propriae lucrationis. Sed and post illos
a Radulfo cognomento Rosel idem concessum. And then follows Rosel's Charter to
that purpose: Ego Radulphus agnomento Rosellus concedo volo atque praecipio
seruientibus meis vt segetes meas de Hen^eth deciment ad ostium Granciae meae
quae ibidem habetur and ipsam Decimam recte and fideliter seruienti S. Mariae
deliberent. And this Tithe was in the sole disposition of the Almosner of the
Abbey. Out of IV. Hides also lying in the same Henred, a consecration of the
Tithe had been made before in the time of the Danish government, by a Dane, and
is thus there reported. Tempore Danorum, fuit quidam eorum qui possidens VII.
hidas in Henreda, propter vicinitatem Abbendoniae and amorem S. Mariae Virginis
and aliorum Sanctorum qui mihi digniter coluntur, dedit Decimam de Dominio
eiusdem terrae Ecclesiae S. Mariae Abbendonensi in eleemosynam pauperum hoc est
de IIII. hydis; quam terram Helto Marmiun Deo and Sancto Stephano Cadomi dedit.
Ecclesiae vero Abbendonensi Decima de Dominio praedicto in aeuum permansit.
Then follows a Charter of Henry the first, wherein all the grants of Lands,
Churches and Tithes made or thence after to be made by Alberique de Ver and
Beatrix his wife, their son Alberique and his brothers, or by their Tenants
to the Monastery of Colme in Essex (which was a member or as a Cell of
Abbingdon, and erected by Alberique their* father) are confirmed; and in them
two parts of the Tithe de omnibus rebus in the Manors of Hethingham, Belcheam,
Laureham, Aldeham, Duurecurt, Bonecleide, and Rodinges, and half of the Tithe
of Walde and Wadane, are recited to have been conveyed to the same Monastery,
Et dimidia Decima Deimiblanc de Cola, and Tertia pars Decimae Ranulfi magni.
this is dated XI. Hen. 1. at Reding, that is M.C.XI. And Faritius Abbot of
Abingdon (as it is further rememberd) at Colme solemnly received inuestiture or
seisin of every of those and other possessions so granted by the hand of Picot
Sewer to Alberique de Ver, with the testimony of his wife, children, and many
of his Tenants. And the Patent of Henry the first is there extant, wherein
tota Decima de venatione quae capta fuerit in For esta de Windesore, is granted
to the Abbey, which was after confirmed by Henry the second, Richard the first
and others. In the same Chartularie about the beginning of the same Henry the
Tithes of Bulhey of Cildestun are given to the Abbey by William of Sulaham; in
Hanney by Osbern and Turold; of Offington by the Tenants there; of Wekenfield
by William of Wecenfield; of Eton by Roger Fitz-Alured. and diverse such are
related. and the words of the most obseruable passages touching them shall be
here infered. Anno V. regni Henrici Regis intrante ( says the book) Willielmus
de Sulaham dedit Deo and Sanctae Mariae and Abbati Faritio and Monachis in
Abbendona Decimam villae suae quae Bulhea vocatur. die videlicet Assumptionis
eiusdem S. Mariae. Eodem etiam die confirmauit donum de alia decima quam antea
dederat de villa Cildestuna quae ad haereditatem Leodselinae priuignae suae
pertinebat, ipsa puella coram Monachis concedente donum. and cum ipso Willielmo
and cum matre sua super Altar idem imposuit, coram his testibus; Abbate
praedicto and omni conuentu, Iohanne fratre coniugis eiusdem Willielmi,
Humfrido eiusdem Milite, Hugone Conred. But that of Turold is thus expressed.
Similiter Turoldus de eadem Villa ( that is, Hanney) dedit Deo and Sanctae
Mariae de Abbendona coram Faritio Abbate and omni conuentu, in Capitulo,
Decimam omnium suarum possessionum, porcellorum scilicet agnorum, vellerum. sed
Decimam Carucae suae tantummodo ita discreuit, vt duas istius decimationis
parts huic loco, tertiam vero partem Presbytero sibi seruienti concederet; hoc
idem concedente and confirmante vxore sua Hugulina and filio suo Willielmo. and
hanc donationem donauit anno V. Henrici Regis. Here specially you see as well
arbitrarie division as consecration of the Tithe by the owners grant. And for
the example of the Tithes of Offington, the words of it are most obseruable
also. Eodem anno ( says the Monk that wrote it) cum venisset Abbas Faritius
in villam suam Offentunam vt opus Ecclesiae quod ibi lapideum a fundamento
inchoauerat ad perfectum determinaret, congregauerunt se homines sui ex eadem
villa and obtulerunt communi deuotione and concessione Decimam suam totius
villae eiusdem, S. Mariae and ipsi Abbati and loco Abbendoniae ab illo in
reliquum tempus. Vt videlicet Abbas de suo proprio Ecclesiam eiusdem alacrius
construendo perficeret and ipsi mererentur in fraternitate loci annumerari.
Hanc expetitionem cum Abbas audisset, inquisiuit vtrum Ecclesiae eiusdem villae
antiquitus Decima ab illis hominibus daretur; nolens scilicet eam sua
rectitudine minuere pro alicuius donatione sibi suoque loco oblata. dictumque
est, hoc esse moris villae vt a singula virgata Ecclesiae illi XXIIII. Garbae
pro Decima numeratae donarentur. Quod sciens Abbas, statuit ante ipsos homines
vt, sicuti ipsimet voluerant and optulerant, reciperet eorum Decimam, ea
determinatione assignata inter ipsum Abbatem and Ecclesiam eiusdem villae,
scilicet, vt tempore colligendarum Decimationum Abbas ipse mitteret Offentonam
quem vellet de suis, and ipse reciperet a fingulis, secundum singulorum
possessionem, rectam Decimationem, and post illam totam collectam, de singula
virgata illius villae tot manipulos Presbytero illius Ecclesiae tribueret quot
superius diximus ei deberi. reliqua vero Decimationis Abbati seruaret. Here
plainly, no Tithe was parochially paid before this Grant, but only XXIV.
Sheaues of every Yard Land; which was now diminished also by the consecration
of the true Tithe to the Abbey. Then Willielmus de Wecenfeld Dedit suam Decimam
ex omni sua pecunia S. Mariae and Monachis in Abbendon de tribus videlicet
Hidis in Wecenfeild, and duabus de Boxore, excepta vna acra quae Ecclesiae de
Boxore, adiacet. This was in 7. Hen. 2. And in the relation of the Tithes of
Eaton, granted to the Abbey by Roger Fitz-Alured, it is added, Et promisit quod
cum Osmundo and alijs suis hominibus de illa villa faceret vt and ipsi de suo
tenore similiter Decimam Ecclesiae huic concederent. So in 9. Hen. 1. Aldred
and Luured homines Ecclesia de Waliford dederunt Monachis huius Ecclesiae
Decimas de omnibus videlicet suis pecoribus, and de agrorum suorum cultura, in
capitulo coram toto contentu. And in the same year, one Ralfe gave them the
Tithe of his Farm or Manor of Bradendene, and assured them, he would entreat
Robert de Insula, his Lord of whom he held Bradendene, Quatenus illius
permissione and concessu suo hoc confirmaret, vt haec Ecclesia ipsius Decima
donatione firmius in posterum potiretur. The like gift occurres there, made by
Hugh Fitz-Wichtgar in 10. Hen. 1. of the Tithes of Bennaham. And about the same
time, Gilbert Basset gave for ever to the Abbey, with his son Robert entering
there into Religion, the Tithe of his Land in Waneting, to be employed ad vsum
pauperum. Not long after, Hugo Dispensator Regis (it seems, Treasurer of the
Household) granted to the Abbey, Suam Decimationem de omni pecunia tam de
mobilibus rebus quam immobilibus de Manerio Spesholt quod de Ecclesia tenebat,
sua coniuge Helewisa fauente, coram his testibus; Poidras suo homine, and
Anschitillo suo praeposito de praedicta villa, and multis alijs. The like did
Ralfe the Abbots Chamberlain grant out of two Hides in Steringford. So one
Iocelin and his son Randoll granted to the Abbey two parts of all kind of
Tithes in possessione quadam quae Graua dicitur. And one Norman, when his son
Eudo there took habit of Religion, consecrated with him Decimam Dominij sui de
Winterburne, quam cui placeret Ecclesiae libere donare poterat. quae sic
concessa sub manus sacristae redacta est. And among other possessions of the
Abbot and Covent, confirmd by the Bull of Pope Eugenius the third, in the year
M.C.LII. (that is, in XVII. of King Stephen) these Tithes granted, are
particularly reckoned in it, as part of what they did in praesentiarum just
and canonice possidere. so are the words of the Bull. Neither to other purpose
are the words of the Bishops of Salisburie, Ordinaries of the Diocese, in their
general confirmations of Churches and Tithes to the Abbey. These confirmations
of theirs came diverse years after the Grants made by the owners, and are at
large extant in the Chartularies of the Monastery. The first that made any,
was Hubert, who was consecrated Bishop in 1. Rich. 1. that is, M.C.LXXXIX. In
the time of Henry the second, through the procurement of Richard Sacristein of
the Abbey, one Giralin de Curzun granted to the Abbey, Decimam XXX. acrarum de
Westlakinge quam parents sui prius concesserant and ipse Altari sanctae Mariae
concessit, addens de Porcellis sieve Agnellis aut Caseis aut rebus alijs quae
Decimari solent, Decimam, quam priores sui minime dederant. Hanc vero
donationem super Altar S. Mariae deuotus obtulit; trium tantum acrarum Decima
de XXX. Ecclesiae de Waneting reseruata. Then, for Tithes in Chiltune; it is
there reported, that in 2. Hen. 2. Nicholas Fitz-Turold gave them to that
Monastery. his whole Charter is recorded, and so take it here for that part
transcribed. Notum sit praesentibus and futuris testimonio huius scripti
sigillo meo signati, quod ego Nicholaus filius Turoldi de Estuna pro salute
animae meae parentumque meorum, and pro eo quod licitum mihi esset ab Ecclesia
de Abbendona coemiterium habere capellae meae de Winterburna, concessi firmiter
and finaliter dedi praedictae Ecclesiae Abbendonensi singulis annis imperpetuum
habendas Decimas terrae meae quam in Dominio meo teneo in villa Chiltune. In
blado scilicet ad ostium Grangiae meae suscipiendo and in Caseis and in
Velleribus and Agnis and Porcellis, and in omnibus quae Decimari solent. And at
the time of the Grant, it was by the Abbot Ingulph assigned to the use of the
poor and strangers, that is, to the Almosnerie, as indeed most other of their
consecrated Tithes were: Which is yet to be seen in the accounts of the
revenues of every Office of the house.

Out of the In Biblioth. Cotton.
Chartularie of the Abbey of Osney.
The Abbey being founded in 29. Hen. 1. that is, in M.C.XXIX. by Robert d'Oily
High Constable of England; in the Charter of the Foundation are given to it the
Tithes of the Founders Mills, that were near the Castle of Oxford, and
Decimatio Nicholai de Stodeham quam Fromundus (a Chaplain mentiond in the
Charter) tenebat. and that is iterated often in other Charters to the same
Monastery. And after in the same Chartularie is a Catalogue of diverse Portions
of Tithes belonging to the Abbey, and as issuing out of the Demesnes of such as
had increased the revenues of it with endowments of Tithes newly granted. nor
are they expressed with any reference to this or that Parish, but only to the
Demesnes and names of the Donors. And then comes a confirmation of Richard
Bishop of Lincoln (within that Diocese, An. D^. 1250.
Oxfordshire was, till the later institution of a Bishoprique in Oxford)
wherein, among the ancient possessions of the Abbey, enjoyed through their
having Saint Georges Church in the Castle by d'Oile's gift, two parts of the
Tithes of all things quae Decimari solent, in dominico horum Maneriorum,
videlicet, Bercencestre, Erdinton, etc. are confirmed to it. Neither is the
number of those Manors there named, under forty. Which way is it likely, that
the Church of S. George came to two parts of the Tithes of so many Manors, if
not by consecration of the owners? And indeed afterward is a transcript of a
Charter of Robert d'Oily's (that was above C.XX. years before the Bishops
confirmation) to the Abbey, wherein he gives three Hides in Walton and Terram
de Twenti acre and Decimam earundem terrarum, and pratum quod vocatur
Brunmannes Mead, cum Decima eiusdem prati (where note, the Land and the Tithe
of the same Land is given, which could be but a discharge of Tithes in the
Abbey) and cum Decima de Northam, Wiueleya, and Lincha, and omnium terrarum and
pratorum and aliarum rerum Decimabilium quae sunt inter Castellum Oxoniae, and
Hin^sey.
Heunteseyam aut Botleiam scilicet in Comitatu Oxoniae. And then Duas parts
Decimae, de omni re quae Decimari solet, de omnibus dominicis vtriusque honoris
qui adjacent Castello Oxenefordiae, videlicet de Hokenorton, Swerefordia,
Bereford, Wiginton, etc. with a recital of above forty Towns and Manors,
which are also in that confirmation long after made by the Bishop. In the same
Book, Richard of Dodeford gives them in perpetual right the Tithes de assarto
bosci mei de Hecholthe cum assartatur and excultus fuerit, sieve ego sieve alius
per me illum assartauerit and excoluerit. This seems to be of about King John's
time. And one Hugh de Croftes grants them Decimas dominij mei de Wauretun de
omnibus rebus quae Decimari possunt and debent, tenendas de Priore and Monachis
de Tedford imperpetuum, sicut cartae vtriusque Monasterij inter eos factae
testantur. And this was in 3. Rich. 1. And a pension was yearly payable for
them to the Prior of Thetford by that clause of tenendas, as appears in the
confirmation made of the same Charter by William Bishop of Hereford. You must
know, that the ancestors of Croftes had formerly given those Tithes to the
Priorie of Thetford, as is remembered there also.

Out of the Chartularie or In Biblioth. Cotton.
Lieger-Booke of the Priorie of Gisburne or Gisburgh in the North Riding of
Yorkshire.
In a Fine there of 23. Hen. 3. between Peter of Brus demandant, and John Prior
of Gisburne tenant, it appears, that when Robert de Brus, ancestor of Peter,
under King Stephen, founded the Monastery; he by grant endowd it, among other
possessions, with the Tithe of his demesnes of Lithun. And in another of 26.
Hen. 3. the Concord has these words in it, Et similiter idem Petrus concessit
pro se and haeredibus suis, quod idem Prior and successores sui habeant in
Parochijs suis Decimam venationis suae and haeredum suorum; and foenorum suorum
vbicunque foenum falcabitur praeterquam in locis subscriptis, scilicet in Parco
sub Castro de Daneby and in IV. Laundis in Foresta de Daneby, scilicet in
Launda de Souresby, Eskebriggethwoyt, Karlethwoyt, and in Launda sub Threlkeld,
and in Haya de Skeleton clausa ex aquilonali part de Routheline, and in paruo
Parco circa Castrum de Skeleton in quibus locis nullas Decimas foeni habebunt.
That of the Tithe of Venison, taken within the Parishes of the Priorie, was
confirmed in another Fine of 30. Hen. 3. levied before the Justices of Eire in
Yorkshire; and therein also was further added, Concesst etiam idem Petrus pro
se and haeredibus suis, quod ipsi de caetero reddent singulis annis praedicto
Priori and successoribus suis and Ecclesiae suae praedictae Decimas
Molendinorum suorum in Parochijs suis existentium imperpetuum. So that if the
Mills were in Lease, the Tenth of the rent was payable; if in the hands of the
grantor, or his heirs, the Tenth of the multure. and for true payment, the
Millers were, by the concord of this Fine, bound to do fealty to the Prior
and his successors. But I have not seen an example of such disposition of
Tithes of so late time. few or none else (I think) exceed the year of that
Constitution of Lateran before spoken of. and remember that this is of York
Province, in which perhaps the Decretall sent to Canterbury had not such
effect till somewhat after, as is before touched.

Out of the Chartularie In sapius dict. Bibliotheca.
of the Monastery of S. Andrews of Rochester.
Henry the first gives to the Monks there diverse Churches with Tithes, Et
dimidiam Decimam meam de Tarentford in annona tantum, and totam Decimam meam de
Strodes, and totam decimam meam de Chealches, and hoc facio pro anima Patris
mei and Matris meae and pro anima mea and vxoris meae, T. Eudone dapifero and
Haymone dapifero apud Rouecestriam. Other Tithes of whole Manors he gave also
to them, Et decimam Hae n. captae Regis sunt. Prarogat. Reg. cap. 11. etc.
Balenarum quae captae fuerint in Episcopatu Roffensi. And about the same time
Ralf Archbishop of Canterbury by Charter gave them Totam Decimam de meo
Dominico and omnes Decimas omniu^ villa norum qui habent terram in Dune, necnon
and aliorum omnium, quorum decimae meo tempore ad quisitae sunt vel quocunque
tempore ad quirentur. Many other Charters are in it to like purpose, as: Ego
Willielmus de Albine^o Pincerna Regis concedo Deo and Sancto Andreae de
Rouecestria and Monachis eiusdem loci totam meam Decimam de villa mea quae
vocatur Elham in omnibus rebus scilicet de blado and de pasnagio, and de
molendinis, and de pecudibus, and de lana, and de caseis etc. and medietatem
Decimae de Bilsintune in omnibus rebus pro anima Domini mei Willielmi Regis and
Henrici Regis atque pro anima mea and patris mei and matris meae and vxoris
meae and fratris mei Nigelli, and nepotis mei Humfridi and aliorum parentum
meorum viuorum atque mortuorum. Testibus militibus meis, Nigello de Wast etc.
That d' Aubigny was Earl of Chichester or Sussex or Arundel (for all these
titles he used) and diverse Confirmations were afterward by his Successors, of
this Grant. and K. Henry the first also confirmed this of the first William.
and the Prior and Covent not long after made a Lease of that their Tithe in
Bilsintune to one Gilebert de Perieres for IX. years, reserving half a Mark
rent payable at Easter. and this was confirmed by the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk under Richard the first, and William his younger
son, had given diverse revenues to the Priorie, and among them occur the
Church of Waltune, and then by it self tota Decimae villae Waltune de omni re
and tota Decima molendinorum ad eandem villam pertinentium. this is related in
the confirmation of Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk and son to Roger. and some
other Churches were granted, but no Tithes mentioned with them. and afterward
the first Charter of Rogers grant is in the same Volume at large. The Tithes of
Buggeley were given to the Priorie by the Ancestors of Osbert de Cappaualle,
and charged with three shillings yearly rent, paiable to the Monks of
Colchester. this instrument there remaining shows it. Notum sit omnibus ( as
the words are) quod ego Osbertus de Cappaualle and Adeliza vxor mea, and
Humfridus priuignus meus and haeres patris sui, accepta societate Roffensium
Monachorum pro amore Dei and Sancti Andreae, and salute animae nostrae, and
omnium parentum nostrorum, concessimus eis omnem Decimam de Bugeleia, sicut eam
antecessores nostri in eleemosynam dederunt, firmiter and stabiliter, and
quiet perpetuo tenendam, reddituris inde annuatim Monachis de Colecestra tres
solidos quamdiu eandem tenent and habere poterunt. and hanc concessionem
nostram praesenti sigillo confirmauimus etc. this was afterward confirmd by
Philip of Leiburn and his wife Anne, and Robert of Leiburn Tenants of Buggeley.

The Tithe of Gedding was thus granted by the Ancestors of Pain Shrife of
Surrey. Notum sit omnibus praesentibus atque futurit quod ego Pagan Vicecomes
Surregiae, do and concedo Decimam de Geddinges quam antecessores mei dederunt
Deo and Ecclesiae S. Andreae de Rouecestria pro anima patris mei and matris
meae, and pro me and vxore mea. and mihi concessum est ab eadem Ecclesia quod
post obitum nostrum singulis annis anniuersarium mei and vxoris meae in
perpetuum persoluetur.

The Tithe of Stalefield is granted to the Monks by D. de Monei, and sic
tenendam sicut tenuerunt de antecessoribus meis.

In 8. Hen. 1. half the Tithe of Halegele was given to them by Henry de Port,
the other half being before conueid to them -- Decimam totam de Halegele, de
qua ( so speaks the Charter) praedictus Sanctus ( that is S. Andrew) dimidiam
partem habuerat, caeteram vero pro amore Radulphi Episcopi, vt praedictum est,
supra taxato tempore donaui. these others also follow.

Walchelinus Maminot omnibus Sanctae Matris* Ecclesiae filijs tam posteris quam
praesentibus salutem. Notum vobis facio quod Decimam de Dominio de Bertreia
quam pater meus pro salute animae suae and suorum Ecclesiae Roffensi and
Monachis ibidem Deo seruientibus in perpetuam eleemosynam dedit, me similiter
pro redemptione delictorum meorum and vxoris meae, and haeredum meorum
concessisse and praesenti scripto confirmasse. Quod si aliquid de praedicto
Dominio in Rusticanam seruitutem translatum est vel fuerit, decima tamen
secundum primam donationem integra permaneat. Test Rodberto de Binham
Presbytero etc.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum peruenerit, Willielmus de
Lamualai aeternam in Domino salutem. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra quod ego
Willielmus de Lamualai diuinae pietatis intuitu pro salute animae meae and
vxoris meae, and liberorum meorum, and antecessorum meorum and successorum,
concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmaui Deo and Ecclesiae S. Andreae
and Monachis Roffensibus in puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, medietatem totius
Decimae de Dominio meo de Henherst quam antecessores mei eis dederunt and
concesserunt; tenendam and habendam been and in pace libere and quiet de me,
and successoribus meis, and per manus eleemosynarij eorum in vsus pauperum
distribuendam: ideoque volo and firmiter praecipio vt praedicti Monachi habeant
etc.

Omnibus sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filijs ad quos praesens scriptum peruenerit,
Adam Pincerna aeternam in Domino salutem. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra, quod ego
Adam Pincerna cognita and comperta dilectione quam antecessores mei habuerunt
erga Ecclesiam S. Andreae Roffensis and Monachos in eadem Ecclesia Deo
seruientis, Decimam de Dominico Campo meo in Culinges qui vocatur Westbroc quam
Radulfus Pincerna eis dedit intuitu Dei, praedicti Ecclesiae, and S. Andreae,
praefatis Monachis in puram and perpetuam eleemosynam concessi and praesenti
Carta mea confirmaui, ita videlicet quod Richardus frater meus qui successit
Geruatio Decano in personatu Ecclesiae de Culinges ad praesentationem meam and
successores sui reddent annuatim, nomine Decimae illius, praefatis Monachis
dimidiam marcam argenti in crastino festiuitatis Sancti Andreae omni occasion
remota and dilatione etc.

it seems that the Parson of Culinges by the Patrons will herein declared, was
to have the Tithe of Westbroke in kind, and pay half a mark for it yearly to
the Priorie.

Sciant tam praesentes quam futuri quod ego Henricus de Malemeins concedo and
confirmo Monachis Ecclesiae sancti Andreae Apostoli Rouecestriae Decimam meam
totam de Dominico meo and eam vehendam quocunque voluerint and transferendam;
cum ante hanc concessionem solum modo granum habuerint. Praeterea dono eis and
concedo Decimam meam de vitulis and porcellis. Has concessiones confirmo illis
pro amore Dei and salute animae meae and vxoris, and antecessorum meorum libere
and quiet possidendas assensu haeredis mei and voluntate vxoris and amicorum
meorum. Test etc.

And William Hachet confirms the moitie of the Tithes of his demesnes in
Hainwold (which his ancestors had granted to the Priorie) to hold free sine
omni molestia and exactione. and warrants them contra omnes homines sicut
liberam eleemosynam nostram.

A like confirmation is from William of Srambroche of the Tithe of Srambroche,
granted formerly from his Ancestors to the Priorie.

William of Gurnay had given to the Priorie certain Tithes in Edintune, which
lying dispersed, were not so commodious for the receipt of the Monks as of the
Parson of the Parish. thereupon Galiena, grandchild to William, declares, that
for that cause prouisum est and statutum, vt quaelibet illius Ecclesiae persona
nomine Decimarum illarum liberaliter soluent annuatim praedictis Monachis
Rouecestriae quinque solidos, ad festum beati Andreae. and so confirms both the
gift of her Ancestor and this composition between the Parson of Edintune and
the Prior and Covent.

Haimo filius Guidonis de Dudindale, confirms, in puram and perpetuam
eleemosynam, the gift made by his ancestors Gerold his grandfather, and Guy
his father, of all the Tithes of his land in Dudindale. which was afterward
confirmed also by his son and heir John.

Hamelinus de Columbeirs establishes the perpetual right of all the small
Tithes of his Demesnes, in the Chantor of the Priorie, to whom by ancient
possession of his Predecessors, he found they belonged, when controversy was
about them, twixt the Chantor and Ralf Parson of Frendesburie.

William the son of Thomas of Ysfield and all his coparceners, confirm the
Tithes of Ysfield formerly given by their Ancestors in puram and perpetuam
eleemosynam. and further grant all small Tithes of Ysfield, as of Lamb, Calf,
Piggs, Fleece, and the like. Et vt haec nostra donatio (says the Deed) and
confirmatio inconcussa permaneat, ego Willielmus omnium fratrum meorum
voluntate pro omnibus sigilli mei appositione corroboro. which I note for the
special kind of sealing with the eldest brothers seal only.

Henry of Tuang confirms to them Decimam de Tuange quam praefati Monachi
habent de dono Smalemanni aui me^ tam in Tuange, quam in Rundel.

These Grants or arbitrarie Consecrations were all diverse years before the end
of M.CC. after Christ, and for the most part in the times of Henry the first,
King Stephen, Henry the second, and Richard the first. neither need you make
doubt of the allowance of them by the Clergy of that time. The Tithes so
arbitrarily given by Lay men were not only possessed by the Priorie, but were
also afterward, with others which are not mentiond in the Chartularie, solemnly
confirmed to them by the Archbishops of Canterbury with their Prior and
Covent, who supplied that which now is the Deane and Chapter. for in 23. Hen.
2. upon a controversy arising about some Tithes challenged by the Priorie, a
confirmation was given by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, in which he grounds
their right upon the Deeds of the Grantors. Cognito (are his words) iure
praedictorum Monachorum per inspectionem instrumentorum suorum, considerata
etiam diutura illorum possessione etc. and then he confirms to them all the
Tithes granted to them within his Diocese, and reckons by name several Tithes
in VIII. Parishes, most of which occur in those examples; After which he
confirms also their appropriated Churches with Tithes belonging to them. For
Tithes given with the Churches appropriated they had as belonging to those
Churches. but others severally consecrated were no otherwise in them then as if
Rents or other profits had been granted out of lands to them. A like
confirmation was made by Baldwin in 1. Rich. 1. of all Tithes in particular
that were formerly settled in them by Lay men's grants. And another such was by
Hubert Archbishop in 1. of King John, wherein he confirms to them omnes Decimas
a quibuscunque Dei fidelibus vsque in praesens in Archiepiscopatu nostro illis
collatas.

Out of the Chartularie of the Monastery of In iam memoraeta Bibliotheca.
Reding for Leonminster or Lemster in Herefordshire, that was annexed by Henry
the first to Reding, in the foundation.
Walter Clifford, for the health of his fathers soul, and for his wife and
children, gives Ecclesiae de Leonminstre Decimam de tota Hamenesca tam de
dominio quam de villanis s. de omnibus vnde Decimae dantur tam de viuis quam de
mortuis But the Church of Lemster is called there the Mother Church of the
place. This was about King John's time. And Robert Malherbe gives to the same
Church Decimam de toto dominio meo de Riseburie de omnibus, vnde Decimae dantur
tam de viuis quam de mortuis.

Out of the Chartularie of the Nunnerie of Jbidem.
Clerkenwell.
Among many possessions confirmed to it by Henry the second, we find, Ex dono
Gaufridi Comitis de Essex and Eustaciae vxoris eius totam Decimam totius victus
and procurationis illorum and domus suae and familiae suae; and, Ex concessioue
Alexandri Prioris and Monachorum Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae de
Stanesgate, assensu conuentus Ecclesiae Sancti Pancratij de Jews, omnes
Decimationes illarum de feodo de Clerkenwell cum pertinentijs suis.

And Maurice of Totham and Muriel his wife grant to the Nunnerie, Ius
parochiale in perpetuo habendum in terris nostris quas habemus and tenemus de
Episcopo Londinensi iuxta Londoniam, and in hominibus in eisdem terris
existentibus and in certis terris nostris quae ad Parochiam pertinent. And
further, that those Lands and his Tenants should be ioind Iure Parochiali to
the Church of the Nunnerie, Et quod homines illi reddant and faciant quae
Parochiani debent reddere and facere suae Matri Ecclesiae. And that the Nuns
should quietly enjoy all Tithes of those Lands, according to the intent of the
Grant from the Priorie of Jews in Sussex; which also is rememberd elsewhere in
the same Chartularie.

Maude of Mandeuill, Countess of Essex and Hereford grants, Totam Decimam
totius victus nostri and familiae nostrae vbicunque fuerimus de panibus and
potibus and carnibus and etiam de Piscibus sicut in Carta Domini G. de
Mandeuilla Comitis Essexiae antecessoris nostri continetur. And a great Curse
is added to all such as should disturb or prevent the Nuns in their enjoying
of that Tithe. The reference made is to that which is before mentioned in the
Patent of Confirmation, made by Henry the second. This of Maude was about the
beginning of Henry the third, and is but a confirmation of that of Geffrey of
Mandeuill, made Earl of Essex by Maude the Empress.

Out of the lives In Biblioth. Cotton.
of the Abbots of S. Augustines of Canterbury, written by Thomas Sprot Balaeo
Thomas Spot dictus est.
, a Monk of the Abbey under Edward the first.
Eodem anno Domini (videlicet M.LXX.) in villa de Fordwico, Willielmus Rex
contulit Sancto Augustino and fratribus eiusdem coenobij, Ecclesias de
Fauersham and de Middeltune, and Decimas de omnibus redditibus prouenientibus
ex illis duobus Manerijs S. de Middeltune and Fauersham and Decimam de omnibus
appendentibus, Terra, Syluis, Pratis, and Aqua, excepta Decima Mellis and
Gabuli denariorum. Et sunt istius donationis septem Cartae diuersorum Regum
praeter istam. That Gabulus denariorum is rent paid in money. Scotland was then
Abbot there.

In the same Abbots time, Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and Earl of Kent, gave to the
Abbey, Decimas aliquas quas mei fideles habebant, id est, Athelwoldus de tribus
villis quae dicuntur Knolton, Tiskenherst, Ringelton, and Decimam totius terrae
Turstini, necnon Decimam Osberni filij Letardi de duobus locis, id est,
Bedlesangre. Decimam etiam Osberni Payfori de villula quae dicitur Bochland.
Haec omnia ( as the words of his Charter are) dono concedo and confirmo etc. Si
quis vero huic donationi contrarius fuerit, vel aliquam calumniam ingesserit,
aeterno anathemate ipso facto sit reus and Regiae Maiestatis etc. Then the
Author tells us, that afterward William d' Aubigny wrongfully took the Tithe of
Knolton and Ringelton from the Abbey, as Roger of Memires did the Tithe of
Bochland.

In the year M.LXXIX. Scotland being still Abbot, Herebert Fitz-Iuo gave to the
Abbey, Decimas quinque Mansionum suarum vel centum solidos nummorum quod in
arbitrio Abbatis and fratrum S. Augustini constituit vtrum Decimas ipsas vel
centum solidos pro Decimis acceptarent. Those five Mansiones, or Farms, or
Manors, were Olive, Ewelle, Osprenge, Heregedsham, and Langedone. But this
Tithe was afterward (says Sprot) wrongfully detaind from them by William
Peuerell.

About the same time, Abbot Scotland made a Lease of V. Solings (that is,
Solins, or Selions, which are made the same with Hides, or Ploughlands, by some
Regist. Monasterij S. Martini de Bello in Arthiuis (...) quae ad Fo^^m a
Regio^um prouentuum increme^to dictum spectant.
good authority) about Northbourne to one Wadard for life, reserving rent of
XXX. shillings, and the Tithes, of all profits there accruing, to himself.

The same Abbot leased for life to Amfrid Mauclerc his Land of Riple, and of
Aluetune, upon like condition, that Mauclerc should pay to the Abbey all the
Tithes both of those Lands as also of his V. Manors, Hortun, Legu, Ernolton,
Seeldrisham, and Oslacestone, and also all other Tithes of his yearly increase
whatsoever. Decimam etiam tam frugum quam omnium animalium suorum and
caeterarum rerum.

One Hugh Fitz-Fulbert had a Lease for life of the same Abbot, of two Solings
of Land in Sibertesweld, whereupon rent of XX. shillings yearly was reserved,
and this Condition also annexed, Vt daret etiam Decimam omnium rerum suarum
quas ipse in dominio haberet.

When Hugh of Trottescliue, Abbot there, founded his Hospital of S. Laurence,
among other Endowments, he gave it, Totam Decimam totius annonae de dominio de
Langeport. This was under King Stephen.

And Anno Domini M.C.LXXXVIII. Rogerus Abbas tradidit Priorissae de Scapeia
Decimas de Westland intra Parochiam praedictae Priorissae pro quatuordecim
solidis annuatim reddendis sacristae S. Augustini. What Tithes were intra
Parochiam of the Prioresse of Shepey, were by former Grant of the owner
conveyed to the Abbey.

Out of Peeter of Blois his In sap^ dict. Biblioth.
continuance of the History of the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolnshire.
At the foundation of the Church, new built by Abbot Ioffrid, in the time of
Henry the first, a great meeting was of the deuouter sort of Yorkshire men
specially, and others, to the number of above five thousand in all. and most of
them laid stones at it, and upon the stones, some offered Money, some the
Patronages of Churches granted by Charters, others Tithes of their Lands: as
for example, the words are, Iuxta illum proximum lapidem versus Boream posuit
Simon Miles and vxor eius Gulana offerentes Ecclesiae Decimam de Morton, and de
Schapwik; and iuxta illos proximum lapidem versus Boream posuit Reinerus de
Bathe Miles and vxor eius Goda offerentes operi Decimam de Houtona and de
Birtona.

Out of the Ibidem.
Lieger-Booke of the Abbey of S. Albons in Hertfordshire.
The Abbot and Covent, about 20. of Henry the third, gave to the Church of the
holy Trinity de Bosco, and the Nuns there, for ever, Totam Decimam de
dominio nostro de Caysho in omnibus rebus de quibus Decimae dari solent, and
two parts of the Tithe Corn of the Parish of Watford, and some other moities
of Tithes, the rest being in the Parson of Watford. But that of the demesnes of
Caysho was newly now created, and expressed for the provision of apparel for
the Nuns. But this being so long after the Constitution of Lateran, and being
made only out of their demesnes which perhaps they had discharged, does only
give an example among many, of another original way of creation of tithes in
some Monasteries, but not so much add to or confirm the arbitrarie course of
disposition of them by Lay men in times before that so frequently used.

Henricus Rex Angliae R. Episcopo Dunelmensi and omnibus Baronibus suis
salutem. sciatis me ( it is Henry the first) dedisse Deo and S. Mariae, and S.
Oswino, and Abbati de S. Albano, and Monachis de Tinemuth omnes Decimas suas
per Northumberland quas Robertus Comes ( that is Robert of Mowbray Earl of
Northumberland, who in time of William the second founded the Priorie of
Tinemuth) and homines eius donauerant eis, scilicet Videsis Cart. Antiq. B. B.
14. and 15. etc. in (...) Land. and G. 21. in Dorso.
Decimas de Colebrige, and illas de Ouinton, and de Wylun, illas etiam de
Neuburn, and illam de Discington and de Caluerdon, and de Elstwic, and illas
etiam de Bothall, and de Werkwrth, and de Anebell, similiter and de Roubyrie,
and de Wulloure, and volo ac praecipio quatenus supradictus Abbas and Monachi
de Tinemuda, been and integre habeant illas ac libere teneant in mea pace, and
quod nullus eis inde aliquid auferat super meam forisfacturam. T. Nigello de
Alben. apud Brantonam.

By the same King. H. Rex Angliae Ranulpho Episcopo Dunelmensi, and Alfrico and
Luilia Vicecomitibus salutem. Sciatis me concessisse and dedisse Deo, and
Sanctae Mariae, and S. Oswino, and Abbati de S. Albano Decimas quas Hubertus de
Lauall ante dederat Monachis de Tinemuda, scilicet de Setona and Caluerdona,
and de Discingtona, and volo ac praecipio vt been and integre in mea pace
teneant eas, and quod nullus super eis iniuriam faciat. T. Nigello de Alben.
apud Wintoniam. This was either a confirmation of a consecration made by De
Lauall, or else a gift of Tithes out of the same lands, by the King, after some
escheat or other new title accrued to the Crown. The Church or Priorie of
Tinemuth was given to the Abbey of S. Albons by William the second, after
Robert de Mowbray had forfeited the Patronage, among the rest of his estate, by
treason.

Henry the second confirms to the Monks of Tinemuth all their Churches
appropriated, and Decimas de Corebriga, and Newburna, and de Wertewrtha, and de
Rodbiria, and de Botala and Wlonera, and de Wylum and Ditentona, and de
Caluerduna, and de Alswicha, and de Anibella, and Decimas de Dominio de Herth,
and de Setona, and de Tunestal, and de Daltona, and de Mideltona, and de
Ouinthuna. All which were, without Churches, formerly and in perpetual right
consecrated by the owners devotions. the like often occurres in confirmations
made to them by the succeeding Kings.

In 7. Rich. 1. Hugh of Pudsey Bishop of Durham, confirms to the Monks of
Tinemuth, Omnes Decimas and obuentiones tam in blado quam in alijs
decimationibus tam de dominijs Regis quam Baronum, sieve aliorum fidelium and
propriarum villarum, and dominiorum tam in Northumbria quam in Haliwarchfolk
(that is in the Territory of the Bishoprique of Durham) ita plenarie and
libere possidendas, sicut eas before and melius habuerunt vel habere
debuerunt, tempore nostro vel antecessorum nostrorum, and sicut donatorum
Cartae testantur. And some other Churches of such general ratification they
have from the Archbishop of York.

In the instrument of foundation of the Cell of Belveir, made between Abbot
Paul and Robert of Belvedeir or Belveir, or de pulchro visu, that Robert grants
it the Tithes of all Lands that he should hereafter purchase. Omnium terrarum
quascunque per Dei adiutorium and concessum Regis in suum dominium ad quirere,
quoquo modo posset, dedit and concessit Decimas eidem Ecclesiae sanctae Mariae;
that is to the Cell; which was at first purposed for a Parish Church, but by
advice of Archbishop Lanfrank was converted into a Cell. Dedit etiam and
concessit Decimas Vinearum suarum omnium and sedem molendini in proxima aqua,
and concessit Decimas december villarum ad praesens, ex suo videlicet dominio
annonae, omnium que rerum de quibus Decima danda est and datur, semota quidem
tertia part Presbyteri villae. The names of the Manors or Towns of which he
thus gave two parts of the Tithes, are, Horton, Fraton, Saperton, Rishendon,
Stoches, Wiberteston, Segeton, Medburne, Wiwell, and Wlstanestorp.

Robert of Piriton gave to the Abbey, the Church of Saint Marie that he had
built in Piriton; and endowd it with gift of all the Tithe, eiusdem villae sui
dominij and omnium suorum hominum ibi manentium omnium illarum rerum de quibus
recte Decima datur; And in Nicenton he gave all the Tithe of his demesnes only.
In Cauendeis and Hocaton and Aperston, Decimam dominij sui, excepta cantaria.

Ralf of Limesi gave to the Church of Saint Marie also that he built in
Piriton, Decimam suam in eadem villa etc. and Decimas hominum eiusdem villae
ipsis libenter concedentibus. Apud Nicentonam dedit duas parts Decimae suae
etc. apud Hulferlea dedit similiter duas parts Decimae suae and apud
Eprestunam similiter and apud Cauendeis and Hocktentunam. And these endowments
are there called beneficium Ecclesiae. These and other Tithes so severally
granted are confirmed to the Abbey by Alan de Limsey, Gerard de Limsey and
others of the posterity of Ralf. The Tithe of the Agistment of
Bibesworth-wood, also was granted by Ralf, and of other Agistments, with
provision also that if the woods were assarted or improued by culture, the
Abbey should have Tithe in kind of the improuements. The whole Deeds o^
conueiance are there at large. and a Bull of confirmation was long afterward
obtaind from Pope Alexander (as I think) the fourth.

W. Peuerell gives to the Monks of Hatfield Decimam denariorum meorum de
Meldona, and rectam Decimam de Dona de omnibus rebus de quibus recte datur
Decima. And then adds Churches of other places cum Decimis. that was in Henry
the first's time.

Out of Matthew Paris In Biblioth. Cotton.
his lives of the Abbots of S. Albons.
In the time of Abbot Paul, under Henry the first. Data est, says he, huic
Ecclesiae Decima de Cundella, and Decima de Rigentona, and Decima de Roniges,
and de Brethelham, and de Herlaga, and de Thamiseford, and de Cliftona, and
Decimae quatuor villarum istarum s. Hunteslege, Gertheham, and de Brunfield,
and Redlang. Et duae parts Decimae villarum istarum s. Sedintonae and
Boctonae. Et tota Decima de Trumpinton, duae parts Decimae de Wacerleia. Porro
in Hertfordsira duae parts Decimae de Esenden and Beiford, and de
Hertfordingbirie. and other like.

Out of the Chartularie In eadem Biblioth.
of the Priorie of Boxgraue in Sussex.
About the year M.C.LXXX. a confirmation is made by William S. John, of what
had been formerly granted to the Priorie by his Ancestors; and among other
possessions, occurres Decima de Chienore, and Decima omnium nemorum suorum de
honor Halnaci in paissone and venditione, and alijs exitibus. And this William
for the maintenance of a fourteenth Monk (there being but thirteen by the first
foundation) which he added, gave, Decimam gabulorum suorum de Estretintona, and
other places. and ex dono Petri de Hampton decima molendini sui, is related to
be theirs.

The same William in another Charter grants, In subscriptis Ecclesijs scilicet
Walborton, Barnaham, Hantoneta, Honestum, Mundeham, duas portiones de terris
and decimis omnibus quae ad ipsas pertinent ( for the third parts were assigned
by him, and the Bishop, and the Prior to Vicarages) and in omnibus praescriptis
Ecclesijs aduocationem liberam and praesentationem Presbyterorum qui in sua
persona in illis Ecclesijs Deo assidue deseruiant etc. Et reddidi Decimam
Gabulorum de Stretinton, videlicet VIII. solidos per annum; and the Tithe of
other Rents.

Robert S. John, brother of this William, gives Decimam omnium gabulorum de
Walborton, and Decimam omnium gabulorum totius villae de Bernham quam frater
meus Willielmus de S. Iohanne dedit mihi, ad tenendum in seruitio Dei
quartumdecimum Monachum in Conuentu Boxgraue, quia prius solum tredecim
fuerant. Quod si quartusdecimus ibi defuerit, Tustinus nepos Dunelinae vel
haeres suus colliget and tenebit eas vsque ad annum integrum; si vero vltra;
dabuntur pauperibus and viduis, and Orphanis duarum villarum. Test Willielmo
de S. Iohanne, Waltero and Willielmo Capellanis, Rogero Hai, and Thoma filio
suo, Rogero de Kaisnei. And a confirmation is there also by William S. John of
the gift (that is of the profits receiud by the Lord in money or rent.) which
lay indeed properly in the Lessors grant. and therefore also William the Lessor
had by another Charter granted those Decimas Gabuli to Robert, to the same
purpose, which he expresses in his Deed of consecration to the Priorie. the
Lessor's grant to him, the confirmation and his consecration were enough to
setle this Tithe-rent in the Monastery. but clearly this could not have
discharged any former right of Tithes in kind payable out of the Land.

The Churches of Warberton and Bernham and the rest before named with others,
were, with the belonging Tithes, appropriated to the Priorie, but the Tithes
alone of Thadeham and Kienor (which they call Chienor) were by grant from the
Ancestors of the S. John's, settled in the Priorie and never named with any
Church, as appears in sundry Confirmations of them. So also is Decima de
Liperinges, in the ratification of such Grants to them made about that time by
John and Seffrid Bishops of Chichester and Richard Bishop of Canterbury. Of
that Tithe of Liperinges see more within a few lines.

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Richardus de Tresgoz filius Philippi
Tresgoz dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmaui Deo and
Ecclesiae B. Mariae de Boxgraue, and Monachis ibidem Deo seruientibus pro
salute animae meae and vxoris meae and antecessorum meorum, and vt missa pro
anima mea, and vxoris meae, and pro animabus patris and matris meae, and
antecessorum meorum, in praedicta Ecclesia de Boxgraue, ter in vnaquaque
septimana celebretur, omnes donationes quas habent de donationibus Philippi
patris mei and antecessorum meorum tam in terris quam in Decimis magnis and
minutis, in Manerio meo de Hamptunete. Et insuper dedi and concessi and hoc
scripto autentico confirmaui praedictis Monachis de Boxgraue, omnes minutas
decimas de praedicto Manerio meo de Hantunete, scilicet in agnis, in vitulis,
in pullis, in porcis, in aucis, in lanis, in caseis, in pomis, in fructibus,
and in omnibus alijs rebus vndecunque Decimae Sanctae Ecclesiae spectant aut
prouenire debent tam maiotes videlicet quam minores. Et vt haec mea donatio and
concessio perpetuae firmitatis robur obtineat eam praesentis scripti testimonio
and sigilli mei munimine roboraui. His testibus Roberto persona de Storhetune,
Stephano Capellano, Philippo Bernhuse, Willielmo Picoth, Willielmo Purcaz,
Philippo de Perham; and multis alijs. This was in the same time, under Henry
the second.

Geffrey of Coleuill gives to the Priorie Decimam de Kienore de toto dominio
meo in terris cultis and incultis in Pomerijs in Piscarijs and Molendinis in
perpetuam and liberam, Eleemosynam salua tertia portione totius Decimae
praefatae de Dominio meo quae ad Ecclesiam de Hidlesham pertinet cum tota
Decima de vilanagio meo. Et vt hoc firmiter teneatur, sigillo meo confirmaui
hoc scriptum his testibus Humfrido de Sartill etc.

Robert of Coleuill grants them Duas portiones

Decimae Garbarum de toto dominio meo de Kienore in perpetuam and liberam
Eleemosynam ex donatione antecessorum meorum ijs prius collatam.

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Radulphus de S. Georgio and Agatha vxor
eius and Alanus haeres eorum dederunt and concesserum Deo and S. Mariae and
Monachis de Boxgraue Decimam de Liparinges in perpetuam Eleemosynam quam prius
dederat eis Basilia matter ipsius Radulphi. Et ipsi Monachi debent facere habere
Ecclesiasticum seruitium in Ecclesia sua de Ichenora vel in Capella sua de
Briddeham hominibus praedicti Radulphi morantibus apud Liparinges, and in
singulis Hebdomadis vnum seruitium pro anima Basiliae and pro cunctis fidelibus
defunctis donec praedictus Radulphus vel haeredes sui ibi fecerint quoddam
Oratorium, in quo vnus de Capellanis Monachorum faciet praedictum seruitium in
Hebdomada. Testibus Ranulpho Capellano Ricardo Capellano de Boxgraue, Roberto
Legato, and alijs multis.

This was about King John's time.

Out of the In Biblioth. Co^ton.
Chartularie of S. Neots or Needs in Huntingdonshire.
Omnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filijs Seherus de Quincy salutem. Sciatis me
concessisse and confirmasse Monachis S. Neoti Decimationes quas antiquitus
habuerunt de terra mea in Grantesete, s. totam Decimationem dominiorum quae
fuerunt Roberti Fafiton in eadem villa tam terrarum quam virgultorum. His
testibus etc. A like Instrument of Confirmation from him, is of two parts of
the Tithes of Suho, and of a third part of the Tithes of Einseburie, which had
been likewise formerly settled by arbitrarie consecration, in the Monastery.
This was about the fourth year of King John, and was confirmd by the Bishop of
Ely.

Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Albinus Fafiton concedo and per hanc
Cartam confirmo Deo and Ecclesiae S. Neoti fratribusque meis, eiusdem Ecclesiae
Monachis, Decimam illam quam Robertus Fafiton auus meus and Eustachius pater
meus eis dederunt and concesserunt, s. de terris and pecunijs totius dominij
mei in Grantesete and in Suho and in Weston duas parts Decimae: and iuxta
Ecclesiam de Grantesete vnam mansuram quam pater meus cum eadem Decima eis
concessit etc. Hoc donum factum est anno quo Rex Angliae Henricus secundus
duxit exercitum apud Tolosam.

Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Galfridus filius Suani and Hathewis
vxor mea and Adam filius noster concessimus Deo and Ecclesiae sancti Neoti and
Monachis Becci (this Priorie was a Cell of the Abbey of Bec in Normandy)
ibidem Deo seruientibus, pro salute nostra, duas parts Decimae bladi and
omnium rerum quae Decimati debent illius Hydae terrae in Croxton quam tenuit
Adelwoldus Flammangus auus praedictae Hathewis, quas ipse dedit Ecclesiae S.
Neoti in perpetuam and liberam Eleemosynam. T. etc

Ego Robertus Waste concessi Deo and S. Mariae Becci and S. Neoto Confessori
and Ecclesiae eius de Ernelesberia and Monachis qui inibi de seruiunt, duas
parts totius Decimae meae de Wereslai in omni videlicet substantia mea, in
segetibus and animalibus vnde Decima dari debet, and hoc fieri praecipue pro
anima Soeni de Essessa and pro salute domini mei Roberti filij praedicti Soeni
qui mihi hanc terram dedit and pro salute Gonnor vxoris suae and pro salute mea
and vxoris meae and Willielmi filij Gerei patris sui and pro anima patris mei
and matris meae and fratris mei and omnium amicorum and antecessorum meorum etc.

This was afterward confirmed by the heirs of Robert Waste. but in the
Confirmations it appears, that Torold Waste had also granted it before Robert.
Torold, I think, was Roberts father, and had granted it about Henry the
second his time.

In the Titles of the Deeds there, is Carta Roberti de Ferrers de Decimis de
Benewell. but the Charter it self is wanting.

Out of the Chartularie of the In eadem Biblioth.
Hospital of S. Leonards in Yorkshire.
Stephanus Rex Angliae Archiepiscopo Eborum, Iusticiarijs, Vicecomiti,
Baronibus, ministris and omnibus fidelibus suis Eboracshire, salutem. Sciatis
quia concessi and dedi in perpetuam Eleemosynam pro anima Regi^ Henrici (...)
mei, and pro salute animae meae, and Matildis Reginae vxoris meae, and
Eustachij filij mei, and aliorum puerorum meorum Deo and Hospitali Sancti Petri
Eborum omnem Decimationem de Theloneo villae de Thicahilla and omnem
Decimationem Molendinorum eiusdem villae and praeter haec V. bouatas terrae in
Wlnethuat, and vnam bouatam in campo de Bagalaia. Quare volo and firmiter
praecipio quod been and in pace and libere and quiet and honorifice hanc
Eleemosynam teneant, quicunque honorem de Thicahilla habeat, sicut Eleemosynam
Deo and pauperibus Christi in perpetuum datam. Test Henrico de Essex and Adam
de Belin and Willielmo de Clarafai apud S. Edmundum. But in the Bulls of
Confirmation from diverse Popes made to the Hospital, no mention is of these
Tithes.

Out of a Ms. of Constitutions, In Biblioth. a^toris.
Charters, and Writs, touching the Province and Church of York.
Ael Dei gratia Carleolensis Episcopus. Omnibus sanctae matris Ecclesiae
fidelibus in Christo salutem, and orationem: Notum sit omnibus and videntibus
and audientibus has literas me dedisse and concessisse Decanatui Eborum and
Willielmo Decano and omnibus eius in Decanatu successoribus Decimas
Molendinorum de Pokelinton and de dominio meo and de tota socha. Sic enim
prouisum fuit and constitutum a Rege Henrico. Constitutum autem and confirmatum
est de omni possessione debere Decimas dari tam in Molendinis quam in rebus
alijs, ideoque autoritate Apostolica and nostra per excommunicationis
sententiam prohibemus ne aliquis has Decimas Molendinorum auferre and diminuere
praesumat. Regia tantum dignitate excepta, in quam nullam dare praesumimus
sententiam. Valete. This Ael is Aethelulph, the first Bishop of Carleol,
Confessor to Henry the first, who first made it a Bishoprique in M.C.XXXII.

Out of old Charters remaining in the hands of that Noble Knight Sir Robert
Cotton.
Suss^^.
R. Dei gratia Cicestrensis Episcopus G. Decano caeterisque fidelibus Sanctae
Ecclesiae salutem and benedictionem. Sciatis me concessisse Brunkino de Hasting
dare Decimam suam totam de dominio suo de terra quam ipse tenet in Marisco de
Penensel Deo and Ecclesiae sancti Martini de Bello (to the Abbey of Battle)
pro anima sua and omnium parentum suorum salute. Concedo etiam hanc Decimam and
omnes alias Decimas quas ipsi Monachi de Bello habent in Parochia mea quatenus
eas libere and quiet teneant and possideant imperpetuum absque omni molestia;
videlicet nominatim Decimam Vulwini de Henam, Decimam Sewini de Glutintune,
Decimam Lewini de Badeherste, Decimam quam Parochiani Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae
de Bello dant de Nedrefelde, Decimam quam Ailricus de Ora dat, Decimam de
Helinfalde quam ipsi Parochiani Sanctae Mariae de Bello dant, Decimam de
Boccholte, and Decimam de Bromham quam Ailwi and Aethelida dederunt cum filio
suo Benedicto quando effectus est Monachus absque omni calumnia in perpetuum
tenendam. Similiter etiam and omnes Ecclesias and Decimas quae eidem Ecclesiae
datae sunt, vel quas eadem Ecclesia and Monachi tenent in Parochia mea vt eas
libere and quiet teneant Episcopali autoritate confirmo. Vnde vobis and
omnibus successoribus vestris and omnibus Christi fidelibus me eis inde aliquam
molestiam, vi, aut venditione, vel qualibet occasion faciatis, super
anathematis vinculo defendo. T. Henrico Archidiacono, Rad. Capellano, Calone
Cantore. Neither the whole name of the Bishop, nor the date, are found in the
Instrument. But it appears by the hand, and that R. designing the name, to be
of the time of Henry the first, and made by Ralf then Bishop of Chichester.

In a Deed of William Earl of Warren and Surry, Sussex.
made in the time of King Stephen to the Priorie of Jews in Sussex, after some
immunities given them in all Lands which they held of his fee, this Grant
follows: Dono etiam illis de omnibus dominijs meis plenariam Decimam,
videlicet, de Blado, de Foeno, de Agnis, de Velleribus, de Caseis, and
plenariam Decimam denariorum de omnibus redditibus meis de Anglia. Quamuis
autem ex illis denarijs in procuratione mea sieve aliorum quorumlibet
expendatur, ex illis tamen plenaria supradictis Monachis reddatur Decima. Et si
dominium meum aut redditus mei creuerint, eotenus crescat and Decima
Monachorum. Haec supradicta ego pro salute animae meae and pro animabus
antecessorum meorum praedictis Monachis concessi and hac mea praesenti Carta
confirmaui quando feci dedicari Ecclesiam Sancti Pancratij (that is, the
Priorie of Jews) and de Decima denariorum de omnibus redditibus meis de Anglia
dotaui ipsam Ecclesiam, and inde seisiui eam per capillos capitis mei and
fratris mei Radulphi de Warenna, quos abscidit cum cultello de capitibus
nostris ante altar Henricus Episcopus Wintoniensis. Test Teobaldo
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Henrico Episcopo Wintoniensi, Rodberto Episcopo
Bath. Ascelino Episcopo Rouecestr. qui eandem Ecclesiam dedicauerunt, and Test
Edwardo Abbate Rading, Waltero Abbate de Bello, Waltero Priore Cantuariensi,
W... Archidiacono Cant. Richardo Decano Cicestr. Rodberto Archidiacono, Iohanne
de Pagham, Willielmo Comite Cicestr. Rad. de Warrenna, Reg. de War. Hugone de
Petrep. Radulpho de Pleiz, Rodberto de Wesneuall, Rodberto de Frieuill,
Rodberto de Petrep. Willielmo de Petrep. Adam de Puninges, Guidone de
Mercecurt, Willielmo filio suo, Willielmo de Droseio The intent of this was to
setle the Tithes of all his revenues wheresoever through England, in the
Priorie. in kind, of his demesnes; in money, of his Rents. neither did he grant
only the Tithe of what he then was seized of, but of all future purchase also
and improuements. that liuerie of seisin, as it were, made upon the Altar by
the Hair of the head both of the Grantor and of his brother, is not without
other example of those ancient times wherein both Tithes Videsis App. ad Council.
Lateran. part. 47. cap. 5.
and other possessions were solemnly consecrated, either by hair, or a horn, or
a cup, or a knife, or a candlestick, or whateuer that might really be delivered
on the Altar. For, the form of conueiance in perpetual right, both to the
Church and Laity, was to give into Jngulph. hist. fol. 512. b.
the hands of the Grantee or Feoffee some such thing, as at this day a Twig or
a Turff is in feoffments. or as in Institutions (according to the Formularie of
the Court of Rome) a Ring is to be given. and the Altar was usually made the
place of such a liuerie. But in the examples of cutting the hair especially in
this where Henry Bishop of Winchester does it, perhaps more was understood
then only a liuerie upon the grant. had it not also some reference to the
ancient ceremony of cutting the hair at a Confirmation? which was usually
done by the Godfathers, as may be collected out of that of Adreuald, where De
Mirat. S. Benedicti lib. 1. cah. 14.
he speaking of Charles Martell, says, that Pepigit hic foedus cum Luitprando,
eique filium suum Pipinum misit vt more Christianorum fidelium eius capillum
primus attonderet, ac pater illi spiritualis existeret. I dare affirm nothing
with confidence herein. But it is specially obseruable that this Charter of the
Earl of Surrey was not, it seems, made without great advice as well as
testimony, both of Clergy and Laymen. whereto you may add the judgment of
Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, in his reprehension of Ala, Countess
dowager of Warren and Surrey, for not payment of the Tithes of her dowry
according to the Grants of the Ancestors of her husband. The original of the
admonition to her, speaks thus: In thesauro Cottoniano.
T. Dei gratia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus Anglorum primas and Apostolicae
sedis Legatus. Dilectae filiae suae Alae, Comitissae Warennae salutem. peruenit
ad aures nostras religiosorum fratrum Lewensis Ecclesiae Monachorum, stupenda
querimonia quam cum ipsi ex antiqua donatione Comitum Warrennae, videlicet Aui
and patris Willielmi viri tui, and sui ipsius etiam antequam Dotem tuam
consecuta fuisses, de omnibus Dominijs Comitis Decimationem Denariorum semper
inconcusse, tanquam Ecclesiae suae dotem possederint, tu, post perceptam dotis
tuae inuestituram, eiusdem fratribus ipsam Decimationem, quae ad Dotem tuam
spectabat, subtraxeris. Quod si ita est, vehementer admiramur cum eorum quae
Deo and Ecclesiae suae in eleemosynam collata esse noscuntur nihil doti tuae
vendicare debeas nec possis. Crudelen. est and sacrilegio proximum quod super
diuinum Altar semel deuote oblatum est iterum repetere, and ad secularia
transfer. proinde tibi salubriter consulimus, and in Domino admonemus
quatenus sicut vis ius tuum tibi a Deo libere conseruari, ita ius suum cum
integritate Monachis relinquas. and nullatenus datam eis denariorum
decimationem dotis tuae retineas; alioquin eis in iustitia deesse non
poterimus, cuius debitores omnibus existimus. Although he speaks only of the
Decimatio denariorum, yet in regard that he mentions it with de omnibus
Dominijs Comitis, it cannot be well understood otherwise then of all the Tithes
of the Earls possessions, according to the former grant.

Richard de Muchegros about King John's time, confirms to the Abbey of Persore
two parts of the Tithes which was wont to be paid to it out of his land of
Wlhaueshulle, tam bladi quam lini and faeni (exceptis linis Curtilagij mei de
Dominico meo de Wlhaueshulle) as also the third part of the Tithes of his
Tenants there, and further grants them Duas parts decimarum bladi de omnibus
assartis meis ibidem de nouo factis and de omnibus assartis per me vel per
haeredes meos in posterum faciendis etc. this is sealed. the seal is
circumscribed with. S. Richardi de Wlhaueshule.

W. Prior of Jews in Sussex gives in 44. Hen. 3. forever to the Priorie of
Southwark, Decimas quas habuimus de Dominico Henrici de Holeghe apud Reygate,
reserving yearly two shillings and six pence to be paid for them to the
Sacristein of the Priorie of Jews. How could this Tithe have been in the Prior
of Jews to have granted, without a precedent consecration from Holeghe, or
some other, from whom he had deriud his estate?

Willielmus Dei gratia Wintoniensis Episcopus, Stephano Archidiacono, and omni
Clero Surreiae, and Baronibus, salu^em and benedictionem. Notum sit vobis quod
Siwardu^ de Ealdestede venit, me praesente ad Sudwerchiam, ibique super Altar
diuina praeuentus gratia obtulit Decimam de Hludebrake Deo and eiiusdem
genitrici and Virgini Mariae, and Canonicis ibidem Deo seruientibus
perpetualiter, and hoc meo consensu. Quare iubeo ex part Dei and mea ne quis
eam retineat vel ab eadem loco auferat, vel possidentes illam perturbet Si quis
vero citra hoc praeceptum quicquam inde facere praesumpserit, perpetuo
anathemate feriatur. Cuius rei testes isti sunt Henricus de Twin, Stephanus
Archidiaconus, Liuingus de Coleces Canonicus, Rogerus Canonicus, Helias
Dapifer, Johannes Capellanus, Richerius, Vitalis de Wicford, Gozo Clericus de
Micheam, Oswardus Monetarius, Walchelinus. This was in the time of Henry the
first, William Giffard being then Bishop of Winchester. the seal remains to
it.

VVillielmo Dei gratia Norwicensi Episcopo, Archidiaconisque suis de Sudfolc,
omnibusque sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filijs, Galfridu^ filius Roberti and vxor
sua Anneis in Domino salutem. sciatis nos concessisse Ecclesiae Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli de Gipeswico, and Canonicis Regularibus ibidem Deo seruientibus
in perpetua ^lcemosyna Decimam molendini de Hagenford, scilicet VIII. solidos
annu^^im, duos ad Natiuitatem Domini, duos ad Pascha, duos ad festiuitatem S.
Iohannis, duos ad festiuitatem Sancti Michaelis, and dimidiam marcam argenti de
Fachendune, and Decimam foeni, and omnia quae habent infra villam de Broches,
and extra ad eam pertinentia tam in terris quam in Decimis and redditibus, and
in omnibus libertatibus datis praedictis Ecclesiae a praedecessoribus and
parentibus nostris etc. Under King Stephen it was made; and has a seal annexed.

Out of an Original Charter of K. Stephens, made to the Priorie of Eye in
Suffolk. It was in the hands of that Learned and Honorable the L. William
Howard. I had the use of it through the courtesy of that Noble Knight Sr.
Robert Cotton.
Quoniam, diuina misericordia prouidente, cognouimus esse dispositum, and long
lateque praedicante Ecclesia, sonat omnium auribus divulgatum, Quod
eleemosynarum largitione possunt absolui vincula peccatorum, and adquiri
coelestium praemia gaudiorum: Ego Stephanus Dei gratia Anglorum Rex, partem
habere volens cum illis qui foelici commercio coelestia pro terrenis commutant,
Dei amore compunctus; and pro salute animae meae and patris mei, matrisque
meae, and omnium parentum meorum and antecessorum meorum Regum Willielmi
scilicet Regis Aui mei, and Willielmi Regis Avunculi mei and Henrici Regis
Avunculi mei, and Rotberti Malet, and con^ilio Baronum meorum, concedo Deo and
Ecclesiae Sancti Petri de Eia and Monachis ibidem in Deo seruitio congregatis,
vt habeant omnes res suas quietas and liberas ab omni exactione, and teneant
eas in Terris, in Decimis, in Ecclesijs, in omnibus possessionibus sicut vnquam
melius and honorabilius tenuerunt tempore Rotberti Malet, and tempore meo
antequam Rex essem; cum Soca vel Saca, and Tol and Tiem and infanganathief.
Praecipio etiam vt teneant de quocunque tenebant (and non mittantur in
placitum) sicut tenebant die quam Henricus Rex fuit vivus and mortuus, and die
qua ad Regni Coronam perueni. Sit etiam ipsa Ecclesia in meo Dominio cum rebus
subscriptis. Concedo Ecclesiam de Holesle, de Dineuet. de Bordenis, de Suttun,
de Stadebroc, de Wingefel; Et mercatum and theloneum de Oreford; praeter nauium
quae pertinent ad firmam de Donerou Forte propter.
proper XXX. fol. Ecclesiam ipsam vbi Monachi habitant cum terris suis; Decimam
de Eia, Duodecim solidos de foro, vnam feriam per quatuor dies ad festum Sancti
Petri Kalendas Augusti, nullusque in feria habeat potestatem nisi Monachi and
homines eorum, and omnes illuc venientes and inde redeuntes habeant meam firmam
pacem, nullusque eos in aliquo disturbet super X. libras forisfacturae. Habeat
etiam Ecclesia eandem libertatem de Episcopo, de Archidiacono, de Decano, quam
habuit a tempore Regis Eadwardi, and a tempore Eadrici de Lexefelda and Regis
H. Sitque de Priore ponendo and remouendo sicut co^stitutum fuit in tempore
Rotberti Malet. Habeat etiam omnes Decimas de Manerijs sicut habuit in tempore
Rotberti Malet, scilicet de Eia, Stedebroc, Radingefeldia, Dineuet. Tatinget.
Bedingham, Keleton, Olesleia, Leest. Donewic, Lessefeld, Bergebi, Willeburn,
Seggebroc. Colum. Cave. Concedo etiam Ecclesias has, De Beweseia, Seggebroc,
Bergebi, and Ecclesias de Donewico, quae factae sunt and faciendae. De
Bedingeham, Lessefeld and Presbyterum eiusde^ villae, and de omnibus meis
siluis Decimam pasnagij. Piscariam etiam de Wells. Atque totam Bedefeldiam,
Storas, Pelecoc, Frasingefeld. Hoc etiam terrae quod habebant tempore Rotberti
Malet. in Bedingeham, and omnia inconcusse teneant. Concedo etiam Ecclesiam
Sancti Botulfi de Ica cum appendicijs suis quam dedit Willielmus de Rouill, and
Beatrix vxor eius, and terram Godem. de Iakl. and ea quae habebant in Donewico
eodem Rotberto viuente.. Horum igitur supradictorum socam and sacam in omnibus
concedo, and nominatim in Donewico and Decimas meorum hominum; Walteri scilicet
Arbalestarij, and Ecclesiam Sancti MARGARETAE de Halgestowe, and terram quae ei
pertinet. Decimam quoque Rogeri filij Walteri de Huntingefeld, and de Benges,
Ricardi Houeell de Wiuerdest, de Geslingesh, Richingehal, Reindun; Decimam
Hugonis de Aluilario in Brom, and in Selfhangers, and hoc quod Alwinus
Presbyter tenet de eo in Beria. Decimam Willielmi de Rouilla in Clakestorp, and
in Glemeham, and de XXX. acris quas tenet Willielmus Bole de feudo Comitis
Brittanniae; Decimam Willielmi Gulafri vnchennel; Decimam Petri de Bedingefeld;
Decimam de Pleeford, and Ecclesiam villae and Aluricum Delfen cum sua terra;
Decimam Hernaldi filij Regeri in Witingeham and Ascheton; Terram Osberti de
Crateuill in Acolt, and hoc quod Benedictus Capellanus tenebat de Rotberto
Malato in Decimis, and rebus alijs; Decimam Will. De pesenhale; Decimam Iordani
de Wilebehe; V. fol De pentenhahe, quos Will. de Rouilla dedit; III. solidatas
quas tenet Johannes filius Rotberti; Terram Alwini filij Wulstan in Bedefeld;
VII. solidatas quas tenet Wulmer Presbyter de Codenham; Decimam Hunfridi filij
Vnuei. Decimam Radulfi Grossi de Gretinges. XII. solid. de Aquitantia in
Aldefen; Terram Wulmari in Akesleia; Et, praeter haec supradicta, concedo eis
quod Decima eorum de Donewico crescat quoque anno in denar. and hareng. and in
omnibus alijs rebus secundum hoc quod redditus mei ibidem crescent. Test Nig.
Eliensi Episcopo, and Roger. Cancellar. Henrico nepote Regis Stephani; Galer.
Com. de Mell. Rotberto filio Rich. Will. Mart. Adam De Beln. Johan. Maresc.
Hubert. Demunc. Johan. filio Rotb. Vicecom. Gauffred fill. Walt. Will. fill.
Rog. Heru. de Glauill. Rich. de Alenc. Roger de Hosa. Anno ab Incarnatione
Domini M.C.XXXVII. apud EIA secundo Anno regni mei, in tempore Ebrardi Episcopi
Norwicensis, and Gausleni Prioris Eye. Ipse Rex subscripsit. Eustachius filius
eius subscripsit. Matildis Regina subscripsit. VVilliemus Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopus subscripsit. Turstanus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus subscripsit.
Alexander Lincoln. Episcop. subscripsit. Henricus Winton Episcopus
subscripsit. Johannes Roffensis Episcopus subscripsit. Eurardus Norwicensis
Episcopus Simo Wigornens. Episcopo subscripserunt. Rotbert. Herefordens.
Episcopus and Rotbert. Badonens. Episcopus, and Gislebertus Lundonens.
Episcopus subscripserunt. Quicunque aliquid de his quae in hac Carta
continentur auferre aut minuere, aut disturbare scienter voluerint, autoritate
Domini omnipotentis Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti and Sanctorum
Apostolorum and omnium Sanctorum sit excommunicatus, Anathematizatus, and a
consortio Domini and liminibus Sanctae Ecclesiae sequestratus donec resipiscat
and Regiae potestati XXX. libras auri persoluat: Fiat. Fiat. Fiat: Amen. Amen.
Amen. It is the fairest hand and largest Charter that ever I saw of that age,
and the Seal is yet hanging to it. And in a Roll In Biblioth. Cotton.
of the Benefactors of that Monastery, very many are mentioned for their
Donors of Tithes, or two parts, or third parts, of diverse Manors.

Out of the Cartae antiquae among the Records of the Tower of London.
When King Henry the second, and Pope Alexander the third, dissolved Vide E.G.
7. and E. 1. and B. 8. and part. 1. Ca^^. 1. (...). membr. 20. ^h^rt 117.
the number of the Nuns of Ambresburie in Wiltshire (by reason of their
unchastity) and filld the Nunnerie with others out of those of Font-Euerard in
Normandy, diverse Churches and Parishes were annexed, by Grant and Confirmation,
to the new Company, and also Tithes severally, as Deeima de Fortesbiria, and
de Wadhulla etc. and Manerium de Etona cum Decima de dominio and medietate
Decimae rusticorum, and Manerium de Chelstamstona, cum Decima eiusdem Manerij
etc. and Decimam de Ingafelot and de Godingeflot, cum omni iure Parochiali and
Decima de Hamsteda, cum omni iure Parochiali. and diverse other such.

Henry the second grants and confirms to the Monks G.G. 1, and 2.
of Thetford in Norfolk, Decimam de Bradleia, Decimam de Offitona, Decimam de
Florendona, Decimam de Moledona, and many other such, without mention of
Churches or Chapels with them; yet in the same Charter, diverse Churches of
other places are by themselves conveyed or confirmed.

William the first gives to the Church of C C. ^.
Westminster, Decimam de Wic de eadem part quae ad me pertinebat atque iterum
reddidi eandem partem eis unjust ablatam quam R. Edwardus antea dederat. Then
severally follows diverse Appropriations of Churches. This was in the second of
his reign.

Henry the second gives to the Church of Sarum Ibid. 3. in dorse.
diverse Churches with Tithes, and among them, Ecclesiam de Durneforda cum
terris and Decimis quas Walterus filius Richardi and, Isabella de Toeni and
reliqui aduocati eiusdem Ecclesiae ei dederunt. and omnes Decimas and de Noua
Foresta, and de Panetot, and de Bucholt, and de Andeuera, and de Husburna, and
omnibus Forestis meis de Wilteshire and de Dorseta, and de Berkshire, de
omnibus rebus scilicet de firma, de Pasnagio, de Herbagio, de Vaccis, de
Caseis, de Porcis, de equabus and omnes Decimas de omni Venatione praedictarum
Forestarum excepta Decima illius Venationis quae capta fuerit cum stabilia in
Foresta de Windleshora etc. What the Bishop had yearly, by reason of this
Grant, may be seen in Rot. Claus. 5. Hen. 3. Membran. 14. And for Grants from
the Kings of the Tithe of Venison, other examples are obuious, as of the
Forests of Essex to the Bishop of Rot. Chart. 6. Ioh. R. chapter 107. memb. 12. and
rot. R^t. 11. Hen* 3. part* 1. membr. 5.
London, by King John, and of others anciently, of the Claus. 4 Hen. 3. part 1.
membr. 2. and Claus. 17. Hen. 3. membran. 4. etc.
Tithe of the Venison taken in the Forests in Northamptonshire, to the Abbot of
Bury; to omit that of Henry the first, his Grant of the Tithe of all his
Venison taken in Yorkshire, to the Abbot of York, which occurres in the
Fletwood in Commentar. de iure Forestarum.
Eire of the Forest of Pickering.

In a Charter of Henry the first, many Tithes are granted and confirmed to the
Priorie of Mountague Cart. antiq. ff ff. 2.
in Somersetshire, as Duae parts Decimarum de Atford, Decima de Crimoc, and
medietas Decimorum de Ciselberg, de Clafford, de Northon iuxta Taunton, and
Decimae dominij de Merston, and de Hetecumb, de Candel, de Torp, de Cernel,
item de Cernel, and de tertio Cernel etc.

Henry the first granted K. indors. 36.
to the Canons of Cambridge, Decimas de dominio meo de Cantebrigia and
Ecclesiam S. Egidij etc.

About 3. Hen. 1. Manasses Arsio S. ^.
renewd his Charter to the Abbey of Fischamp in Normandy, and gave them apud
Sobrinton de suo dominio duas garbas Decimae suae, and so in diverse other
Manors. Dedit and Decimas de cunctis denarijs suis and de pullis equarum
suarum, de Vitulis, de Ouibus, de Caseis, de Lana and Decimas de omnibus rebus
suis, and Decimas de omnibus hominibus supradictarum villarum. All which, was
confirmed by the King. It seems, that in Decimas de omnibus rebus the Corn
was excepted, according to the first Limitation of his Grant.

II.
To these might he added more out of the Rolls Vide Rot. cart. 5. R. Ioh.
membr. 8. cart. 61. and Cart. antiq. V. and E. 7. and in Fasciculo cart. antiq.
number. 80. etc.
especially of Exemplifications or Confirmations. But the store is large that
is already delivered. And to conclude it, observe this most notable testimony
in a Writ of the Register and in Fitzherbert, that had reference to the common
use of those arbitrarie Grants out of demesne Lands at the owners pleasure,
without understanding of which use, I shall doubt no man thoroughly understands
the Writ, nor the true ground of any Writ de aduocatione Decimarum. It is a
singular example, and, as I remember, not seconded or specially noted elsewhere
in our Law books; and therefore I transcribe it whole. Rex Re^ist. orig. fol.
36. b. and Fitz. N. B, 40. N.
tali Iudici salutem. Monstrauit nobis venerabilis Pater H. Lincolniensis
Episcopus quod cum I. praecentor Ecclesiae Beatae Mariae Lincoln. teneat de
dono suo omnes Decimas Dominicarum terrarum suarum vel Dominici sui de N. quas
idem Episcopus and praedecessores sui Episcopi loci praedicti libere confer
consueuerunt: Prior Beatae Katharinae extra Lincoln. clamans Decimas illas
pertinere ad Ecclesiam suam de B. trahit eum inde in placitum etc. Et quia
placitum praedictum tangit Coronam and dignitatem nostram; praesertim cum
collatio earundem Decimarum ad nos possit deuolui ratione custodiae vel
Escaetae, quia etiam consimiles Decimas conferimus in quibusdam Dominicis, and
similiter quamplures magnates regni nostri in Dominicis suis, vobis prohibemus
ne placitum illud teneatis in Curia Christianitatis, nec aliquid quod in
derogationem Regiae dignitatis nostrae cedere valeat, in hac part attentetis
seu per alios attentari faciatis quouismodo. Test etc. What can the intent of
this be other, then that the Bishop, the King, and many other Grandes of the
Kingdom, did usually grant or collate the Tithes of their Demesnes; which,
because they were so grantable at the owners will, were (by the meaning of this
Writ) exempted from the Spiritual Jurisdiction. But thereof more anon. Perhaps
the Writ is immediately to be understood of Tithes collated in like sort as a
Church; so that he which collated them, had aduocationem Decimarum (which
appears also in the Register) as any other conferring a Church, had Ecclesiae
aduocationem. If not so; whence could the collation of these Tithes have
original, saving only from the making them severally a kind of Benefice (under
the name of Decimae seperatae, that is, annexed to no Church, as the Marginall
note in the Register well calls them) by arbitrarie Grant at first of the
owner, no otherwise then a Church was made a Benefice to be bestowd, by the
arbitrarie Ordinance of the Patron, at the foundation? Clearly, had not the use
of conueyance of Tithes severally by Grant, preceded in practice, it could not
have been, that Quamplures magnate regni (as the Writ says) might Decimas
libere confer in dominicis suis. Tithes alone could never have been collated
like a Benefice, had they not been first founded or created as a Benefice. And
the Writ might seem indeed to bear even the character of the time wherein
that use of arbitrarie Grants of Tithes was known, as of common practice; which
I understand to be about King John's time; and that, before the Popes
Decretalls, or other authority, had taken away the Laymens challenged liberty
of granting Tithes severally, according to the former example. And the rather
might that conjecture hold, because also the Sigle expressing the Bishops name,
is H. which by all likelihood denotes Hugh Archdeacon of Wells, being L.
Chancellor to King John, and Bishop of Lincoln. But it may be also, that it
was had of later time, and at the suit of Henry of Lexinton, made Bishop of
Lincoln in 38. Hen. 3. and that, after Parochial right was more settled. For
notwithstanding the settling of it, and making Tithes then payable de iure
communi to the Parish-Rector, yet it is certain, that the former Grants (what
through general Confirmations from Rome, what through the Lay men's standing
upon their Patronages of Tithes, and upon the Grantees acknowledgement of their
first devotions in such Consecrations) still continued, and were subject (in
case the Aduocatio Decimarum might come in question) to such a Prohibition,
until some alteration was therein made, as anon shall be showed, where we
speak of the ancient use of the Writ of Indicauit. But of what time soever the
Writ was, it is plain, that the ground of it must come from that use of
arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes, which severally also (as in it is supposed)
made sometimes a kind of Benefices that might be collated at the will of those
who were owners of the Land whence the Tithes were payable. How could Tithes
severally be collated by any Grandes, but from such original examples as are
already copiously delivered? A like In Codice Ms. Coenobij Osniens. in Bibl.
Cotton.
precedent of a prohibition I have seen 7. Ed. 1. which because it so confirms
the ancient purpose of that in the Register, shall be here at large delivered.
Edwardus etc. Archidiacono Wilteshyr. and eius Commissarijs salutem. Cum
dilecti nobis in Christo Abbas and Conuentus de Osney ex collatione
progenitorum nostrorum Regum Angliae percipiant and percipi debeant, and ipsi
and praedecessores a tempore collationis illius semper hucusque percipere
consueuerint duas parts Decimae garbarum prouenientium de dominicis terris
Edmundi Comitis Cornubiae in Harewell, and quorundam tenentium suorum eiusdem
villae in subuentionem sustentationis Capellanorum and Clericorum in libera
Capella nostra S. Georgij in Castro nostro Oxoniae ministrantium, Rogerus de
Draytona Persona Ecclesiae praedictae villae de Harewell, clamans praedictas
duas parts ad eandem Ecclesiam suam pertinere trahit ipsos Abbatem, and
Conuentum inde in placitum coram vobis in Curia Christianitatis, sicut ex
relatu plurium accepimus. Quia vero praedictum placitum tangit nos and Coronam
nostram and dignitatem, maxim cum* consimiles decimas in pluribus Dominicis
nostris conferamus, and etiam plures Magnates regni nostri consimiles decimas,
quarum collatio ad nos ratione custodiae deuolui solet, similiter conferant in
Dominicis suis, and etiam quia cognitio super iure patronatus huiusmodi
Decimarum ad Curiam nostram pertinet; tibi vel vobis prohibemus ne placitum
illud teneatis in Curia Christianitatis. T. meipso apud Wodestoke Octauo die
Febr. anno regni nostri septimo. Here is plainly understood whole Benefices of
only Tithes, to be collated by the King and diverse of his Baronage. as the
Tithes of the Kings Garden in Windesore are in Pat. 16. Hom. 3. membr. 7.
record, collated by Henry the third; and other like sometimes occur. Neither
is that Canon of the Council of Westminster held under Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, in 2. Johan. R. from any other original to be interpreted, then
from those common conueiances and grants of Tithes and Church livings generally
by Lay men to Monasteries. The words are, Roger. de Houeden. part. 2. fol. 460
b.
Lateranensis Concilij Vide extr. tit. de Prob. c. in Lateranensi 31 and tit.
de priuileg. c. 3. cum and plantare. and in Council ipso quod. plene^ tantummodo
extat in editione Romana and postr^ma Bi^ij.
tenore perpenso decernimus ne fratres Templi, vel Hospitalis, sieve quicunque
alij religiosi Ecclesias vel decimas, vel alia beneficia Ecclesiastica, sine
Episcopali autoritate de manu Laica recipiant, dimissis etiam quas contra
tenorem istam moderno tempore receperant etc. For howeuer, that in the Council
of Lateran, be interpreted (I enquire not how well) of Tithes only infeodated
Extr. tit de ^is qua fiunt a Prael. c. 7. cum Apostolica
into Lay hands; yet in this Kingdom, where those infeodations were not, or
were very rare (whereof anon more) how can it be well understood but of new
Grants or arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes as well not before in esse, as of
others conueid by Inuestiture of Churches. But touching those conueiances of
Tithes by Lay men, see more in the XIII. Chapter where we speak of
Infeodations.

III.
Out of those examples of Conueiances and arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes
(being but a few, and as an essay only of the multitude of them, which might be
found in the Lieger books of other Monasteries) may easily be collected, the
truth of those assertions in the old year books, which have, without desert,
been taken for falsehoods grounded only upon ignorance. By the practiced Law,
clearly every man gave the perpetual right of his Tithes to what Church he
would, although the Canon Law were against it; whereof also notice, it seems,
is sometimes taken in those conueiances which have the words of Quae decimari
debent, as if they had said, Tithes of all things which by the Canon Law ought
to be tithed, or, Quae decimari debent more Catholico, as the words are in a
Charter In Armario Cottoniano.
of about Henry the seconds time, of Gilbert one of the Earls of Hertford, to
the Priorie of S. Marie Oueries in Southwark of the Tithes of Capefeld. And it
is like enough, that according to the recitalls of those Decretalls noted in
the former Chapter, in some places devotion had bred an obedience to the Canons
in this point; but, that it was general through the Kingdom, is most false.
and whateuer the Pope wrote from Rome, we know the truth by a cloud of
homebred witnesses. But also those words, Decimari debent or solent, so often
occurring, may be understood of such things as used to be tithed when Tithes
were arbitrarily paid, as among the Gentiles, or Christians, he that offers de
ijs quae offerri solent, intimates not so much any necessary duty
acknowledged by him, as a custom of offering such things, when offerings were
arbitrarily made. And although in the book of Domesday it be specially found of
one Stori an ancestor of Walter of Aincurt, that he might sine alicuius
licentia facere Ecclesiam (in Darby and Notinghamshire) in sua terra and in sua
soca, and suam decimam mittere quo vellet, as if it had been his singular
prerogative, in his possessions of Graneby, Mortune, Pinnesleg, and other
Manors; yet was that liberty or prerogative as well of building Churches as
arbitrarie conueiance of Tithes not already consecrated either by deed or
prescription, common, it seems, to all Lords of Manors or large Territories,
until about the time of K. John. For that of Tithes; the examples and
autorities before cited justify it. For the building of Churches (which
considered with the arbitrarie endowments of them with new Tithes, specially
belongs also to this disquisition) it was affirmd for a common liberty of the
Baronage in letters of King John to Innocent the third, as you may see in the
Popes answer to the King. Innocent 3 Epist. Decretal. lib. 1. page 228.
Quod enim de consuetudine regni Anglorum (says the Pope to him) procedere
regia serenitas per suas literas intimauit, vt liceat tam Episcopis quam
Comitibus and Baronibus Ecclesias in feudo suo fundare; Laicis quidem
Principibus id licere nullatenus denegamus, dummodo Dioecesani Episcopi eis
suffragetur assensus, and per nouam structuram veterum Ecclesiarum iustitia non
laedatur. It was challenged without license; but the Pope allows it to the
Laity, so that they had license from the Bishop of the Diocese, and withal
that the new foundations bereaved not ancient Churches of their assigned
endowments. But after the time of K. John, few or none of those arbitrarie
consecrations are found. yet in Henry the thirds time some were, as you may see
in those of Fines taken out of the Chartularie of Gisburn. but remember also
they were in the Province of York. Neither were those Grants disallowd by
either Common or Canon Law here then practiced. and in thoses Epist. 21. and ^4.
cases of Tithes that occur among the Epistles of John of Salisbury, who lived
in time of Henry the second, no title is made merely by Parochial right; but
Prescription or Consecration are the grounds whereupon they are demanded. and
whereas in the case of Robert Wnegot before Adelelm Archdeacon of Dorchester,
the question was there, super quibusdam Parochianis and Decimis, and the Actor
produced testimony that he had formerly recovered ius Parochiale quod petebat
cum decimis; it is clear that the Tithes were not recovered iure communi as
they are at this day belonging to the Parish-Rector, but by special title of
Consecration or Prescription. and the ius Parochiale there, was the right of
having the Cure and Offerings of the Parishioners, which had not necessarily
annexed to it the right of Tithes by the practice of that time. whence it came
that Parochiani and Decimae are both there mentioned as several demands in the
Actors Libell. and hereof see more anon in the corollarie of the ancient
Jurisdiction of Tithes in England. and that admonition of Theobald Archbishop
of Canterbury (before cited) to Ala Countess of Warren, is obseruable. is it
not apparent that he allows not only the arbitrarie Consecrations made by the
Earls, but also reprehends her sharply for not performing what they had
therein vowed? But in the ensuing times, after that the Canon Law had here
gained greater strength, which happend soon upon Innocent the third his
thundering out his Interdict against this Kingdom, his Excommunication against
the King, and frighting the subjects with his Bulls stufft with commination,
and that against this very point of arbitrarie conueiances of Tithes; it soon
came to be a receiud Law, that all Lands regularly were to pay Tithes to the
Parish or Mother Church according to the provision of the Canons. and therefore
upon Delegation made by Pope Innocent the fourth in 49. Hen. 3. to the Priors
of S. Trinity, and S. Bartholomew in London, and the Archdeacon of Westminster
for the deciding of a controversy twixt the Abbess and Nuns of Chartris by
Ely, and Robert Passelew Archdeacon of Jews, about some Tithes of the
possession of the Nunnerie in Barington, it appears that in Passelews libell,
no other title is made, but that the Land lies infra limits Parochiae suae de
Barenton, vnde petit dictam Abbatissam compelli integre ad solutionem dictarum
decimarum cum damnis and interesse etc. and some others like are of that time
according to the Law that to this day continues, as may especially be found in
the books of Ms. in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
Pipewell and Osney. That example is in the Chartularie of that Nunnerie,
composed by the cost and pains of Agnes Aschefeld* Abbess there, and Henry
Bukworth Bachiler of the Canon Law, about the time of Henry the sixth. You may
add to the confirmation of this ending of the ancienter course of arbitrarie
consecrations, and the later establishing of Parochial right in Tithes, that
of the English Sup. cap. 7.. 1.
Monks before cited touching the general Council of Lions, held in 2 Ed. 1. I
doubt not but that Parochial right was long before for the most part settled;
but it is not likely that they had so confidently affirmed such a continuing
liberty of conueiance of Tithes at the owners will, had they not known that
until about the preceding ages at least, it had been in common practice both
of fact and positive Law, especially in this Kingdom where they lived. Whether
this petition in Parliament of 6. Ed. 1. Inter fascie. Pet. Parl 6. Ed. 1 in
ar^^ Londin.
may give any light to that assertion of theirs, I know not. Nicholas of
Crainford, Parson of Gilingham, complaind to the King, Quod cum Foresta Domini
Regis, ibidem sita, sit infra Parochiam suam, quod Dominus Rex Decimam faeni,
venationis, pannagij, and aliorum prouentuum ipsius forestae de gratia and pro
salute animae suae, and animarum praedecessorum suorum, Ecclesiae suae cui de
iure communi debentur plene solui praecipiat, secundum formam supplicationis
and exhortationis Apostolicae porrectam Dominio R. apud Gilingham quando fuit
ibi ad Natale. What was that supplicatio or exhortatio Apostolica? did not some
such thing, coming from Rome about the time of the Council of Lions, make the
Monks think it a thing agreed upon in that Council? it seems here too, that in
the Kings case, Parochial right of Tithes was not yet every where settled,
although the Tithes were increasing in a Parish.

IV.
After this establishment of Parochial right, new arbitrarie conueiances out
of lands lying in any Parish, were not permitted, but ancient consecrations
were still retained, and had confirmation either from prescription or Papal
privilege which were, by the Canons, sufficient titles to be pleaded against
the common right claimed by Parish Rectors. And when this innovation grew in
Parochial right, then also the jurisdiction which the common or secular Law
had formerly challenged and exercised in detaining the right of Tithes (between
the Parish and Parishioner) grew out of use; and the legal proceeding became
to be regularly according to the Canons which brought the practice to be as
since it has continued. But of the ancient jurisdiction more anon. So was it
now come to that pass, that no new arbitrarie consecrations might be made of
the Tithes of lands lying in any Parish. But yet for such lands as were not
Parochially limited, the ancient liberty was retained. and although by the
Canon Law the Bishop is to have all Tithes growing in lands not assigned to any
Extr. tit. de Decimis c. 13* quoniam
Parish within his Diocese, yet in the moniments of the common Laws such Tithes
growing in lands of the Crown, are at the arbitrarie disposition of the King.
such places have 14. Hen. 4 fol. 17. b. and Brook tit. Dismes 10.
been and (I think) are in diverse Forests. And hereof says Thorp in 22. Assis.
pl. 75. Il soleit estre ley quant il aver certane place qui fuit horse de
chescun Paroche come en Englewode, and huiusmodi, en tell case le Roy ad and
doit aver les dismes de cest place (and nient l' Euesque de lieu) a granter a
que luy plest. and relates further that the Archbishop that year made suit to
the Council, to have had such Tithes. But, under favor this was understood
only of the Kings granting the tithes of his Demesnes occupied by his Bailifes
according as in ancient time every man else did. for whateuer the words seem to
import, Thorp speaks only of such lands of the possession of the Crown; in
which case, it must not perhaps be understood so much, a part of the Royal
prerogative as a right due to the King by common Law, in regard of his
possession of lands not limited to any Parish. Neither does he affirm that
Tithes of such places are due to be paid to the Crown, but that they are in the
King to grant at his pleasure, if growing in his demesnes. But to this purpose
is a notable case in the Parliament rolls of In Recept. Scaccarij, and in Cod
Vet. apud V. C. I. Borough regiorum in arce Land. Seriniorum prasectum.
18. Ed. 1. where Ralph Bishop of Carleol Petit versus Ecclesiae Priorem de
Karliel Decimas duarum placearum terrae, of the new assarts in the Forest of
Inglewood, whereof the one is called Linthwait, the other Kirkthwait, Quae sunt
infra limits Parochiae Ecclesiae suae de Aspaterike etc. and lays by
praescription in his predecessors the Tithes of the pannage there, before the
assarting or culture. Henry of Burton also, Parson of Thoresby, claimed in
Parliament the same Tithes as belonging to his Church, and infra limits
Parochiae suae. and the Prior comes and says, that Henricus Rex vetus (Henry
the first, it seems) concessit Deo and Ecclesiae suae Beatae Mariae Karliel
omnes Decimas de omnibus terris quas in culturam redigeret infra Forestam, and
inde eos feoffauit per quoddam cornu eburneum quod dedit Ecclesiae suae
praedictae etc. Whereupon the Kings Attorney, Dicit quod Decimae praedictae
pertinent ad Regem and non ad alium, quia sunt infra bundas Forestae de
Inglewood, and quod Rex in Foresta sua praedicta potest villas aedificare,
Ecclesias construere, terras assartare, and Ecclesias illas cum Decimis
terrarum illarum pro voluntate sua cuicunque voluerit confer, eo quod Foresta
illa non est infra Limits alicuius Parochiae etc. Et petit quod Decimae illae
Domino Regi remaneant prout de iure debent ratione praedicta etc. Et quia
Dominus Rex super praemissis vult certiorari, vt vnicuique tribuatur quod suum
est. William of Vesci, Justice of the Forest beyond Trent, and Thomas of
Normanuill, his Escheator for those parts (for so was the division anciently of
Escheatorships) were assigned Commissioners to enquire of the truth, and
certificent Regem ad proximum Parlamentum etc. So are the words of the Record.
Where the Attorney challenges not the right by prerogative, but only in regard
that the place being the demesne Land of the Crown; and not assigned to any
Parish, the Tithes are grantable by the King, as owner, at his pleasure. And so
it well agrees both with that liberty challenged by King John in the name of
his Baronage, that they might found new Churches at their pleasure in their
own fees (before the establishment of Parochial right in Tithes) as also with
the more ancient practice of the Kingdom, whereby Tithes might not be
parochially exacted, nor were so reputed due, but by the owners arbitrarily
conveyed in perpetual right. And whereas Herle, in 7. Ed. 3. fol. 5. a. says
generally, That no man might arbitrarily give his Tithes that are not within
Parochial Limits, but that the Bishop of the Diocese should have them. It
seems, he spoke suddenly, as out of the Canon Law, and not according to the Law
of England. And he adds, that it is against reason, Que home ne purra my
granter ses almoignes a que il vouldra. And but Mich. 5. Ed. 3. Coram Rege Rot.
168. Cumbria.
two years before that of Herle, it was adjudged in the Kings Bench, Quod de
Decimis grossis Priori de Carleol and praedecessoribus suis de dominicis Domini
Regis infra Forestam de Inglewood prouenientibus and extra quaruncunque
Parochiarum Limits existentibus per Cartam progenitorum Domini Regis nunc
concessis, and per Cartam ipsius D. R. nunc confirmatis, etc. a Prohibition
should be granted against the Bishop of Carleol, that claymed them. It was upon
a Record sent thither out of the Parliament, as in the Roll appears largely.
And Edward the first gave such Tithes of the Forest of Dene, as increased not
within any Parish to the Bishop of Landaff, by which title the Bishop afterward
Rot. Parl. 8. Ed. 2. rot. 17. in dors.
claymed them; and no question was of that point. But for common or waste
ground, the Parish whereof is not known, the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. has given
the Tithe cattle therein depasturing, to the Church within whose Parish the
owner dwells.

CAP. XII.
I. Appropriations and Collations of Tithes with Churches. The Corporations to
which the Appropriations were made, presented, for the most part, Vicars.
Thence the most of perpetual Vicarages.

II. How Churches and Tithes by Appropriation were anciently conveyed from
Lay-Patrons. The use of Inuestitures, practiced by Lay-Patrons.

III. Grants of Rents or Annuities by Patrons only, out of their Churches. Of
the Bishops assent. More of Inuestitures. A Writ to the Archdeacon anciently
sometime sent upon recovery of a Presentment.

IV. Of haereditarie succession in Churches.

V. Laps upon default of Presentation grounded upon the general Council of
Lateran, held in 25. Hen. 2. What Praesentare ad Ecclesiam is originally.
Donatio Ecclesiae.

I.
AS by Consecrations severally, so, with Churches, in Appropriations, Tithes
were frequently conveyed, and by express name. as Ecclesia de N. cum Decimis,
or the like, are usually given Monachis, Monialibus etc. ibidem Deo
seruientibus etc. according to what is before noted of other Countries. But
this Mention of Tithes, with Churches in Appropriations, was rare, or not at
all, till after the Normans. In the Saxon times, many appropriated Churches are
found, and that from between D.CC. and D.CCC. years since, till the Normans.
but the Charters that conveyed or confirmed them, have usually nothing but
Ecclesias and so many Carues or Yard Lands, or so much rent annexed to them, nor
speaking at all of any Tithes transferd with them. For special examples of
such ancient Appropriations, you may see the recitalls of the Charters of King
Bertulph, King Beored, and King Edred, made to the Abbey of Crowland, and
inserted in Ingulphus. But after the Normans, in Appropriations, most commonly,
the Church is expressed, Vna cum Decima (that is, the Tithe annexed or consecrated
to it) in annona, or in other kind, and the places sometimes are named where
the increase of the Tithe grew. Such examples are very obuious, especially in
the Chartularies of Abingdon and Rochester. And, as is before noted, the most
common intent (allowd also by Canonical confirmation, which sometime but
rarely was added in those elder ages) was, that the Corporation whereto the
Appropriation was made, should put Clerks or Vicars in the Churches so conveyed
to them, which were to answer to them for all temporal profits, as Tithes and
other revenues (although the Churches were distant many hundred miles sometimes
from the Monasteries; for a Church in one Kingdom also was often appropriated
to a Monastery of another) and to the Ordinary for spiritual function. The
general Confirmations that are sometimes found of that time, make it manifest.
and for the two Provinces, it is not amiss to add here these two examples of
it. In 17. Will. 1. Thomas Archbishop of York makes a general Confirmation
R^g. de Hou^d^n, part. 1. fol. 26^. ^.
to the Priorie of Durham of all Churches either then appropriated to them, or
thereafter to be appropriated, and grants and commands, Vt omnes Ecclesias suas
in manu sua teneat, and quiet eas possideant, and Vicarios suos in eis libere
ponant, qui mihi and successoribus meis de cura tantum intendant animarum,
ipsis vero de omnibus caeteris Eleemosynis and Beneficijs. So, under Henry the
second, Pope Lucius the third writes to all the Monks in the Province Append.
ad Council. (...). part. 16
of Canterbury, and bids them, that in all Churches, in quibus praesentationem
habetis cum vacauerint Diocesanis Episcopis Clericos idoneos praesentetis qui
illis de spiritualibus, vobis de temporalibus debeant respondere. Where, that
in quibus praesentationem habetis, can be understood only of Churches
appropriated (which they enioied not pleno iure, that is, Panormitan. ad tit.
de restit. in integr. cap. (...).
in which they were bound to allow some competent revenue to a Vicar or Curat,
and had not exempt jurisdiction, nor the power of institution of Vicars,
without presentation to the Bishop) as is plainly known from what follows
touching the answering for the Temporalties to the Monasteries. And in those
times, as is already delivered, it was most frequent, to have presentations
made by Monasteries to their appropriated Churches; and the Vicar-Incumbents or
Presentees had no more of the profits (notwithstanding the institution then the
Monasteries would arbitrarily allow them. Neither followd any disappropriation
upon such Presentation, howeuer the later Law be taken otherwise. Nor was there
any perpetual certainty of profits or revenues to their Presentees, until
such time as the Monks, by composition with the Ordinaries, or by their own
Ordinance (which prescription after confirmed) appointed some yearly salarie in
Tithes, or Glebe, or Rent, severally for the perpetual maintenance of the
Cure; which Salaries became afterward perpetual Vicarages. And to these
testimonies touching appropriated Churches in those ancient times, and
presentation to them, you may also add that Roger. Houed. annal. 2. fol. 460.
b.
Canon of the Council of Westminster, held in the second of King John by
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, to the same purpose. wherewith is agreeing
also one of Othobons Legatine Constitutions, touching filling of
Appropriations, and making of Vicarages; as also the two Statuts of 15. Rich.
2. cap. 6. and 4. Hen. 4. cap. 12. touching the point of which Statut, a Bill
in the next Parliament* was again put in, but answered with Rot. Parl. 5. Hen.
4. art. 74.
Soient les Statuts en faitez and gardez.

II.
In those elder Appropriations, it appears that the Church and the Tithes, and
what else was ioind with it as part of the assigned revenue, by the practice of
the time passed in point of interest from the Patron by his gift (which
oftentimes was by liuerie of a book or a knife on the Altar) not otherwise then
freehold conueid by his deed and liuerie. Neither was confirmation or assent of
the Ordinary (as it seems) necessary as of later time. Observe this one
example of the Church of Waldren appropriated to the Priorie of Jews in Sussex
by Robert of Dene, wherein he as Patron appoints also the conditions to which
the Presentee or Vicar-encumbent of the Priorie should be subject. Ego Robertus
de Dena (says the In Thesauro Cottoniano.
Deed) and vxor mea Sibilia pro animabus antecessorum nostrorum and pro salute
nostra, and successorum nastrorum concedimus Deo and S. Pancratio Latisaquensi
Ecclesiam de Waldrena cum terris and Decimis, and omnibus ad eam pertinentibus,
and cum duabus partibus Decimae bladorum de Caluindona, ita videlicet vt
Sacerdos de Waldrena, de his omnibus soluat S. Pancratio singulis annis
dimidiam marcam argenti. Ipse autem Sacerdos per manum Prioris S. Pancratij
Ecclesiam de Waldrena tenebit quamdiu cast and religiose vixerit. Quod si
crimen incurrerit, iudicio Prioris Latisaquensis corrigetur aut expelletur.
This, about the time of Henry the second, was made coram duobus Hundredis apud
Hundestuph. Very many other are extant so made, as well by common persons as
the King in the Saxon times of churches, and since, of Churches and Tithes
without any confirmations; saving sometimes that those of common persons are
ratified by the King Videsis 7. Ed. ^. fol. 4. b. and Esson. and Placit. de 10.
Rich. 1. Rot. 22. Hertf. cas* Reginaldi de Argentain.
as supreme Lord, as also they are too by other Lords. for it was not unusual
for Tenants to have their Lords confirm their alienations of all kind of
possessions. I know what is said in the later Law of the Kings power as suprem
Ordinary for the part of Jurisdiction, and I acknowledge it, as all ought. but
in those elder times, that was not the matter which made appropriations good,
where his confirmation had place, and none was from the Bishop. at least it
cannot at all be proved that his suprem Jurisdiction spiritual was so much
thought of in them, although otherwise apparent testimony be of the exercise
of such jurisdiction and of the right of it in the elder ages in this Kingdom.
But the reason of appropriations so practiced by lay Patrons only, was the
challenged right which in those times they most commonly used in disposition of
their Churches, as if they had been all Donatiues by collation (without
presentation) that is by Inuestiture from their own hands only, which gave
their Incumbents real possession of the Tithe of the Church and all the
revenues, no less then presentation, institution, and induction do at this
day. For howeuer, not only the Decrees both of the Pope and general Counsels,
were anciently against that kind of inuestiture, but also the Provincial or
National Synods here held, had like Canons forbidding it, as in 3. Hen. 1. the
Guil Malmes^. de Gest. Pontific. lib. 1. vide Anselm. lib. 3. Epist. 45.
Council of Westminster held under Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Girard of York, ordains, Ne Monachi Ecclesias nisi per Episcopos accipiant,
and in 25. Hen. 1. at the same place in the National Synod, held by Cardinal
John de Crema, the Popes Legate, it was constituted, that Continuat. F^^rent.
Wigor^. anno 1125.
Nullus Abbas, nullus Prior, nullus omnino Monachus, vel Clericus Ecclesiam
sieve Decimam seu quaelibet beneficia Ecclesiastica de dono Laici sine proprij
Episcopi autoritate and assensu suscipiat quod si praesumptum fuerit, irrita
erit donatio huiusmodi etc. and some allowance was given to these Canons by the
King; yet it is most certain that the practice was for diverse years afterward
otherwise, and that Churches with Tithes were most commonly given by lay
Patrons, without the Bishops assent or institution, and that as well by filling
them with Incumbents, as appropriating them to Monasteries, Chapters, or
otherwise. Beside the examples that might enough prove it and are obuious in
old Chartularies, the preamble of a Decretall of Alexander the third, sent,
under Henry the second, to all the Bishops of Extr. de Instit. c. 3. ex
frequentibu^ qui Canon plemus habetur in Appendice ad Council. Lateran. part.
28. cap. 11.
the Province of Canterbury, is herein full testimony. Ex frequentibus
querelis (says he) didicimus in partibus vestris consuetudinem prauam a multis
retro actis temporibus invaluisse, quod Clerici Ecclesiastica beneficia sine
consensu Episcopi Dioecesis vel Officialium suoru^ (qui hoc de iure possunt)
recipient minus quam deceat, sollimite cogitantes, quomodo id a Patrum
sanctoru^ est institutionibus alienum and Ecclesiasticae contrarium honestati.
Vnde cum tu frater etc. where you see plainly that course of inuestiture or
donation by the Patron without presentation, was consuetudo quae a multis retro
actis temporibus inualuerat, which shows it to have been then a part of the
secular Law; though the judgment of the Bishops and the Pope titles it Praua.
agreeing to this are other testimonies in Tit. de iure patr. c. 10. cum Laici.
c. 11 cura Pa^torali etc. 21. relatum. vide Roger. de Houeden. Annal. fol. 208.
a. l. Sarisbur. Policrat. lib. 7. cap. 21. and App. ad Council. Lat. part. 15
cap. 2.
Gregory's Decretalls, and that in Epistles to all the Bishops of England to
forbid it. and it is specially obserueable, how ill the Baronage of England
took it when Anselm under Henry the first would have, through Papal Canons,
inhibited the practice of inuestitures, used by the King and other lay Patrons,
which is recorded in an Epistle Epist. Anselm. Ms. 195. in Bibl. Cottoniana.
of that Anselm, directed to Pope Paschal the second, thus speaking. Domino
Reuerendo and Patri diligendo Paschali summo Pontifici Anselmus seruus
Ecclesiae Cantuariensis, debitam subiectionem and orationum assiduitatem.
Postquam reuocatus ad Episcopatum redij in Angliam, ostendi decreta Apostolica
quae in Romano Concilio praesens audiui ne scilicet aliquis de manu Regis aut
alicuius Laici Ecclesiarum Inuestituras acciperet, vt pro hoc eius homo fieret;
nec aliquis haec transgredientem consecrare praesumeret. Quod audientes Rex and
Principes eius ipsi etiam Episcopi, and alij minoris ordinis tam grauiter
aceperunt, vt assererent se nullo modo huic rei assensum praebituros, and me de
regno potius, quam hoc seruarent, expulsuros and a Romana Ecclesia se
discessuros; vnde reverend Pater vestrum petij, per Epistolam nostram,
consilium etc. This is in the Ms. Volume of Epistles of Anselm, fairly written
by John de Grandisono Bishop of Excester, in the year M.CCC.LXIV. in which are
above C. more then are published in his printed Works. they menaced the
Archbishop with banishment, and the Pope with revolt from his See, only for
their withstanding that practice of Inuestiture; whereof, for so much as
concerns Abbeies, Priories, or Bishopriques (in giving them by the ring and
baston) much testimony is in the story of about that age. and the Kings
remission of the Inuestitures of those great dignities is frequent. but, for
Parish Churches, of which we here chiefly speak; the common occurrences of
Inuestitures mention them but little. But for the use of them known also by the
name of Institution; see the Fine anon transcribed of 33. Hen. 2. as also
specially a commission sent by Pope Alexander the third, to the In Append.
(...) Council. Lat. part. 8. cap. 14. tit. de testibus cogend^^.
Dean of Chichester, touching a Parson that was legitime institutus a Willielmo
Nobili viro, and had resigned Personatum Capellano Domini. But this course of
Inuestiture by Lay men, after Anselmes time, began to be of less use; and
some, obeying the Canons, presented, others still collated by Inuestiture till
about Richard the first and King John's time, whereof more in the next
Paragraph. To the Lay Patrons challenged right of such Inuestiture of Churches
and Tithes, belongs specially the Granting of Rents and such like out of
Rectories by the Patrons only, and the Sons or others Succession in Parish
Churches after the death of their ancestors of both which (little known
vulgarly) ancient warrant is yet remaining.

III.
For the first; in the Chartularie of the Priorie of S. Needs in
Huntingdonshire, one Robert Fitz-water (about King John's time) gives to the
Priorie six marks of silver nomine certi beneficij in Ecclesia de Wimbisse
annuatim percipiendas per manum personae eiusdem Ecclesiae. Quare volo (says
he) vt quicunque in praefata Ecclesia de Wimbis. ad praesentationem meam vel
haeredum meorum persona instituta fuerit praenominatis Monachis S. Neoti de
supradicto beneficio VI. marcarum fidelitatem faciat, saluo mihi and haeredibus
meis iure aduocationis and praesentationis etc. and diverse other such like are.
Neither have I met with a precedent of those times wherein the Encumbent was
Grantor, as at this day by the Common Law (the Church being full) I think he
must. but most usually a provision by the Patron was inserted to this purpose,
that the several Encumbents should by Oath bind themselves to the true payment.
nor was it so necessary to have the ordinaries assent, when that, which the
Ordinary by the practice of the later Law is to do in his Institution, was in
frequent practice supplied by the Patrons Inuestiture. Out of which may be the
better understood that part of the new Canon in the Synod of Westminster, held
under Roger. (...). A^^al. fol. 310.
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, in 21* Hen. 2. Nulli liceat Ecclesiam
nomine Dotalitij ad aliquem transfer, that is, That no Patron should give his
Church. as it were in Frankmariage, or make of it a Donatio propter nuptias (as
the Ciuilians call it) to remain with the husband of his Daughter or Kinswoman,
during his life. How could such a gift have at all been made by presentation
(as of later time it is understood) Institution or Induction? and a most
obseruable example of this matter is in a Fine of 33. Hen. 2. in these words.
Haec est finalis concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Cantuariam anno
Regni Regis Henrici secundi XXXIII. die Venetis proxima post festum sancti
Iohannis Baptistae Coram Radulpho Archidiacono Colecestriae, and Rogero filio
Reinfri, and Roberto de Witefeld, and Michaele Belet Iusticiarijs Domini Regis,
and alijs fidelibus Domini Regis ibidem tunc praesentibus inter Priorem de
Jews and Monachis eiusdem loci and Willielmum filium Arthuri, quem Richardus
de Budegintun pofuit loco suo ad lucrandum vel perdendum de aduocatione
Ecclesiae de Budeketun, vnde placitum erat inter eos in Curia Regis, scilicet
quod Prior and Monachi remiserunt and quietum clamauerunt eidem Richardo and
haeredibus suis aduocationem praedictae Ecclesiae per ita quod persona quae per
ipsum Richardum vel haeredes eius in eadem Ecclesia instituetur, reddet
singulis annis Ecclesiae de Jews IIII. solidos scilicet ad festum Sancti
Michaelis. and ille qui in eadem Ecclesia per ipsum Richardum vel haeredes suos
instituetur persona, post institutionem suam, coram Episcopo fidelitatem
praestabit quod praedictam pensionem praedicto termino Ecclesiae de Jews
persoluet, and postea in Capitulo de Jews eandem fidelitatem innouabit. Here
it appears (it seems) by the judgment of the Kings Justices, that the Patron
had such interest in those times, that he might alone without grant of the
Encumbent (who came in by his Institution and Inuestiture) or confirmation of
the Bishop, charge the church with a pension. and this, being in a Fine, is of
authority beyond exception for that age. But the like is in Rot. Fin. 7. Rich.
1. Lancast. in a Fine levied between Theobald Fitz-water, demandant in a Writ
of Right of Aduowson against the Abbot of Shrewsburie, of the Church of
Kirkham, where XII. mark Rent is reserved to the Abbot, with a like clause for
the Encumbents fealty for true payment. the like in Fin. 4. Rich. 1. diverse.
Commit. touching the Church of Dacheworth. yet also, in that age, the assent of
the Parson and Bishop was sometime had. as in Rot. Fin. 7. Rich. 1. Staff.
where, upon Right of Aduowson by the Prior and Canons of Stanes against Alice
Hopton, for the Church of Cheklegh, Alice and Robertus filius and haeres suus
per assensum and voluntatem H. Couentrensis Episcopi in cuius Diocoesi Ecclesia
illa sita est, and Osberti personae eiusdem Ecclesiae tunc ibidem praesentium,
concesserunt praefatis Priori and Canonicis XXs. de eadem Ecclesia de Cheklegh
annuatim percipiendos sine omni contradictione imperpetuum de Clerico eandem
Ecclesiam possidente quicunque ille fuerit ad duos terminos videlicet ad Pascha
Xs. and ad festum S. Michaelis X^. etc, Here the assent of the Parson and
Bishop being both present in Court, is inserted in the Fine; yet enough
examples show that it was not (as may be strongly coniecturd) thought
altogether necessary. But indeed howeuer the right of Inuestitures had been
then much exercised by Lay Patrons, yet in case of Clergy Patrons, if the
Church were not of exempted jurisdiction, the Bishops more usually instituted:
and therefore was their assent the sooner admitted sometimes into the Fine; and
doubtless also some lay Patrons willing enough herein to obey the Canons,
after Anselm and perhaps before arbitrarily filld their Churches by
presentation to the Bishop. this may be collected especially out of that of the
grant of the Extr. de Instit. ^. 6. cum ve^issent Edit. Gregoriana.
privilege of Institution in Churches, made by Turstan Archbishop of York under
Henry the first, to the Archdeacon of Richemond, as also out of two Decretalls
from Rome, sent by Pope Extr. tit. de iure ^urando c. 11. tuae ^es. and de iure
patr. c. 24. cus autem.
Lucius the third, under Henry the second to the Bishop of Norwich. and in
some other 16. Ed. 3. tit. Annuitie 23 and Rot. Fin. 1. Ioh. Huntingdon.
authority both in our year books and in the fine Rolls also of the beginning
of King John, the Bishops assent in such grants of that time is sometimes
found. and in that commonly (but without sufficient ground) attributed to
Randol of Lib. 3. cap. 20.
Glanvill chief Justice of England to Henry the second, the Bishops
institution is spoken of as a thing of not unknown right upon a recovery in
Darrain presentment, according as the Canons require. And in an Epistle In
Symbol. Electorum Ms. in Bib. Cotton.
of Giraldus Cambrensis (written in those times to Hugh Bishop of Lincoln about
his Parsonage of Cestreton, which he challenged upon presentation of himself
made by Gerard of Camvill, a Gentleman of great worth in Lincolnshire) the
Bishops Institution is spoken of, as clearly necessary, according to the
Canons, and noted with Episcopus solus honores dare potest; which, you must
remember, was written by one that was fervent for the Canons, and had also
written against the auitae consuetudines or common Laws of that time. But these
testimonies must be warily understood, and compared with the former and
frequent practice of the contrary, which about that time, especially under
Richard the first and King John (it seems) much altered. Neither till about
that time can it be found, that the more common practice of Lay men's
Inuestitures ceased. Nor was the Bishops Institution presently and uniformly
thence used, as of later ages. The authority of the Clergy had by that time
taken away the use of Lay men's Inuestitures. Yet was it not clear, it seems,
upon the practice that here followed, what dignity of the Clergy should then
exercise the Institution: for you shall find it sometimes done by the
Archdeacon, as it was also before K. John, in some cases where any Lay man
omitted his Inuestiture; as may be gathered out of a Decretall, sent Extr. de
(...). Archidiac. c. 4. cum satis and cap. 5. Archidiac^^^.
hither from Pope Alexander the third, to forbid the Archdeacon of Ely, Curam
animarum sine mandato Episcopi committere. And afterward also, in Pasch. and
Trin. 9. and 10. Reg. Ioh. a Writ is awarded to the Archdeacon, as now it ought
to the Bishop, upon recovery of a Presentment. The entry is thus. Recordatum
est per G. filium Petri and Simonem de Pateshull quod Simon filius Richardi,
tempore Regis Richardi, recuperauit, coram eis and socijs eorum versus Iohannem
de Kalceto seisinam Aduocationis Ecclesiae de Buckworth (in Huntingdonshire)
per assisam de vltima prasentatione, ita quod habuit breue quod Archidiaconus
admitteret personam ad Ecclesiam illam ad praesentationem eidem; and ipse
Johannes impediuit eum ita quod implacitauit eum per breue Papae, and Dominus
Rex prohibuit placitum, and Simon venit and impetrauit a Rege quod loquela
procederet, and quod haberet breue ab Archidiaconum de Clerico suo admittendo
and habuit. T. domino G. filio Petri and Will. de Briwere. Here twice was the
Writ of Admission or Institution sent to the Archdeacon, not to the Bishop.
Perhaps indeed it happened in the vacancie of the Sea. for the time so falls,
that we cannot be sure of the contrary. But admit it were so. Plainly, the
Archdeacon neither by Canon nor common Law had any more right of Institution,
by reason of a Vacancie of the Bishoprique. And certainly, during the vacancie,
the Writ should Arg. 15. Ed. 3 tit. Quare non admisit 5. and Fitzh. N.^. 47. l.
etc.
go to the Gardians of the Spirituality, which by the Canon Laws, are the
Deane 6 tit. de Suppl^nd. Pr^lat. neglig c. 3. and 36. Hen. 8. tit.
Administrators 46.
and Chapter, but by the Law of England Vide 17. Ed. 2. tit. Brief^ 812. 1^.
Ed. 4.14. ^. Regist. Orig. f. 6^ a. and 141. a 17. Ed 3. fol. 23. b. etc.
, the Archbishops in their several Provinces, and the Deanes and Chapters
only, in case where the Archbishopriques are void. And in other places,
somewhat afterward also I have seen Institutions often 5. (...) Matricul.
Eccles* in Archidiac. L^ic. in Biblioth. Cottoniana.
by the Archdeacon of Leicester, while the Bishoprique of Lincoln was void;
which shows, that those times were the infancy of the exact course of
Episcopal Institutions, as they are at this day used. Neither had these any
privilege of Institution, as the Archdeacon of Richmond had anciently given
Vide extr* tit. de Instit. c. 6. and Rog. de Houeden p. 465. and 468. and seq.
him, or the like. At this day, and from long time before, the Archdeacon only
Inducts, as the Books and common practice show. But thereof thus much by the
way.

IV.
For that other, of Succession in the Benefices of the Ancestors; doubtless,
that was, often when the father or other ancestor was Incumbent and Patron, and
by that challenged right, of the time, of Inuestiture and sole disposition of
the Church, would either in his life time convey the Benefice to his son or
heir by grant, which by the practice of the time, supplied, it seems, as well
a Resignation, as Presentation, Institution, and Induction; or would so leave
the Aduowson to descend to his heir, that he (being in Orders) might retain
the Church in his own hands, according as the Law then, it seems, permitted.
Against this, was a Canon made in the National Synod at Westminster in 3. Hen.
1. Vt filij Presbyterorum non sint haeredes Ecclesiarum Patrum suorum. And
another in 25. Hen. 1. held under the Popes Legate. Sancimus (as the words are)
ne quis Ecclesiam sibi sieve Praebendam paterna vendicet haereditate Videsis
extr. tit de iure Patron. c. 15 consuluit etc. and tit. de filijs Presbyt.
passim. and tit. de Pactis c. 5. aecepimu^. and tit. de Tollibus c. 7. c^
part. and Append. Council. Lat. part. 8. cap. 22. Hereford. Episcopo and Abbati
de Forde. Nec omittas eiusdem appendicis, part. 15 cap. 15. and part 19. cap.
1. and part. 28. cap. 4. and 8. part 49 cap. 14. and part. 50. cap. 60.
aut successorem sibi in aliquo Ecclesiastico constituat Beneficio. Without
that challenged right of Inuestiture supposed in the Incumbent (having also the
Patronage) which supplied all that the Patron, Bishop, and Archdeacon at this
day do in filling a Church, how could any Parson make to himself a successor
or an heir to have color to claim the Incu^bencie from his ancestor. To this
purpose may be well rememberd a passage in a verdict found in Rot. Placit. 6.
Rich. 1. Rot. 1. of such a kind of conueyance of S. Peeters Church in
Cambridge: the words are; Iuratores been sciunt quod quidam Langlinus qui
tenuit Ecclesiam illam, and qui fuit persona illius Ecclesiae dedit Ecclesiam
illam, secundum quod tunc fuit mos Ciuitatis Cantebrigiae, cuidam parenti suo
Segario nomine qui illam tenuit per LX. annos and plus, and fuit persona illius
Ecclesiae and ipse postea dedit Ecclesiam illam Henrico filio suo qui illam
tenuit per LX. annos and ipse in ligea potestate sua dedit illam Hospitali
Cantebrigiae per Cartam suam and idem Hospitali habet Ecclesiam illam. They
discreetly find the custom of the City to maintain the Conueyance, supposing
(it seems) that the custom would help the last Grantors title, although the
Common Law, which had by that time received some change herein, by force of the
Papal Decrees, should not have allowd it. I know, in the Canons another thing
is also understood in this matter of Succession, that is, the irregularitie of
the son of a Clerk; but that can extend only to the matter of Illegitimation
upon Marriage forbidden to the Clergy. For which point alone, the Bishops
refusal had been the best help, but that indeed the other kind of disposition
of Churches by Inuestiture prevented his refusal when Presentation was not
made to him.

V.
But after such time as the Decretals and the increasing authority of the
Canons, about the year M.CC. had settled the universal course here of filling
of Churches by Presentation to the Bishop, or (as it seems sometimes it was) to
the Archdeacon, or to the Vicar of the Bishop, or Guardian of the Spiritualties;
that use of Inuestitures of Churches and Tithes severally or together,
practiced by Lay men, was left off, and a division of Ecclesiastical and
Secular right from thence has continued in practice. Neither did Vide Rot.
pat. 9. Ioh. R. membr. 1. alibi saepe^ in Archiuis, quae ad illius tempora
spectant.
the King afterward (much less common persons) fill their common Parochial
Churches without such presentiments from Bishops. Parochial Churches; for of
special donatiue Chapels we here speak not. neither were Appropriations of
Churches and Tithes afterward allowd, that had not 2. Ed. 3.23. b. 3 Ed. 3.
fol. 11. b. 10. Ed. 3. fol. 50. a. and vide Casum Episcopi Lincoln. in Comment.
2. etc.
confirmation from the Ordinary immediate or supreme. And in the same age also
came in the Law of the Laps, whereby the Bishop is to collate after six months
upon the Patrons default, it being before at his liberty to fill his Church at
his pleasure. neither was he confined to any time. That time of Laps was
(according as the use of Presentation grew by degrees settled) received into the
Laws of England out of the general Vide Rog. de Houeaon, an. 1179.
Council of Lateran, held in 25. Hen. 2. under Alexander the third; to which,
four Bishops (according to the ancient use of this Kingdom) that is, Hugh
Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of Norwich, Robert Bishop of Hereford, and
Reinold Bishop of Bath, were sent as Agents for the Church of England. By that
Council, after vacancie of six months, the Chapter is to bestow those
Churches, which the Bishop, being Patron, had left so long void; and upon their
default, the Metropolitan. but no word is of Lay Patrons in it. Yet by reason
of the Authority of that Council, and of a Decretall Extr. de iure Patronat.
c. 22. (...) se.
of the same Pope, which speaks of like time upon default of Lay Patrons, it
has been since taken here generally, that after vacancie of six months, the
next Ordinary is regularly to collate by Laps. Which perhaps was received for
a Law, to continue as it has done, in the Council or Convocation at Pipewell,
held in the first of Richard the first, and some ten years after that General
Council of Lateran. For in that of Pipewell, the principal thing in hand was
the providing for Churches upon death of their Pastors. Habitus est (says Ralf
de Diceto, Dean of Paul's under King John) generalis conuentus iuxta
dispositionem Regis and Archiepiscopi XVI. Kal. Octobris apud Pipewell, vt de
consilio vacantium per Angliam Ecclesiarum haberetur tractatus. I know it was
for many Churches then void. but it is like enough that according to the
general Council this Law was then here received. but that's only a rouing
conjecture, and so I leave it. and as in the Extr. tit. de suppl. prael. negl.
c. 3. and 4. ad Conc. pra^. c. 5. etc.
Canon Law the Council of Lateran (which must be understood that of Alexander
the third) is commonly affirmed for the authority of the original of the right
of this Laps in the case of Bishops specially and Chapters, so is it, in
ancient moniments of our Laws, also in the case of Lay Patrons. Ante Concilium
Lateranense (says Lib. 4. tr. de Assis. vlt. praes. cap. 6.. 3. Vide, si
placet, Roger. de Houcden part. 2. Annal. fol 430. b. and Extr. tit. de Officio
I^dicis ordinarij c. 4. cum (...). ant^ Concilium Papae Alex. 3. illud n^
fallor rese^^ps^^, and lucem huc ad^^rt.
Bracton) nullum currebat tempus contra praesentantes. And in Placit. de Banco
Mich. 3. Ed. 1. Rot. 105. Staff. The Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield pleads a
collation by laps autoritate concilij, against the Prior of Landa, to the
Church of Patingham. and in the same Plea Rolls of Pasch. 5. Ed. 1* Rot. 100.
Linc. in a quare non admisit, by Alienor, the Queen Mother, against the Bishop
of Lincoln, for the Church of Orkestow, the six Months and the computation of
them (which is there adjudged according to that in Coke Report. part. 6. fol.
62.
Catesbies case) is referd to Concilium Apostolicum, which can be no other then
that of Lateran, howeuer the printed Copy of that which we commonly call
Breton Chap. 62. des exceptions fol. 225. a.
talks of the Council of Lions for the Director of the Laps, whereas indeed
the Mss. have for de Lions, de Lautr. which is doubtless for de Lateran; yet
also in the Rolls of the Common pleas of Pasch. 9. Ed. 1. Rot. 58. Suthampt.
the Archbishop of Canterbury defendant in a Darrain presentment, against the
Abbot of Lyra, pleads that the Church (of Godeshull) est plena ex collatione
ipsius Archiepiscopi ratione Concilij Lugdunensis, and being demanded by what
article of the Council, would not thereto answer, whereupon, after long
deliberation, judgment is given for the Abbot. But in the same Plea the Law
and custom of England for the six months time of Laps (which they call there
Consuetudo regni Angliae) is referd to a Council; but none is specially named
saving that of Lions. But although from Canonical authority the Laps was thus
receiud into our Laws, yet it has been no otherwise then the Baronage of
England would permit it. for the Canons otherwise (as at this day they are)
give but four C. Vnico. 1. de iure pa^r. in 6.
months to a Lay Patron, and six to an Ecclesiastique, which difference the Law
of England would never permit; as also neither that of the right of collation
which the Chapter is to have upon default of the Bishop, howeuer the Pope would
have put it here in execution according to the words of the Council, which you
may see in the autorities before noted out of the Text of the Canon Law. and
therefore the Law of Laps is well referd rather to Regist orig. fol. 42. b.
^nter prohibitiones.
Consuetudo Regni Angliae (by which title other parts of our Vide 19. Ed 2.
tit. Brief 842.18. Ed. 3. fol. 55 b. Regist. Orig. fol. 98. a.
Laws were often named that were of later beginning) then to the Council,
although thence doubtless, as is showed, it had its original. But although
now, what through the Decretalls and other Canons against Lay men's
Inuestitures, what by reason of the Law of Laps, the Patrons former interest or
challenged right was much diminished in the Church and the disposition of the
revenues of it (for it followd also that the Ordinaries assent was requisite)
yet the formulae or precedents used from ancient time in the recovery of
presentations still retain, to this day, Characters in them of that
Inuestiture. as the quare impedit, that is, Praecipe A. quod just etc.
permittat B. praesentare idoneam personam ad Ecclesiam de N. quae vacat and ad
suam spectat donationem etc. Where Donatio still sauors of the ancient right of
Inuestiture; agreeing whereto is that of Ecclesiam Gla^^il. lib 6. cap. 17.
alibi item scilicet in Archiuis quae vetustiora Richardi p^imi aut initij
Iohannis tempora spectant, and vide Roger. de Hou^den. fol. 425. b. and P^t. 3.
Hen. 3. part. 2* membr. 2.
concedere, used elsewhere in our Law, and attributed to the Lay Patron. Neither
does praesentare ad Ecclesiam originally denote otherwise then the Patrons
sending or placing an Incumbent into the Church, and is made only of
repraesentare, which in that Council of Lateran and Extr tit. de Cens^bus c.
11. cum Clerici. and tit. de Praeb. and dig* c. 31. In Lateranens.. 2. and tit.
de priuil^g* ^ 3. and Hostiens. Sum. tit. de Capellis Monachorum. and sapius.
elswher occurres also for praesentare. repraesentare is properly to restore,
give back, or repay, as reddo or repraesto, whence praesentare taken in the
barbarous times denoted as dare or donare; so that idoneam personam ad
Ecclesiam praesentare was all one with idoneam personam ad Ecclesiam dare or
donare, or in Ecclesia constituere, or (...), as Epist. ad Tit. cap. 1 comm 5.
the Apostles word is to Titus, where he bids him (...). that is, appoint or
constitut, or indeed present Priests or Encumbents in every City. for he that
there should turn it by present, might so keep the property of the word in
both tongues, though not as present is now restraind. this is justified out of
an old Glossarie that turns Repraesento by (...). for then clearly (...) is
Praesento: while praesentare so signified also in practice, that is in the time
of the use of Lay Inuestitures, all Churches so given were properly Donatiues,
which attribute has been since restraind, chiefly to such free-chappels as the
Ordinary had no interest in, but are collated or given by the act only of the
Patron. and this interpretation of praesentare is justified also 16. Ed* 3.
tit. Br^i^e 660. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 33. B.C.D.E.
out of the quare impedit upon a right of collation (which is but a donation)
by the Bishop, wherein the words are also quod permittat praesentare ad
Ecclesiam etc. Donation (which is merely as Inuestiture in regard of the
Bishop) is there called Presentation. So also is the Law in the Kings Case and
of common persons, being disturbed to collate by Letters Patents to their free
Chapels or Donatiues. the Writ in those Cases is only praesentare, which
confirms that it denotes Donation or Inuestiture. But in the Counts upon such
Writs, the special matter must be discovered. The like Law is in the Case of
him that has the Nomination of the Clerk. his Writ is also praesentare,
although another have the right of that which is now known by the bare name of
presentation. Nomination indeed or (...) being the true and eldest name found
in the Laws belonging to the (...).
Church, that denote filling or presenting to a Church, in that sense as
Presenting is taken for giving or inuesting. For, in the primitive times, when
the Patron had founded his Church, he nominated whom he would have received
into Orders for the serving of that Cure; and then if the nominated were found
worthy he was received into Orders for that purpose, which Ordination turned
afterward into Episcopal institution, as is before declared. that nomination
was indeed as Inuestiture or giving the Church. so is the word used in the Laws
and agreeing to them is the purer time of Latin wherein Nominatio (...) Epist.
ad ^rut. 7.
is for giving a Place or Office that is void. And as these phrases of the
Writs taste of the ancient right challenged by the Patron, so do some assertions
in our year books of later time; as that of entering 18. Ed. 3. fol. 16, a.
into an Aduowson by entering into the Church, of passing an 43. Ed. 3. fol. 1.
b.
Aduowson by liuerie of seisin at the Church-dore, of the Patrons entering into
the place 5 Hen. 7 fol. 37 a.
of foundation if the Church cease to remain hallowed, and the like. And to
like original may you refer those of the Kings presentations, which have
Dedimus and concessimus in them yet retained, although the force of the words
by the later Law, make but only a Vide 19. Ed. 3. tit. Quare impedit 60.
presentation. But the Law is now settled; neither with us has the Patron alone
now any prerogative or direct interest in the Church or the revenues, beside
his right of Aduowson or Presentation to the Bishop, by whose institution and
the Archdeacons induction every Church regularly is to be filled. Neither (for
ought I have heard) has he in our Law any of those Droicts honorifiques, which
the French allow him in Precedence, Seats, and the like. These particulars of
Benefices and Aduowsons had here their place, both because in the ancient
conueiance of them either by Inuestiture to an Incumbent, or by Appropriation,
the revenue that was in Tithes passed by express words, and that in point of
interest from the Patron, as also in regard that, at this day, the Patron of a
Parson prohibited by Indicauit, to sue in the Spiritual Court for the fourth
part of the Tithes of a Church, may have his Droit d'auowson de Dismes. it was
requisite therefore to add these not vulgar or obuious notes of the Aduowsons
in this discovery of the ancient conueiance and interest of Tithes.

CAP. XIII.
I. Infeodations here into Lay hands since the Statuts of Dissolutions. Of
Infeodations before that time in England. somewhat more of the original of Lay
men's practice in arbitrarie Consecrations or Infeodations.

II. Exemptions or discharges of payment originally by Privileges,
Prescriptions, Unity, Grants or Compositions, and by the Statuts of
Dissolutions.

I.
FRom those arbitrarie Consecrations, and frequent Appropriations of Tithes
(whereof we have hitherto made mention) to Monasteries or other Religious
Places, as Colleges of Regulars, Chantries and Free-Chappels, came the present
and common Infeodations of them into Lay hands, which began in the age of our
Fathers. For, the Portions of Tithes conveyed to them out of Closes, parts of
Manors, and whole Demesnes, by the owners, together with the Tithes granted
and possessed with appropriated Churches, were first by the Statut of
Dissolution of Monasteries in 31. Hen. 8. and by that other of 1. Ed. 6. given
to the Crown, and from thence granted to Lay men, whose Posterity or Assignees
to this day hold them with like limitation of estate, as they do other
enheritances of Lands or Rents. and, for them, have like remedy by the Statut
of 32. Hen. 8. cap. 7. by real action as Assise, Dower, or other originals, as
for Lands, Rents, or other Lay possessions by the common Law they might have.
But although in other States these Infeodations or Conueiances of the
perpetual right of Tithes to Lay men, be very ancient and frequent also; yet
no such certain or obuious testimony of their antiquity, is in the moniments
of England as can enough assure us that they were before the Statut of
Dissolutions in any common use here. But some were, and, for aught appears in
the practice of the time, many more might equally have been. And what scruple
was there but that long before the general dissolution of Monasteries, Henry
the fifth might (by the Law of the Kingdom) have made Infeodations into Lay
hands (as Henry the eight did) of all Tithes belonging Rot. Parl. 2. Hen. 5.
part. 2. art. 9.
to the Priors aliens whose possessions were given to him by Parliament, he had
them settled in the Crown in Fee, and afterward disposed of them to other
Ecclesiastique Corporations Vide Cart. 2. Hen. 5. part. 1. number. 3. etc.
at his pleasure, no otherwise then of other Lay possessions. By the way, we
understand, in these Infeodations, by the name of Lay men, only such as were
not either in Orders or professed in Religion. for otherwise all the
possessions of Tithes enioied by Nuns and the like, that were indeed Lay
(though not commonly called so) might be comprehended under the name of
Infeodations. But, that some were here; observe that of Odo Bishop of Bayeux
and Earl of Kent, which is before cited out of the lives of the Abbots of S.
Augustines in Canterbury. The words are, Decimas aliquas quas mei fideles
habebant etc. What can that be, according to the words, other then Tithes that
were in the hands of some of his Tenants? You may add that of Robert S. John
cited before out of the Book of Bosgraue, where he had, by the gift of his
brother William, certain Tithes, which he gave to the Priorie, for maintenance
of a fourteenth Monk. And observe the rest of the Deed there. So out of the
Book of Osney it appears before, that Decimatio Nicholai de Stodeham quam
Fromundus (Capellanus) tenebat is granted by D'Oilly. Had not D'Oilly this from
Stodeham? Or was Stodeham here one of his Bailifes or Fermors, whose Tithe he
granted as Lord or according to covenant with the Lessee? Other such occur
sometimes. And perhaps, Decimae hominu^ meorum, and the like granted, may
suppose a title possessed in the Tithes by the Lay grantor. And in the same
Book of In Biblioth. Cottoniana.
Osney, in a Passage written in a hand of about Hen. 5. touching the conueyances
of Tithes by Lay men to Monasteries, it is related, that he that wrote it, saw
Quendam Rogerum D'Oyly Dominum cuiusdam partis de Bampton in Episcopatu
Lincolniensi suis Decimis ita vti, vt nunc vni nunc alteri de suis Valettis
ipsas conferret annuatim qui sibi in diuersis officijs ministrabant, until
afterward he erected a Chaunterie with them in the Church of Bampton. These
Grants to his Valets, plainly were as Infeodations. And what else was in that
known case of Herne and Report 2. fol. 45. a.
Pigot in Mich. 39. and 40. Elizab. but an ancient kind of Infeodation, at
least an Inheritance of Tithes from immemoriall time in a Lay man? That, and
other like to it, might begin upon real compositions, and so the Tithes be
derived out of the Church. But regularly, I think, at this day no kind of
Infeodation is here allowable in Lay man's making title to a perpetual right of
Tithes (except only by the later Statuts of Dissolutions) unless it either be
derived from some old Grant of discharge from the Parson, Patron, and
Ordinary, (in which case, he to whom the Infeudation should be made, could
have it only as a Lay profit issuing out of the discharged land) or joined with
a Consideration to be given for maintenance to the Parson, by him that receives
them; and this either from time immemoriall, or by ancient composition. So I
take the meaning of our reverend Judges to have been touching this point. In
sum then we may affirm, that some such ancient Infeodations have been in
England as in other States; but, that of later time none are allowable (if
derived from Vide in d. Commentatio, ibid.
other ancient original, then from the Statuts of Dissolutions) unless they
be anciently derived out of the Church first by discharge, or appear to be
but as a Reward given in pernancie, or as Consideration for a Pension or other
competent Maintenance yearly payable to the Parson. Which withal well stands
with the common opinion of the original of such Infeodations; whereof we have
already Cap. 6.. 4.
spoken. And whereas it has been resolved, that without these reasons, a Lay
man was not here capable, at the common Law, of Tithes by pernancie; it well
agrees with a Decretall of Extr. tit. de Arbitris. c. 3. pern. ni^ ad nos.
Alexander the third, which forbids one that married a Parsons sister, to enjoy
a Tithe given him by the Parson, as for the marriage portion, although the
Parson were still living. But also, that we may not defraud you of any
testimony of former times, that may seem obseruable touching these
Infeodations, whereof so few examples and so ltttle mention is in the Moniments
of England, take this special Disquisition, written in a hand of about Henry
the fifth, in the Book of In Bibblioth. Cottoniana.
Osney, which would as well give light to the course of Arbitrarie
Consecrations (before largely opened) as to these Infeodations, if it were of
sufficient credit. but you shall first have it compendiously delivered, and
then judge of it This title is put to it, Qualiter Laici ad id priuilegium
peruenerint quod locis Religiosis illas (Decimas) confer possint. Then says
he that writes it; he had heard from a good Civil and Canon Lawier, that had
been present at the Disputation of the point, in a case happening between a
Religious house and a Parson, for Tithes in the Parsons Parish, who claimed
them iure communi, that the Aduocat for the Religious house being put to make a
special title against the Parsons common right, told the Court a long story
of Eastern holy Wars about Pipins time; and interposed somewhat of Charles
Martell; and concluded, that the Pope and the Church every where granted, in
reward to the Christian Princes, for their Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen, that
spent their bloods, labors, and estates in those Wars, the privilege of
arbitrarie disposition of the Tithes of their lands; by reason of which Grant,
they afterward made not only Arbitrarie Consecrations of them, but also
Infeodations into Lay hands, according as the common opinion among the
Canonists is too confidently received at this day. Then he tells us that before
rememberd, of the Tithes in Bampton, and cites some texts out of the
Decretalls, that touch Infeodations. Next he relates, that among the Princes of
the holy War, about Martell and Pipins time, the Duke of Normandy was a
special one, whence he had also that privilege touching Tithes, pro se ac
suis, as the words are. And lastly (to bring it into England) he thus
concludes, Et cum Dux Normanniae Willielmus ad conquisitionem Angliae venisset,
quidam Miles eius Robertus d'Oylleye nomine malens suas Decimas Deo commendare
quam contra naturalem Ecclesiae consuetudinem ipsis vti, eas Ecclesiae S.
Georgij quam in Castria Oxenford construxit contulit, Et postea ad Monasterium
Osney per Diocesanum and Capitulum Lincoln. ac etiam per Aduocatum Canonice
deuenerunt. But it all tastes of nothing but ignorance. For what touches Martell
and his time generally, enough already is said. And see but what a bold
ignorance here was, to tell us, that the Duke of Normandy was one of the
greatest ( personis Regum exceptis, as his Language is) that went in the holy
War in succursum Ecclesiae Romanae, in those times of Pipin and Martell? I
would he durst have told us also who had then been Duke of Normandy. Neither
that title of Dignity, nor that name of the Country, were, till about CL.
years after Martell, at all known. The Territory being then under the French
Kings, who long after gave it to the Normans, and erected it into a Dukedom.
Indeed the Duke of Normandy had good place in the later holy Wars, about
M.XCV. but did not that make this Aduocat say, that the Duke of Normandy was a
special Prince in the other also of Martell's time? Such of the later middle
times stand not much upon the mingling of Stories, that differ in themselves
even many whole ages. Besides, he tells us of strange Princes names of the
East, that made the War against the Church. Plainly, the most pretended cause
of the rest that err herein as much as he does, is the Saracenicall War in
Martell's time, and that out of Spain, not from the East. And had it been so
under Martell's time, as it is usually affirmd; what had that been to England?
But you see his providence for that matter, where he deriues it from the Duke
of Normandy. But what though there had been some such Duke of Normandy, whose
Successor had afterward either conquered or enherited England? had therefore
the old supposed privilege of retaining or disposing of Tithes, been thence
communicated to his subjects of England? and that to the loss of the Church
here, that never could have gotten good by the supposed cause of the
privilege? All the Canon and Civil Law that the Aduocat had, could never have
proved such a consequent. It will still remain most probable, if not clear,
that what Infeodations were in England, had their original as well out of the
right of arbitrarie disposition of Tithes challenged by the Laity, without the
grant of the Pope or Church, as out of Compositions or Conueyances from the
Clergy; according as in other States. For no sufficient Story, no credible
Moniment, no Passage, or Testimony of worth, can justify that general right
of retainer or disposition to have been given by the Clergy, or Pope, upon any
cause whatsoever; though the Canonists and others that follow them, cry against
it, vsque ad rauim. The use of Infeodations, before those later holy Wars, we
have already showed. And that no use of them could be about Martell's time, is
not less apparent, by what is also before delivered. But beside this blind
testimony of the ground of Consecrations or Infeodations; for England
especially, you may take that (as it is) also of Tit. de locato and conducto c.
licet bona verb. p^rtiones.
Lindwood, who thus speaks touching the Portions which Religious houses had.
Hae Portiones (says he) potuerunt peruenisse ad locum Religiosum de
concessione etiam Laici cum solius Diocesani consensu de Decimis vel
prouentibus quas Laicus talis ab Ecclesia alia habuit in feudum ab antiquo,
according to that in tit. de his quae fiunt a Praelatis sine ass. cap. c. cum
Apostolica. And he adds, that this is only true, if those Tithes were
infeodated before that Council of Lateran of MC.LXXIX. And then concludes
with, Nam ante illud Concilium been potuerunt Laici Decimas in feudum retinere
and eas alteri Ecclesiae vel Monasterio dare. Non tamen post tempus dicti
Concilij. For his interpretation of the Council, enough before, toward the
ends of the VI. and X. Chapters. But does not Lindwood here suppose ancient
Infeodations of Tithes (at least created by Churchmen) in England? Does he not
thence fetch the original of Portions belonging to Religious houses in
England? commonly, though he writ as a Canonist, yet he adds the special
custom of England if he speak of any Canon Law, which he thinks had not place
here. but he excepts not England in this, but implies it. therefore doubtless,
he supposed a common use of ancient Infeodations among our Ancestors. but I
doubt he had not better ground for it then what he found in others of his
profession, that had rememberd the frequent use of Infeodations in other States
before that Council. and he so applied it equally to his own Country, and
with them takes the Infeodations to have had original only from the Grants of
Churchmen. therefore I value his testimony here but as of a common Canonist,
and not sufficient to satisfy us touching our own Country* neither in his
age were the particulars of practice of the time before that Lateran Council,
or of the time of creation of Infeodations in other places, enough known among
Lawiers. I add only one note out of Bracton that may touch Tithes infeodated
or turned anciently here into Lay fee, and conclude this matter. He Lib. 5.
tract* de Exceptionibus cap. 12. fol. 411. b.
speaking of Land demised and recovered by the Legatarie, tells us some opinion
was of his time, that such Land after the recovery iterum incipit esse Laicum
feodum and non ante; quod non erit de Decimis, cum semel efficiantur Laicum
feodum; nunquam reincipient esse Decimae, and haec vera sunt secundum R. and
alios. Did not he here suppose Lay infeodations of Tithes in England? let the
Reader judge. By the way, I note, that passage is corrupted in the print. The
beginning is Item for Iterum, and that R. and alios (which I think stands for
Roger de Thurkelby a great Judge of that time) is Biastos. but according to my
Ms. Bracton, I have thus alterd it. You may consider also if some Infeodations
came not out of Lay men's enjoying of whole Churches with their possessions
about the Norman Conquest. it is frequent in Domesday, to find that such a Lay
man tenet Ecclesiam of such a place, and sold it to such a one. and in the
claims of Yorkshire there, the Entry is super Ecclesiam S. Mariae de
Moselege habet Rex medietatem eleemosynae festorum S. Mariae quae iacet ad
Wackefeld. Omne aliud habet Ilbertus and Presbyter qui Ecclesiae seruit etc.
Where Tithes were in that time annexed by continuance of payment or Consecration
to Churches, perhaps they might in like manner as these Offerings or whole
Churches, come into the Lay hands. but I leave this to the judgment of my
Reader. And hereof thus much.

II.
Now for Exemptions or discharge from payment; we have anciently had them here,
and still retain some of them in the practiced Law. and that originally either
by Privileges, Prescription, or Grants and Compositions and Unity of
possession. The Privileges have been either such as were specially allowd and
limited to the Orders of the Templars, Hospitalars, and Cistercians by the
General Council of Lateran, held in 17. of King John (of which more
particular narration is before made) or by new Bulls for the discharge of this
or that Monastery or Order, at the Popes pleasure. By reason of the first kind
of privilege, those three Orders held their Lands discharged of payment so long
as they manured them in their own occupation. at least all such Lands as they
had purchased before the General Council. and by the second kind sometimes
whole Orders were discharged, as for example, that Bull to the Innoc. 3. in
Epist. Decret. lib. 1. page 20^.
Praemonstratenses in general given by Pope Innocent the third, grants them
that of their own culture or other improuments they should pay none. Sometimes
special Monasteries; as in that of the same Pope to the Ibid lib 2 page 410.
Videsis Extr. tit. de Decimis c. 3. Ex multiplici.
Abbey of Chertsey. De noualibus vero quae proprijs manibus aut sumptibus
colitis, aut de vestrorum animalium nutrimentis, sieve de hortis and virgultis,
aut piscationibus vestris, nullus a vobis Decimas exigere, vel extorquere
praesumat, sed eas eleemosynae aut pauperibus Monasterij vestri iuxta quod tu
fili Abbas postulasti a nobis, praecepimus assignari. What force by the common
Laws of this Kingdom, such a Papal privilege in ancient time alone had, I
abstain here to dispute. and although other examples enough might out of
originalls be brought of the like, yet I touch not any of them neither, lest
unawares I might give occasion of some private controversy. But they had their
force in the Canon Law here, and being so allowd in allegations against Libels
for Tithes, were strengthened also at length (especially those which were of
the ancientest) with prescription of time, in so much that from them originally
diverse Lands of dissolved Monasteries remain to this day discharged of payment.
But in 2. Hen. 4. cap. 4. an Act of Parliament is made against those of the
Cistercians here, which purchased Bulls of Exemption for their demised Lands.
and those of the Order and others putting such Bulls in execution are made
thereby subject to the punishment, containd in the Statut of 13. Rich. 2. of
Praemunire. Discharges by immemoriall Praescription of paying no Tithes (of
things commonly and of their nature titheable) nor any thing in lieu of them,
are by the later common Law (since their Parochial right established about the
time of King John) allowd only Voyez Rep. part. 2. fol. 44. and Fitzh. Not. Br.
fol. 42. ^.
to spiritual persons, but to no Lay man. The Laity being since that time
held incapable of Tithes both by pernancie (saving in such a special case
where continual consideration was given to the Church, as in that Case before
of Herne and Pigot) in their own right, as also by discharge upon bare
prescription alone, saving only in Cases within the Statuts of Dissolution of
31. Hen. 8. and 1. Ed. 6. and the Statut of 32. Hen. 8. that warrants common
Infeodations of them. and so is the practiced Law of this day. For, by those
Statuts, lay Patentees of lands or Tithes have like privilege of discharge and
title as the spiritual persons, whose Corporations were by them dissolved,
before the dissolution enioied. Of the Hospitalars dissolved in 32. Hen. 8. I
purposely abstain to speak. To this of Prescription, may be added that of
Unity of Possession. For if any Religious house dissolved in 31. Hen. 8. held
the Rectorie of Dale and Lands in the Parish immemorially paying no Tithes,
this Unity discharges also the Patentees at this day, in such sort as the
Monasteries were discharged. But by Compositions and Grants every man, as well
Lay as Spiritual, by the common Law (before the Statut of 13. of Elizabeth,
made against Leases and Grants of Parsons) might be discharged of Tithes; as if
the Parson Patron and Ordinary ioind in it to the Parishioner either for
consideration continuing (as in real Regist. Orig. fol. 38. b. Fitzh. vbi
supra.
Composition) or for other arbitrarie causes not appearing to posterity as in
Grants by all three, or rather in Grants by the Parson, and Confirmations by
the Patron and Ordinary. And it is provided by the Statut of 2. Ed. 6. cap.
13. tha no person shall be sued or otherwise compelled to yield, give, or pay
any manner of Tithes for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments which
by the Laws and Statuts of this Realm, or by any Privilege or Prescription are
not chargeable with the payment of any such Tithes, or that be discharged by
any Composition real. But although a Lay man may not be discharged of all
payment by mere Prescription (unless he begin the Prescription in a Spiritual
person) yet for diminishing the Quota in payment only of a less then the
Tenth, he may Vide lib. Intrat. non. rit. Prohibition. 6. and Rep. 2. part. fol
44.
prescribe, that is, De modo decimandi. and to that purpose an immemoriall
custom of a whole Town or Manor holds place at this day. So was the Law 8.
Ed. 4. fol. 14.
anciently also. Beside these discharges, some may here expect that part of our
Laws, which with us (as the Philippine in France, and the Carolines in Spain)
discharge some things from payment of Tithes, and seem to permit some customs
de non Decimando. But for that matter; so much as upon consideration was
thought fit to be sparingly said of it, is referd to the passages in the next
Chapter, that touches ancient prohibitions de non Decimando. Neither indeed
does that part of our English customs belong to the title of Exemption or
Discharge. for Exemption and Discharge are properly singular rights to this or
that person or Land, and against the current of the practiced Law. but those
things touching which any such prohibitions de non etc. by our Law should be
granted, are supposed generally according to the reasons and practice of the
Laws of England, of their own nature, not titheable. So that not so much a
discharge is found in that course as a prevention of an unlawful charge which
the Canons would lay upon that which the Laws of the Kingdom account not at all
in its own nature chargeable. But thereof somewhat more anon.

CAP. XIV.
I. The jurisdiction of Ecclesiastique causes, in the Saxon times, exercised by
the Shrife and the Bishop in the County Court. and among them that of Tithes
also was then to have been there determind. The Bishops Consistory severed
from the County Court by William the first.

II. After the Normans, Original suits for Tithes, were as well in the
Temporal Courts as in the Spiritual. and that continued till Henry the
second or about King John.

III. Of the time since about King John or Henry the second. Of the Indicauit
and the Writ of right of Aduowson of Tithes. What the Law was in an Indicauit
before that Statut of Westminster. 2. A touch of ancient Prohibitions, De non
Decimando.

IV. Writs of Scire facias for Tithes. Enquests taken upon Commission to
enquire of the right of Tithes.

V. Fines levied of Tithes (in the time of Richard the first, of King John, and
Henry the third) upon Writs of right of Aduowson.

VI. Scire facias by the Patentees against the pernor of Tithes granted by the
King.

VII. Command of payment by the Kings Writ. And of Tithes in Forests. Trial of
the right of Tithes incident in some issues.

AS a corollarie to the former parts that directly concern the payment or
consecration of Tithes, we thought fit to add here in the Conclusion of the
Treatise, the History also (but only the History) of the jurisdiction of
Tithes in this Kingdom. It is clear by the practiced common Law, both of this
day as also of the ancientest times that we have in our year books, that
regularly the jurisdiction of spiritual Tithes (that is, of the direct and
original question of their right) belongs, I think as in all other States of
Christendom, properly to the Ecclesiastical Court. and the later Statuts that
have given remedy for Tithes infeodated from the Crown after the Dissolution,
leave also the ancient right of Jurisdiction of Tithes to the Ecclesiastique
Courts. But how the difference of Ages has herein bin amongst us, is little
enough known even to them which see more then vulgarly. In declaration thereof,
we shall aptly divide the time tripartitly; into that of the Saxons; that from
the Normans till about Henry the second; and what intercedes from thence till
this day.

I.
In the Saxon times a jurisdiction of Ecclesiastique causes (among which you
may reckon that of Tithes, although not much sign of it, in exacting payment
of them, appears in the moniments of that age) was exercised jointly by the
Videsis Leg. Et^el^^ni apud Fox in Eccles. Hist lib. 3 ^ag 135. col. 1. Hinc
debent Episcopi etc.
Bishop of the Diocese, and by the Shrife or Alderman of the sciregemot, or
Hundred, or County Court, where they both sat, the one to give Gods right,
the other for uruldes right, that is, the one to judge according to the Laws of
the Kingdom, the other to direct according to Divinity. and in the Laws made
for Tithes by K. Edgar and K. Knout, you see upon default of payment it is
ordaind, that the Bishop and the Kings Bailife, or Shirife, with the Bailife of
the Lord of the Land, should see that just restitution should be made.
particulars of the exercise of this kind of jurisdiction, I have not seen. But
at the Norman Conquest, this kind of holding Ecclesiastique pleas in the
Hundred or County Court, was taken away. Remember that as at this day most of
the Pleas Ecclesiastique are in the Ordinaries Court within the Diocese, so
most suits in the secular or common Law were Viscontiel and held in the County
or Hundred Court of the Shrife in those ancienter times, which may best be
observed out of one of the books of Ely In Biblioth. Cottonianae.
the most especial moniment that is extant, for the holding of Pleas in the
Saxon times. That alteration at the Norman Conquest, was by a Law made by the
Conqueror, and directed to all Tenants in the Diocese of Remy, that was first
Bishop of Lincoln whither his See was then translated from Dorchester. and
although it be sent in the direction by name to them only, yet it seems, it
grew afterward to be a general Law, no otherwise then the Statut of
Circumspecte agatis, that has special reference only to the Bishop of
Norwich. The words of it In Rot. Insp ex. Chart. 2. Rich. 2. prodec. and cap.
Lincoln. membran 12. Idem est quod habetur Angl^ce^ apud Foxum Hist. Eccles.
Anglic. lib. 4 page 154. col. 2.
as they are recorded, are, Sciatis vos omnes and caeteri mei fideles, qui in
Anglia manent, quod Episcopales leges, quae non been secundum sanctorum Canonum
praecepta, vsque ad mea tempora in regno Anglorum fuerunt, communi Consilio
Archiepiscoporum meorum and caeterorum Episcoporum and Abbatum, and omnium
Principum Regni mei emendandas iudicaui. Propterea mando, and Regia autoritate
praecipio, vt nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus
amplius in Hundret placita teneant, nec causam quae ad regimen animarum
pertinet, ad iudicium secularium hominum adducant, sed quicunque secundum
Episcopales leges, de quacunque causa, vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad locum
quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit and nominauerit, veniat, ibique de causa sua
respondeat, and non secundum Hundret, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales
leges rectum Deo, and Episcopo suo faciat. Which I rather transcribe here,
because also it seems to give the original of the Bishops Cosistorie, as it
sits with us, divided from the Hundred or Countie-Court, wherewith, in the
Saxon time, it was joined. And in the same Law of his, is further added, Hoc
etiam defendo vt nullus Laicus homo de legibus quae ad Episcopum pertinent se
intromittat etc.

II.
Afterward, under the succeeding Princes, till about Henry the second, it
seems, that the Jurisdiction of Tithes was exercised in both Courts, as well
Secular as Spiritual, and that by original suit; not only in the one by the
first instance (as regularly the later common Law would have it) and in the
other by Prohibition only. I know, little proof will serve most men to
justify, that the Spiritual Court had then a Jurisdiction of them. but also
some testimony I have seen of a particular recovery of Tithes in the Bishops
Court in that age. The Monks of Northampton, under Ch^rta Simonis Comitis North
in Thesaur. Cotton.
King Stephen, recovered two parts of the Tithes of the demesnes of Wullaueston
against Anselm de Cochis, before Robert Bishop of Lincoln, as Ordinary. In
plenaria Synodo coram Roberto Lincolniensi Episcopo disrationauerunt, as the
words are in a sealed Charter of Simon the second, Earl of Northampton, then
living; wherein he testifies both the recovery, as also Anselme's
confirmation of the same two parts, according to the recovery, and adds also
of his own volo and praecipio vt illam Eleemosynam habeant and teneant liberam
and quietam. And to this you may add the Appeals to Rome from the Audience of
the Archbishop of Canterbury and other Ecclesiastique Conisans touching I.
Sarisbur. epist. 21.84.92.109. and 133.
Tithes, that are (as the ancientest Precedents of any such Ecclesiastique
proceeding in England) remaining among the Epistles of John of Salisburie, a
great favorite of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury in the beginning of
Henry the second. In one of them it is obseruable by the way Idem Epist. 109.
, that one Richard, the Tenant of Land lying within the Parish of Lenham, being
sued in the Audience by Andrew the Rector for his Tithes, alleges in Court,
Sibi a nobili viro Willielmo fratre Regis, Domino suo, esse prohibitum, ne, eo
absente, super Decimis de quibus agebatur, causam ingrederetur. Yet the Court
ceased not therefore to proceed; but Sentence being ready to be given for the
Rector, the Cause was sent to Rome, upon the defendants Appeal. And although
the Append* ad Council Lateran. part. 47. cap. 5.
title were only upon the Grant of him that arbitrarily consecrated, yet was it
sometime determined in the Spiritual Court. But also that in this elder age
before about the time of Henry the second, the Kings secular Courts of Justice
originally held plea of the right of Tithes, is as plain by infallible proof
of ancient Moniments. To begin with the eldest times of this part of our
Division; there remains Chart. antiq. EE. 1 in Arce Londin.
yet recorded a Plea held apud Fulcardi montem, under William the second,
between the Monks of Salmur and Philip de Braiosa; wherein, the Monks claiming
against him and the Abbey of Fischamp (in Normandy) Parochiam quae ad Sanctum
Cuthmannum pertinet de Castello de Staninges (these are in England, I think in
Sussex) de Bedingas, and de Bedelingtona; by the testimony of Robert Earl of
Mellent, a Judgment of the Conquerors time is cited, by which the Abbey of
Fischamp had the Parish of S. Cuthmann adjudged to it in the Kings Court. And
thereupon (it being denied by none) it was now again adjudged, that the Monks
of Salmur should restore whatsoever they had taken post mortem Regis in Decimis
and Sepulturis and Offrendis etc. to the Church of Fischamp. And while some
delay was in the execution, the King sent his Writ ad Iusticiarios suos de
Anglia, that is, to Ralf Bishop of Chichester, Randoll his Chaplain, Hamon his
Sewer, and Vrso de Abetot, whereby he commanded, Vt facerent Ecclesiam S.
Trinitatis (that is, of Fischamp) habere totam Parochiam S. Cuthmanni and
Decimas and Corpora and omnes Custumas tam de viuis quam de mortuis sicut
pertinebant ad praedictam Ecclesiam S. Cuthmanni antequam Willielmus de Braiosa
haberet Castellum de Bembra ( Bramber Castle, in Sussex, given by William the
first to William de Braiosa) and quicquid de supradictis custumis Monachi de
Salmur ceperint reddi. The right of Tithes and Offerings appears here plainly
to have been determined in the Temporal Court by two Judgments, the one under
the Conqueror, the other under his son William. And it is found upon record,
that about Chart. antiq ib. S. 7. vide supr. cap. 8.. 17.
10. Hen. 1. a Writ was sent to Manasses Arsic, out of whose Lands, diverse
Tithes were conveyed into the Monastery of Fischamp, commanding him, Quatenus
Decimas a parentibus suis inuiolabili iure concessas and datas Fiscamensi
Ecclesiae, Monachos suos apud Coges degentes omnes in pa^e and quiet habere
faciat; sinon, Iustitiae Regis facerent. Whereupon he sends his Precept to all
his Tenants of such Lands, commanding them to make payment. Si quis autem
aliter (says he) facere praesumpserit Regis irae and nostrae poenam sine dubio
patietur. So among the Liberties of Saint John of Beuerley Ms. In Biblioth.
Cottoniana.
, this Writ is found of Henry the first. Henricus Rex Anglorum Osberto
Vicecomiti de Eboraco and Geraldo de Bridesala salutem. Praecipio vobis, vt
faciatis habere Ecclesiae Sancti Iohannis de Beuerlaco, Decimas suas sicur
vnquam melius habuit, in tempore Regis Edwardi and patris mei, de illis
videlicet terris omnibus de quibus homines Comitatus Eboraci testimonium
portabunt quod eas habere debent. Et quicunque detinuerit, sciatis quod ego
volo vt rectum faciat Deo and S. Iohanni and mihi. T. Ran. Cancellario, and
Comite de Mellet, apud Londonias, etc. What is this else then a kind of
Iusticies to the Shirife of Yorkshire, for the right of Tithes determinable by
the Country? Does not homines Comitatus Eboraci denote as much? Of the same
time also, in a In Bibl. autoris
Volume of Constitutions and other things belonging to the Church of York:
Henricus Rex Anglorum Osberto Vicecomiti de Eboraco salutem. Mando tibi and
praecipio vt Archiepiscopum Girardum permittas and facias honorifice tenere
Ecclesias meorum propriorum Maneriorum quas S. Petro and eidem dedi cum omnibus
Capellis suis, and cum omnibus Decimis suis, and cum omnibus terris suis,
videlicet Ecclesiam de Bokelinton, and de Driffeild, and de Killum, and de
Pickering, and de Burgo. Waltero and Euremaro Ministris de Driffeild praecipio
vt Decimas de hoc praeterito Augusto, quas non reddiderunt, plenarie reddant
sicut Ecclesia eas just habere debet and sicut vnquam eas melius habuit
tempore patris mei sieve meo antequam eas dedissem S. Petro, and videant ne
amplius inde clamorem audiam. si quis inde iniuriam fecerit Archiepiscopo,
tibi, Osberte Vicecomes, praecipio vt plenariam rectitudinem inde facias. Test
Rogero Episcopo Sarisburiense apud Westmonasterium in Natali Domini. And
another is there, in these words: Henricus Rex Anglorum Ansch. Vicecomiti and
omnibus Praepositis and Ministris suis de Driffeild, and de Pokelinton, and de
Killum, and de Pikering, and de Burt, salutem. Volo and praecipio quod faciatis
habere Hugoni Decano and Clericis suis been and plenarie omnes rectas Decimas
de Dominijs meis in omnibus rebus per haec praedicta Maneria mea and de omnibus
Parochianis, qui ad Ecclesias horum praedictorum Maneriorum meorum pertinent.
Similiter facite ei habere been and plenarie and Decimas and omnia iura
praedictarum Ecclesiarum in terris and capellis. Quia pro salute animae meae
and omnium antecessorum meorum beato Petro eas concessi in Eleemosynam. Nolo
autem quod pro recti penuria quicquam perdant quod just habere debent. T. apud
Eborum. And about 6. Hen. 2. when Turstin Fitz-Simon usurped the Tithes of
Mercham, belonging to the Abbey of Abingdon, one of the Monks were sent over to
the King into France, Vt per eius iustitiam and autoritatem (as my Colici^
Abindinensis Ms. Bibl. Cotton.
Author says) rectum suum Ecclesiae suae restitueretur. Quod and ita factum
est. Rediens enim frater qui missus fuerat breue a Rege transmissum in haec
verba reportauit. Then the writ follows, directed from Tours to the Shirife of
Barkshire. Henricus Rex Angliae and Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae and Comes
Andegauiae, Vicecomiti suo and ministris suis de Berchesira salutem. Si
Ecclesia de Abbendona habuit Decimam de Mercham ad luminare Ecclesiae tempore
Henrici Regis aui mei and anno and die quo fuit mortuus and viuus and post, and
inde sit disseisita unjust and sine iudicio, tunc praecipio quod sine
dilatione inde eam resaisiatis, Et ita been and in pace and libere and just
tenere faciatis sicut melius and liberius tenuit tempore Henrici Regis aui mei,
Et praecipio quod quando Turstinus filius Simonis redierit in Anglia, quod
Abbas Abbendoniae plenum rectum habeat de terra quam praedictus Turstinus
filius S. tenet de feudo Abbatiae. Et si Abbas poterit disrationare quod non
defecerit de recto praedicto T. in Curia sua, Abbas inde ei in Curia sua rectum
teneat. T. Magistro Iohanne de Oxenford apud Turonem. The Shirife, by virtue of
this Writ, upon inquiry of the point of it in his Countie-Court, restored the
Abbey to the possession of those Tithes. The words of the Book are, Cum vero
per lectum esset Regis breue in pleno Comitatu and manifest compertum totius
Comitatus testimonio L. quod.
quoniam praefata Decima ad luminare Altaris S. Mariae pertineret, and quod eam
Turstinus unjust tenebat, Vicecomes ex part Regis illum dissaisiauit, and eam
Altari cui adiacebat restituit. What can be plainer, then that in those times
(if these examples have credit, as indeed they cannot justly be impeached) the
Temporal Courts held Jurisdiction of Tithes in point of right; and not only
the Spiritual. and to confirm it, we add also the authority of John of
Sarisburie Epist. 159.
that then liud. he in an Epistle to the Bishop of Excester relating some of
those Positions of the common Laws; or the Auitae consuetudines (as they called
them) which Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury about 12. of Hen. 2. so much
withstood, mentions one to be Quod Laici, sieve Rex, sieve alius, causas de
Ecclesijs and Decimis tractent. which well agrees with the autorities before
cited. But this was utterly disallowd then by the Pontificiall Laws, as, beside
the authority of the common Canons, may be seen in an Epistle of Alexander the
third, to the App. ad Council. Lateran. part. 10. cap. 26.
Bishop of Exceter and the Dean of Chichester, wherein it appears, that one
William a Clerk of Chichester had appealed to the Pope about Tithes, the suit
being twixt him and the Parson of Curket. and the Parson had on the other side
appealed Ad audientiam Domini Regis. whereupon says the Pope, Quoniam nemini
liceat super rebus spiritualibus ad secularem Iudicem appellare, they should
enquire of the matter, deprive the Parson, and send him to Rome.

III.
The frequencie of such original suits for Tithes, in the temporal Courts
(through the Canons and the power of the Pope increasing, and growing more
dreadful to Henry the second, and King John) became about their times to be,
it seems, more out of use, and possessed rather by Ecclesiastique jurisdiction.
Nevertheless in the sundry ages since, the determination of the right and
payment of Tithes has been subject to the temporal Courts, by diverse kinds of
original proceeding, which for orders sake may be all comprehended in these
Five. I. By Prohibitions touching the modus or Customs of Tithing, or other
matter concerning the Kings Vide Eliz^. Not. B^. fol. 40. N.
right, triable only in his own Court, or the like. II. The Writ of Right of
Aduowson of Tithes, whereto you must annex the writ of Indicanit, that is but a
special prohibition making way for the Writ of Right of Aduowson. III. By
Scire facias IV. By bare process of command of payment. V. By the actions upon
the late Statuts of 32. Hen. 8. and 2 Ed. 6. For the first and last of these;
because they are now both in common practice, and thence known enough in
general to every man, I abstain purposely to speak more of them; saving only
that for the first; out of the more ancient ages, I observe somewhat by the way
which may belong to the use of the present. In 21. Hen. 3. when all the Clergy
of England, in the National Synod held at London, under Otho the Popes Legate,
made subplication to have redress from the King, of some grieuances, Annal.
Burton. Monast. in Bibl. V. Cl^^h. Allen. Oxon. subanu. 1237.
one was, Quod iudices seculares non decidant causas Ecclesiasticas in foro
seculari etc. and vtrum dandae sint Decimae de Lapicidinis, vel Syluicedijs,
vel Herbagijs, vel Pasturis, vel de alijs Decimis non consuetis. which shows
that the temporal Courts also in those elder times, determined what was
titheable or not, and so made prohibitions De non decimando, according to the
Processes in France upon their Philippin, and in Spain upon the Carolin, and
according to that note in the Fol. 54. b.
Register and N.B. fol. 5^.
Fitzherbert touching the Justices determination of what is titheable. agreeing
to this is a Case of 8. Hen. 3. Placit. and Inquisit. 8. Hen. 3. in Arce Londin.
where in a prohibition was granted against a Parson that sued for the Tithes
of Rent. But you shall have it as it is in the Record. Warwick. Magister
Eustachius de Cestreton attachiatus fuit rd respondendum Hugoni de Lege, quare
contra prohibitionem etc. trahit eum in placitum in Curiam Christianitatis de
Laico feodo ipsius Hugonis in Cestreton; vnde Idem Hugo queritur quod ipse
exigit ab eo in Curia Christianitatis de certa pecunia pro Decimis
molendinorum, and certum pratum, scilicet tres acras prati, and praeterea de
Wareto suo; and de terris incultis si illas locauerit ipse petit Decimum
denarium etc. Et Magister Eustachius venit and defendit contra eum and contra
sectam suam, quod nunquam traxit eum in placitum de aliqua re certa nisi tantum
de Decimis faeni and molendinorum sicut Decimae inde dari debent, nec aliquam
acram prati petit nec denarios de molendinis, nec aliquid de Wareto vel terra
nisi tantum garbas; and ideo praeceptum est eidem Eustachio quod de nullo
placito de caetero sequatur in Curia Christianitatis* nec de aliquo Laico feodo
nec de aliquo quod sit contra Coronam Domini Regis. But, to leave this and to
go to the II. and III. and IV. courses of proceeding for Tithes in temporal
Courts, which are not so obuiously known; for the II. touching the Writ of
Right of Aduowson of Tithes, and the Indicauit. it has bin clear ever since
the Statut of Westminster 2. cap. 5. and of Circumspecte agatis, both made in
13. Ed. 1. (this as well as the other long since being receiud into practice by
the name of a Statut, and so called in Acts of Parliament; although it were
anciently reputed rather as an Ordinance made 16. Ed 3. tit Jurisdiction 28.
and See Cosius Apology part. 1. page 57. etc. and Rot. Parlam. 25. Ed. 3.
artic. 62.
by the King and Prelates) that if A. Parson of Sale (for examples sake) libell
against B. Parson of Dale in the spiritual Court, for so much Tithes and
Offerings, possessed by B. as amount to the fourth or a greater part of the
value of the Church of Dale, B. may have him prohibited by an Indicauit
directed to him and the spiritual Judge, after which the Patron of A. has no
other remedy for himself or his Encumbent (what right soever they have) then
to bring a Writ of Right in the common Pleas, of the Aduowson of that fourth
part, against the Patron of B. in which Writ, the right of those Tithes must be
tried by the common Law. and herewith expressly agrees the Statut of Articuli
Cleri. and the reason is because that if the determination of this Plea should
be allowd to the spiritual Court, then might the Patrons Aduowson of such a
part be there lost by judgment according to the Canons, whereas the right of
Aduowson and Patronage of Churches or Tithes only belongs, by our ancient Laws
and at this day, to the secular Court. Neither is the Writ so much of the
Tithes as of the Aduowson of the Tithes; Praecipe A. (so are the words) quod
reddat B. aduocationem Decimarum tertiae vel quartae partis Ecclesiae de C.
etc. And howeuer by the Canon Law the right of Tithes be merely spiritual, and
so not due to the Rector so much by reason of his presentation from the Patron,
as of the common right challenged by the Ministry (whereupon also Constit.
Prouin. tit. de fore competent. c. Circumspect^. verb. quarta part.
Lindwood, like a Canonist, thinks it not preiudicall to the Patron, which way
soever the Tithes alone be determind of, in regard that all the Patrons
interest is, he says, originally in the foundation, building, or endowing of
the Church with Manse, Glebe, or Rent, and has no relation to the Tithes which
by common right are receiud without his Donation) yet by reason it seems both
of our ancient practiced Law of Dotation of Churches by arbitrarie conueiances
of Tithes, at the owners pleasure, in which doubtless Patrons very frequently
Videsis Matthew. Paris page 716. lin. 40.
increased the revenues of foundations with the Tithes of their Demesnes; as
also of that other ancient use of Inuestiture, wherein the very interest of all
the Glebe, Tithes annexed* and other revenues, was transferd into the Encumbent
by the Patron; it was thought fit that the Aduowson of the Tithes alone should
be equally reputed, for what concerned the Patron, with any other part of the
Churches revenue. And the Law has been clear thus, and so still practiced 7.
Ed. 3 fol. 42. b 8. Ed. 3. fol 50. a. Regist. Orig fo 29. b 38 Ed 3. fol. 1^.
a. 16. Ed. 3. tit. Qua ^e impedit 147. 38 Hen. 6. fol 20 a. Fitzh. N.B. fol 30
c Se^german. fol. 108.
since the Statuts before cited. they permit not the spiritual Court to hold
Plea of Tithes of the value of the fourth part, where the Patronage is
questionable; but will have the Aduowson thereof tried always by the common
Law after the prohibition of Indicauit, which (being purchased as well at the
suit of the Patron as of the Parson) recites that the Parson defendant in the
spiritual Court Tenet 31. Hen. 6. fol. 14. b. and Bract. lib 5. tract de
Exceptionibus cap. 4. fol. 403. a. and vide Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 45. D.
medietatem or quartam partem omnium Decimarum prouenientium de etc. de
aduocatione of the Patron etc. And then, Quia manifestum est quod praedictus
the Patron iacturam aduocationis Decimarum praedictarum incurreret si
praedictus Rector in causa illa (that is the Parson plantif) obtineret, vobis
prohibemus ne placitum illud teneatis in Curia Christianitatis donec discussum
fuerit ad quem illorum pertineat earundem Decimarum aduocatio. And then
according as the right shall afterward be tried in the Writ of right, the
spiritual Judge is to give Westminster. 2. cap. 5.
sentence. The same Statuts allow, to the spiritual Jurisdiction, conisans of
the fifth, and of all parts less then a fourth of the value of the Church in
tithes controuerted twixt two Parsons. and no Indicauit Artic. Cleri. cap. 2.
is grantable to forbid the suit of one of them, commenced for any less part,
in respect of the Patrons right only. Neither upon them, by consequence, has
any Writ of right of any part of Tithes that 18. Ed. 2. tit. Brief 825. and
Regist. Orig. fol 29. b. Vide Fitzh. Not. Br. 45. D.
appears not to be a fourth part of the Churches value, been allowable. But,
for this point; how the Law was before those Statuts of 13. Ed. 1. is a great
question in our year books, and diverse are the Opinions touching it. Some Moile
38. Hen. 6.20. a. For^es^. 31. Hen. 6.14. a. ^eingerm. fol. 108. and voye^ 38.
Ed 3.19 a. 16. Ed. 3. tit. Qua^e impedit 147.
think that before the Statut of West. 2. cap. 5. (out of which, ioind with
Circumspecte agatis, they limit the Indicauit to the fourth part) no Writ of
right of Aduowson of any Tithes lay by the common Law. Others guess that
before that time a Prohibition or Indicauit lay upon every suit in the
spiritual Court Markham 38. Hen 6. fol 20. a. and Parn. 4 Ed 3. fol. 27. b.
for Tithes, and that the Patron might have had his Writ of Regist Orig. fol.
29. b Fitzh. B. 30. ^ Fortesc. 38. Hen. 6. fol. 20. a.
right upon such prohibition against the suit of his Encumbent, either of a
fifth or sixth part, and that these Statuts restraind him to the value of the
fourth part at least Others have herein other fancies. But, it is plain first,
that long before those Statuts, Tithes were demandable, of the owner detaining
them, of their own nature, and pleadable, in the Spiritual Court. and that
affirmd in Fleta, was regularly before true. Decimae Fleta. lib. 6. cap. 37.
in quantum Decimae (it suits against the Parishioners) debent in foro
Ecclesiastico intentari, wherewith Bracton, Lib. 5. de Exceptionibus cap. 4.
fol. 403. and cap. 10. fol. 407.
living in the time of Henry the third, also agrees. But it is as plain that
before those Statuts, if the Rectors of two Churches of several Auowries, had
controuerted the right of a fourth part (or of the value of either of their
Churches more) in Tithes, by suit commenced in the spiritual Court, the Patron
of the Rector-defendant might have had an Indicauit, to prohibit the
prosecution and holding of the Plea. Bracton teaches us that; and has the
form of the Writ to the same purpose, and gives his reason, Quia posset
Patronus, iacturam suae aduocationis incurrere. But somewhat doubtfully he
limits the quantity of the Tithes to the sixth part at the least, beyond which
denomination the Indicauit, he thinks, lay not for any part. His words are: Si
contentio fuerit inter Rectores de aliquibus Decimis quae aestimari possunt
vsque ad quartam, quintam, vel sextam partem aduocationis, vltra quam partem
non extenditur prohibitio vt videtur, tunc fiat Iudicibus (Ecclesiasticis)
Prohibitio in hac forma. Rex talibus Iudicibus salutem. Indicauit mihi etc. But
he mentions no Writ of right of Aduowson of Tithes that should follow. He
says indeed that upon the Indicauit, by consent only of the Patrons, there may
be an enquest taken (the Jury being returned into Court by Venire facias or
Distringas had by petition of them so consenting) tanquam de Aduocatione, to
find Vtrum talis praesentatus a tali Patrono recenter fuerit in seisina de
talibus Decimis tanquam spectantibus ad Ecclesiam suam quam tenet de
praesentatione talis Patroni sui, vel si talis alia persona inde fuit in
seisina tali tempore vt de Decimis spectantibus ad Ecclesiam suam talem quam
tenet de aduocatione talis Patroni sui. But how ever Bracton's own opinion
(yet doubtfully) be, that the Indicauit might be brought for the sixth part,
and for no less, yet, it seems, the practice of the age was otherwise. and
that no determination was in his time, nor before 13. Edw. 1. of any certainty
therein; which is expressly delivered in the Grieuances comprehended in the
National Annal. Burton^ in Biblioth. V.C. Thoma Allen. Oxon.
Council of London in 21. Hen. 3. where all the Clergy entreated Otho the
Popes Legate, that he would persuade the King to alter and correct certain
proceedings, quae fuerunt in regno Angliae in praeiudicium libertatis
Ecclesiasticae; among which, one is, Item ne currat prohibitio (you must
understand the Indicauit) Ne Iudices Ecclesiastici cognoscant de iure
Pat^onatus quominus Clerici possunt petere Decimas tanquam de iure Communi ad
Ecclesias suas pertinentes. Quia Patroni Ecclesiarum vel Capellarum quae
Decimas petitas possident, dicunt per talem petitionem Iuri Patronatus sui
derogari, and nolunt Iusticiarij Domini Regis Iudicare quota pars Decimarum
peti possit vel debeat coram Iudice Ecclesiastico. And another, Item ne currat
prohibitio Domini Regis, ne Rector Parochialis Ecclesiae impetat eos qui
percipiunt Decimas infra limits Parochiae suae. By both which, compared with
the ancient Books, it appears, that the Kings Prohibition lay commonly, if
the Aduowson of the Tithes were between two persons questioned, and that also
(for aught occurres to the contrary, except Bracton's conjecture) if any part
of the Tithes or the Aduowson (which in such a suit were reputed as one) had
been controuerted. To these testimonies may be added this, in the Epistles of
the most learned In Epist. Rob. Li^^ Mss. in Biblioth. Cotton.
Robert Grossetest Bishop of Lincoln under Henry the third, whereby the
course of Indicauit is proved, and also taxed for injustice against the
liberty of the Church. Thus is it spoken of among other grieuances of the
Clergy. Item in Ecclesiae libertatem non mediocriter delinquitur, cum Iudices
Ecclesiastici, ne causas quas notum est pure esse Ecclesiasticas in foro
discindant Ecclesiastico, a domino Rege prohibentur. Vt per literas Regias
inhibetur ne Iudex Ecclesiasticus iudicialiter cognoscat vtrum Ecclesia vel
Capella talis loci sit Capella Matricis Ecclesiae alicuius alterius loci, and
vtrum Decimae talis terrae ad hanc vel ad illam pertineant Ecclesiam, eo quod
si Actor in huiusmodi causa euincat possessionem, Ecclesiae Rei contingeret
imminui ac per consequens, vt aiunt, ius Patronatus eiusdem Ecclesiae
deteriorari, Ecclesia ad quam Patronus praesentabat effecta minus pingui.
Accideret namque ratione consimili, omnem causam super possessionem vel quasi
possessione^ Ecclesiasticam inter duos Rectores duarum Ecclesiarum diuersorum
Patronatuum emergentem, ne ventilaretur coram iudicibus Ecclesiasticis a domino
Rege debere prohiberi; eo quod Actore in huiusmodi causa euincente, co^tinget
semper Ecclesiam Rei imminui ac per hoc, secundum quod dicunt, Patronatum
eiusdem deteriorari. Consequetur autem and sic quod huiusmodi causae
Ecclesiasticae nunquam discindentur. A seculari enim iudice discindi non
poterunt, neque ab Ecclesiastico iudice, obstante Regia prohibitione. Forte
autem nec consequitur quod in huiusmodi casu, euincente actore, imminuetur
Patronatus alterius Ecclesiae. Non enim minus est Patronus qui minoris
Ecclesiae est Patronus, sed nec minus est pater qui minoris hominis est pater.
Patronatus enim seu ius Patronatus non intenditur vel remittitur ex maioritate
vel minoritate rei cuius est Patronatus. Praeterea sed tubera and ea quae
contra naturam excrescunt in carne hominis non augent ipsum hominem, and
medicinalis abscissio innaturalium huiusmodi excrementorum ipsum hominem non
imminuit sed potius pulcrificat and sanat. Ita unjust possessiones and quasi
possessiones Ecclesias ipsas non augent sed deturpant, and earum abscissio per
iustum iudicium non est Ecclesiarum imminutio, sed potius pulcrificatio quaedam
and sanatio; vnde and Patronatus seu ius Patronatus per huiusmodi abscissionem
nullo modo potest imminui vel deteriorari, sed multo amplius emendari. I
faithfully relate it, and censure not the Arguments. You may do that, Reader,
while you smile at the Magis and Minus in it. But also, although the Indicauit
prohibited the Spiritual Court, yet it seems the Temporal, before the
Statute of Westminster 2. and after the time of Henry the second, or
thereabouts, held no Plea of right of Aduowson of Tithes, except only upon
Inquest taken by consent of both Patrons. something, as you see, might be tried
in it. May we not conclude then, that the same Statut, in those words, Habeat
Patronus Rectoris sic impediti breue ad petendum Aduocationem Decimarum
petitarum, was the first Author (at least after the change about the time of
Henry the second) of the Writ of Right of Aduowson of Tithes? Which also is
well justified by the pleading of the Abbot of Selbies case, within six years
after the Statute, wherein the parties (according to the fashion of argument in
pleading of that time) agree, Platit. de Banco Pasch. 19. Ed. 1. rot. 45.
Quod breue de quarta part Decimarum primo locum habere caepit a tempore
Statuti Regis nunc apud Westmonasterium inde editi etc. Neither rests any
scruple, touching the fourth part, why the Prohibition in the Indicauit and the
Writ of Right, should be of the fourth part only, or of a greater, although
the Statute of Westminster 2. speak of no certain part. For, that of
Circumspecte agatis ordaines, That no Prohibition or Indicauit should lie,
where the part controuerted is less then a fourth (it being before grantable
upon such suit for a sixth part, by Bracton's opinion; and it seems indeed, upon
suit for any part) and the Statute of Westminster the 2. gives the Writ of
Right only where the Indicauit is first sued. And for this matter of Indicauit
(which concerns properly suit between Rector and Rector, not between the
Rector and the Parishioner) take as a note by the way the advice of the Bishops
among themselves in 41. Hen. 3. against the Temporal Courts. In the Annals of
Burton it is extant, and thus speaks. Concilium Archiepiscopi and omnium
Episcoporum super Articulis propositis apud London. Petit persona Ecclesiastica
Decimas coram Iudice Ecclesiastico. Iudicanti and petenti porrigitur Regia
Prohibitio nomine Patroni Ecclesiae cuius Rector conuenitur, ne super
Aduocatione seu Patronatu Ecclesiae Iudex ille cognoscat; si actor prosequatur
and Iudicantis officium f. index.
assumat, vterque attachiatur and attachiati veniunt Consilium tale est, quod
si Iusticiarij causam Decimarum sub color querelae Aduocationis Ecclesiarum ad
se trahere velint and de non prosequendo vlterius causam Decimarum in foro
Ecclesiastico and Iudice sieve a Part securitatem exigunt, in nullo eis
caueatur. Et si propter hoc aristentur, per loci Diocesanum requirantur sieve
per Episcopum proprium. Et si libere non tradantur Ecclesiae, competenti
monitione praemissa excommunicentur Iudicantes and detentores. Et si queratur a
Iudice quota pars vel quanta petatur, non respondeatur. But this advice of
theirs was to little purpose, nor durst they, questionless, have put it in
execution. The Statuts of Westminster the 2. and Circumspecte agatis gave them
some remedy; whereof enough already.

IV.
Of Writs of Scire facias, granted to call men to answer in the Chancerie for
Tithes, sufficient testimony is in the Statute made for the Clergy in 18. Ed.
3. chap. 7. Item que per la ou briefs (so are the words) de Scire facias eient
este grantez a garnir Prelates, Religieuses, and autres Clerks a respondre des
Dismes en nostre Chancellarie and a monstre s'ils eient riens pur eux ou
sachent riens dire pur quoy tielx Dismes a les demandants ne deuient estre
restituees and a responder auxibien a nou^ come a la party de tielx Dismes
etc. By this it appears, that some use was to grant such Writs for Tithes.
Whence also Fitzherbert well inferres, that the right of Tithes was
determinable in the Kings Court. But we have not in our Yeere-Bookes any case
of further declaration of that use before the Statute. But out of good ground
you may conjecture, that in these Three special cases, Writs of Scire facias
were grantable anciently for Tithes, and that in those times, before the
Statut; either upon the title of the demandant, first found by Inquest, to the
Tithes, or returned by the Shirife; or out of Fines, it seems, levied of
Tithes; or upon Patents of Tithes legally granted by the King, when, against
the Grant, any Clergy man by the Canon Law took them from the Patentee. Of all
these, there is fair proof enough. But the third (it seems) has principal
reference to that Statute, as shall anon be showed. For the course of taking an
Inquest by commission, which being returned, might be sufficient ground for a
Scire facias, it appears in Escaet. 8. Ed. 1. numer. 67. that a commission was
sent to Adam of Eueringham, Steward of the Forest of Shirewood, to enquire by
Oath of the Foresters and Verderors, whether the Priors of Lenton had used to
have all Tithes of the Kings Venison, taken in the County of Notingham, which
they claimed per Cartas quorundam praedecessorum etc. And in the Inquisition
returned, it is found, that they had used to have it, and that first by the
Grant of Videsis Rot. Claus. 21. Hen. 3. membran. 3.
King John. And in the same bundell, number. 72. a Commission is to Nicholas of
Stapleton, commanding him to enquire, whether the Prior of Wyrkesep ought to
have the Tithes of all profits of the Manor of Gringeley; Nobis super iure
Prioris in hac part and facto contrario (that is, the subtraction of them by
Henry de Alemannia, against whom the Prior complaind) certiorari volentibus
etc. Whereupon the Commissioner returns, that the Priorie had right by
prescription, and that Henry de Alemannia had subtracted them. What could be
more proper, then to have a Scire facias upon the Inquisition, according to the
intent of that preample of 18. Ed. 3. in which Scire facias, the right might be
tried between the parties, and so judgment be given? To these may be added
that in Inquis. ad quod damnum 8. Ed. 2. number. 79. Where, per Petitionem Videsis
Rot. Parl. 8 Ed. 2. rot. 23
in Consilio, the Abbess of Godestow has a Writ directed Custodi equitij sui
de Woodstock etc. which relates that ex part dilectae nobis in Christo
Abbatissae de Godestow per petitionem suam coram nobis in Consilio nostro
exhibitam, nobis est ostensum quod cum per cartas Vide, si placet, Rot. Claus.
21. Haw. 3. membr. 19.
progenitorum nostrorum quorundam Regum Angliae Concessum sit ei, quod ipsam
Decimam omnem in Manerio nostro de Wodestoke, and parco nostro ibidem per annum
renouantium percipiat and habeat, praetextu cuius. the Abbess and her
Predecessors had enioied it, and that the Bailife kept from her the Tithe of
the Colts, bred in the same Park; wherefore it commands him to restore them if
they be so due; which supposes, I think, that he should return an inquest or
some discovery of the truth or falsehood of the Plaintifes pretense, although
indeed this example may serve also for that part of our division of this kind
of proceeding which touches Patents. But to that Writ is annexed the return,
that is, the Bailifes acknowledgment in French of her right. his name is
William Beauxamys. So in Escaet. 7. Ed. 3. number. 83. a Commission is sent out to
enquire of the right of the Tithes of the Demesnes of the Kings Castle of
Tikhull, which the Prior of S. Oswald claimed. the enquest was taken of it at
Le Faure Oaks, in the confines of Yorkshire and Nothingham. and in it the
particulars of the right are returned. and what should want, that upon such
returns, writs of Scire facias might not have been granted. we omit that before
cited out of the Parliament Rols of 18. Ed. 1. Pat^ 9. Hen. 3. part. 2. membr. 3.
And light also to this practice in the temporal Courts of that elder time,
may be had from other Co^missions or Process in the Rolls; as from that sent
by Henry the third into Ireland, to the Archbishop of Cassile, the Bishop of
Fern, and the Bishop of Lismore, commanding them, that, taking with them
Ieffrey de Marisco then Justice (or Lord Deputy) of Ireland, or some other
whom he should appoint, they should enquire by the Oaths of both Lay and
Clergy men, whether Bartholmew de Camera Parson of the Chapel of Limeric, or
William of Caerdiff Treasurer there, had seisin of the Tithes, De Piscaria and
Molendinis de Limeric, tempore Ioannis Regis Patris nostri ante guerram motam
inter ipsum and Barons etc. But it may be also that these Enquests or Returns
made of the Title to Tithes by the Shrife, were only in case where the Tithes
increased out of the Kings Demesnes, or perhaps immediate Tenancies. The
examples seem not to go further* and in Jn fascic. Pet. 6. Ed. 1. in Arc^
Londin.
6. Ed. 1. a Petition was exhibited in Parliament by one Piers a Chaplain of the
Earl of Sauoy, against the Prior and Covent of Jews, for a Tithe given him by
the Prior and Covent in the Parish of Westun, in the Diocese of Ely, whereof
another grant had been afterward made by them to one Richard de Meuton; and
Piers beseeches the King to send his writ to the Shrife of Cambridge, to put
him in possession; but this answer is indorsed. Rex non intromittit se de hijs
quae taliter spectant ad forum Ecclesiasticum; sed prosequatur Ius suum versus
Clericum qui tenet Ecclesiam, coram Ordinario. Here was an express exclusion
of the Temporal jurisdiction in such a case, where an original Writ or
Commission was commanded to setle or inquire of the right of Tithes, that
touched only common persons. But wheneuer through such means the title appeared
upon record, I understand not why a Scire facias might not as well be issuable
(although I have not met with an express example of that kind) as in the last
course that is upon the title appearing in Patents of the King or his Ancestors.

V.
For that second ground of Writs of Scire facias, which we suppose to be Fines,
levied of Tithes; why was it not as likely that upon such Fines levied, Writs
of Scire facias should lie as upon any others of Lands or Rents. and that Fines
of the right of Tithes were in the Kings Courts anciently levied, is manifest:
not as I remember upon Writs of Covenant, which yet may (for aught I know) at
this day be brought, in the temporal Court, for spiritual 38. Ed. 7. fol. 8.
and Regist. Orig. fol. 165.
Tithes, in regard no Tithes but damages are only to be recovered; but chiefly
in Writs of Right of Aduowson. For example, In Fin. Trinit. 10. R. Iohannis
Wilt. apud Windlesore coram ipso Rege, Simone de Pateshulle, Iacobo de Poterna,
Henrico de Audemero Iusticiarijs and alijs Domini Regis fidelibus tunc ibidem
praesentibus. upon a Writ of right of Aduowson brought by Ascelina Abbess of
Wilton, against Henry of Abeny for the Patronage of the Chapel of the
greater Wicheford, the concord is, that the Abbess grants it to him in Fee,
saving a pension of two shillings yearly to the Church of Neweton, being a
Prebend of Wilton. Et pro hac recognitione and quieta clamatione and fine and
concordia idem Henricus remisit and quietum clamauit de se, and haeredibus suis
praedictae Abbatissae and Ecclesiae sanctae Edithae Virginis in Wilton, and
eiusdem loci conuentui, all his right in certain Lands, and recognouit and
concessit omnes Decimas de Dominico suo in maiori Wicheford, esse pertinentes
ad praedictam Ecclesiam de Neweton, quae est Praebenda de Wilton sicut eas
habere solet, excepta Decima bladi proueniente ex viginti acris terrae quas
persona praedictae Capellae elegerit de Dominico ipsius Henrici. quam Decimam
persona per Henricum praedictum, vel haeredes suos ad praedictam Capellam de
Wicheford praesentata, and admissa per visum personae quae praedictam
Praebendam de Niweton habuit, vel per visum balliui eius debet recipere in
autumno, sicut ab antiquo recipere consueuit. The record is worthy of special
observation. And in the Leiger book of the Priorie of Merton in Surrey, a Fine
is of Pasch. 12. R. Ioh. before the King and the same Justices, between William
de Cantelupo Defendant, and Walter Prior of Merton, upon the right of Aduowson
of the Church of Eyton, wherein it is agreed that the Chaplain of the
demandants in Eyton, shall not take a parochianis eiusdem Ecclesiae nec in
Decimis, nec in Oblationibus, nec in Confessionibus etc. but leave them all to
the Parish Church of Eyton. and in this, some may, as in the other, note the
pretended interest of the Patron, in disposition of any of the Revenues of the
Church. which anciently claimed, while Inuestitures continued, was not as yet
omitted in these Legal proceedings or instruments, that is, Fines; which are
of greatest curiosity. and according hereto is a Fine of 7. Rich. 1. levied
between the Prior of Stanes and Alice Hopton, of the Aduowson of the Church of
Cheklegh in Staffordshire, where Alice as Patroness grants to the Priorie,
among other things, Omnes Decimas villae de Northmankote in perpetuum quae est
de eadem Parochia, that is of Cheklegh. and in the In Bibl. Cotton.
Chartularie of Gisburn, in a Fine of 23. Hen. 3. between Peeter de Bruis
plaintiff, and John Prior of Gisburn (in the Province of York) defendant, In
droit d'Aduowson, Peeter grants vt ius suum omnes Decimas superscriptas quas
etc. The like also does he in a Fine of 26. Hen. 3. there transcribed. and in
30. Hen. 3. also, of which more particular mention is before made.

VI.
But for Writs of Scire facias brought upon the third ground, that is, in Case
where the title appears upon record in Patents made of the Tithes from the King
or his Predecessors; take this special example of 17. Ed. 3. A Writ was
directed to the Shrife Fascicul. Bren. de 17 Ed. 3. part. 1. and 3. in Arce
Londin.
of Essex, relating that Maude, Quondam Regina Angliae, granted to the Deane
and Canons of the Kings free-Chappell of S. Martins in London, the Churches of
Witteham and Chersinges, Cum Capellis and Decimis etc. and that they were
thereof and of the Tithes of Witteham and Cheresinges, seized till 16. Ed. 2.
and that since the Abbot of Saint John's of Colchester took from them two parts
of the Tithes etc. Et quia nos omnia and singula iura liberae Capellae nostrae
supradictae manutenere volumus and tenemur, and ea quae substracta fuerint sieve
unjust occupata reuocare, tibi praecipimus quod scire facias nunc Abbati quod
sit in Cancellaria nostra in quindenam S. Iohannis Baptistae prox. futurum
vbicunque tunc fuerit ad respondendum tam nobis quam praefatis Decano and
Capitulo de vsurpationibus, occupatione, and detentione dictarum duarum partium
decimarum praedictarum and ad ostendendum si quid pro se habeat vel dicere
sciat quare dictae duae parts Decimarum earundem eisdem Decano and Capitulo
adiudicari non debeant, and ad faciendum and ad recipiendum vlterius quod curia
nostra considerauerit etc. test etc. apud Westmonast. 17. Iunij anno regni
nostri 17. Per Regem and Consilium. This Writ was returned with Scire feci by H.
Garnet Shrife of Essex, and by consent of the parties it is referd to Mihelmas
Term following In Statu pro nunc. the Writ is both in part 1. and 3. of that
year, but to that in part 3. which is of Trinity Term, a Plea of the Abbots
is annexed in these words. Et praedictus Abbas per atturnatum suum dicit quod
praedicti Decanus and Capitulum per breue suum non supponunt quod Ecclesiae de
Witteham and Cheresinges sunt de fundatione dictae liberae Capellae Domini
Regis, sed quod illas Ecclesias tenent de dono Matildae quondam Reginae Angliae
post fundationem dictae liberae Capellae, and dicit quod tempore doni,
praedictae Ecclesiae fuerunt in jurisdiction ordinaria videlicet Episcopi
London. and continue post donum hucusque fuerunt and ad huc sunt in praesenti
in jurisdiction ordinaria. Et dicit quod praedictae Ecclesiae fuerunt
visitabiles and visitatae per Episcopos London. in visitationibus suis a
tempore a quo memoria non extat. and praedicti Decanus and Capitulum per breue
suum petunt decimas quas supponunt esse parcellam earum Ecclesiarum quae sunt
in jurisdiction Ordinaria in forma praedicta, and sic Decimae illae sunt mere
spiritualia and non placitabilia nisi in curia Christianitatis; per quod non
intendit quod Curia ista in hoc casu cognitionem habere debeat. Here it
appears, that the Counsel of the Abbot of Colchester Defendant, supposed that
the conisans of the Tithes was spiritual only, unless they were originally
part of the Kings free Chapel. how the Case was determined, appears not. But
in the next Parliament following was a Petition exhibited by the Clergy in
those words before cited. IV. complaining of the granting of such Writs of
Scire facias, and upon that Petition the King answered, Que tielx breifs desore
nauant ne soient grantes, and que les Process pendant sur tielx breifs soient
anentes and que les parties soient dismisses deuant secular Judges de tielx
manner de Plees salve a nous nostre droit tiel come nous and nostre ancestors
auoient ewe and soloient aver de reason. I think we need not doubt but that this
very Case of the Abbot of Colchester was no small cause of that Petition of the
Clergy. and you see mention is, in the answer, of some Writs hanging, whereof
this is most likely to have been one. But howeuer the Petition was answered,
and although out of this Petition and answer that Act of 18. Ed. 3. has been
receiud among our Statuts, and commonly goes for one, yet might it deserve
further consideration then I will here seem to take of it. only I admonish that
within four years after, a Scire facias was 22. Assis. pl. 75.
brought by a Patentee of Tithes in the Forest of Inglewood, and that against a
Prior being Pernor of them; and by judgment the Writ was allowd without
mention or the least regard had of that Act. why that was so, or what force the
Act has, let others examine; I purposely abstain.

VII.
But for Process of bare command of payment of Tithes, or the like; when the
title was by Patent clearly supposed true, the Shrife or other Officer was
sometimes commanded by Writ to take order that the demandant might enjoy his
Tithes. As in Claus. 7. Hen. 3. part. 1. membran. 6. the King directs his Writ
to Brian de Insula Keeper of the Forest of Shirewood, telling him, that pro
salute animae Domini Ioannis Regis patris nostri concessimus Monachis de
Basingwere, quod percipiant hac vice vsque ad Festum S. Michaelis Anno regni
nostri VII. Decimas de bladis seminatis in defenso nostro inter Blakebroc and
Glossop, and ideo vobis mandamus quod ipsos Monachos hac vice sine impedimento
permittatis Decimas praedictas percipere. T. etc. And such more sometimes
occur. But this, and the most of that age that are of this matter, indeed
appear to have bin of Tithes in a Forest also, as that of 22. Ed. 3. is in the
Book of Assizes (which happened after the Statute of 18. Ed. 3.) and you may
remember those before cited out of 6. Ed. 1. and 18. Ed. 1. in Chapter XI..
III. and the example of 8. Ed. 2. before rememberd touching Woodstock Park. So
in Rot. Claus. 5. Hen. 3. part. 2. membr.. 14. the Bishop of Salisburie has
his fifty shillings yearly nomine Decimae, out of New-Forest (which Cart.
Antiq. CC. in dors. 10. in Arce Land.
Henry the second had granted to his Church by the name of omnes Decimas de
Noua Foresta etc.) and other like out of other, paid him by Writ to the
Sheriff; and in Rot. Pat. 11. Hen. 3. membrana 5. part. 1. Eustace Bishop of
London has the Tithe of the Kings Venison, taken in the Forest of Essex,
(according to King Rot. Chart. 6. R. Ioh. membr. 12. chapter 107.
John's Grant) by Writ directed to the Foresters and Bailifes of that County.
Neither would they (it seems) in that age permit any suit for the Tenths of
Venison or Beasts of the Forest in the Spiritual Court, (although those Tenths
were most commonly settled in one Church or another by Grant) as may be seen in
In Arce Londin.
Mich. 9. and 10. Hen. 3. Rot. 15. where John Fitz-Robert, in an Attachment
upon a Prohibition against Philip of Ardern Clerk, in the pleading allows, that
for Tithe of Hay and Mills, the prosecution in the Spiritual Court was
lawful; but he further says, that de Decima Bestia Forestae eum implacitauit
contra prohibitionem etc. And herewith may be considered also the Kings Pat.
^6. Hen. 3. membr. 7.
command, sent to the Constable of Windsore Castle, that the Church of Saint
John in Windsore should have Decimas Gardini Regis de Windleshores. But out of
these all (as out of the examples before brought of Commissions to be returned)
it may perhaps be collected, that only the Tithes of the Kings lands, or
belonging to his Churches, were to be ordered or commanded to be paid by these
kind of Processes. I confess I have not seen enough to persuade me otherwise,
for the time after about King John or his near predecessors. Yet, that as I
leave the judgment of all, which historically I relate to the able Reader, so
I may not defraud him of what in any kind may give light; here I offer him also
this Writ of 24. Hen. 3. that seems to touch the temporal Courts determination
of the right of such Tithes, as, for aught appears, belonged neither to the
Kings Churches, nor were increasing in his Demesnes or immediate Tenancies.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex In Codice Abba^. S. Alba^^. Ms.
Angliae and Vicecomiti Hertford salutem. Licet alias tibi signifi^ auerimus
quod non permitteres Ecclesiam de Hamelamstede spoliari Decimis ad ipsam
pertinentibus, and quod Ecclesiam ipsam manuteneres, and defenderes in eo statu
in quo ^uit tempore Syluij quondam Rectoris eiusdem Ecclesiae, non tamen fuit
intentionis nostrae quod occasion illius praecepti aliqua alia Ecclesia
Decimis suis spoliaretur. Et ide^ praecipimus quod occasone illius praecepti
nullam violentiam inferas vel inferri permittas Monachis S. Albani super
Decimis spectantibus ad Ecclesiam suam de Redburne quas per XX. annos hactenus
pacifice possiderunt. T. meipso apud Westminster. 1. die Septembris an. r. n. XXIV.
And in like form was a Writ sent to the Constable of Berkhamstede. But this
kind of Process, and all other such Writs of Scire facias, either upon
Commissions returned, Fines, or Patents, or otherwise, (for aught I could yet
learn) have long since ceased, by reason especially of that received Act of
18. Ed. 3. Neither since that one case of 22. Ed. 3 as I guess, has any use
been of an original suit for Tithes in the Temporal Courts, saving only upon
Prohibitions and the Statutes of 32. Hen. 8. and 2. Ed. 6. I say, original
suit. for otherwise, the question of the right of Tithes, incident in an Issue
at the Kings 38. Assis pl. 20.
suit, has since been triable in the Temporal Court; and between Vide 50. Ed.
3. fol. 20. and 2^. Ed. 4. fol. 24. a.
common persons also; especially if the right of Tithes, upon the Issue, were
but indirectly or inclusiuely in question. And although it were directly the
very Issue, yet also it has sometimes been tried in an Action of Trespass in
the Kings Bench, as you may see in Mich. 12. Ed. 2. Rot. 66. between Philip de
Say Parson of Hodenet in Shropshire, and Geffrey of Wolsele Parson of
Chedleton, for Tithes in Marchumle. But of these things hitherto; and enough.

The end of the History of Tithes.
A REVIEW.
AFter some few Copies, thus half printed and half written, were dispersed,
and since the various Censure of unequal Readers, (some of them cauilling at
such Passages in it, as the Author at first thought, and not without cause, had
been enough cleared) this short Reuiew is now added; wherein, beside some other
Confirming and Declaring Autorities, by the way also, and opportunely enough,
occur some Admonitions briefly offered, that may somewhat direct in the Use
of this Historical truth. The printed sheets could not be increased, or
altered. neither was it so fit, after many hands had the whole, that Additions
inserted, should make any variance from the written part. And plainly, that of
the Admonitions, for direction in the Use, of its own nature rather required a
several place, then was fit to have been mixed in the body of the History. In
the name therefore of Goodness and Learning, I earnestly beseech every one,
that hereafter shall get it either Copied or Printed, to join also (if he
may) this Reuiew with it.

Of the I. Chapter.
IN the I.. touching that of Abraham's Tithes being of the spoils of War
only; I know many think otherwise. And beside the general name of Tithes of
all, reasons are drawn for their side out of those words of the Patriarch to
the King of Sodom; I will not take of all that is thine so much as a thread etc.
I neither profess to dispute it, nor find I any such consequent out of that
Text. And the Vide Fran. Iuni^m in Analys. Gen^s cap. 14.
answer to the objection is not difficult. But I add here to those testimonies
both of Jews and ancient Fathers which I have cited, (for I was willing to
make their testimonies my warrant, not to gloss the text with my own
interpretation, or with the fancies of petie names) that S. Ambrose and
Eucherius Bishop of Lions call those Tithes also Consulas Eucherium Lugd. in
Genes. lib. ^. cap. 17. and 18 and D. Ambros in Epist. ad Ebraos, cap. 7.
Decimas praedae and victoriae. And in one passage, Eucherius having a plain
regard to the words of the Epistle to the Ebrews, which in the vulgar are
expressed by Decimas de praecipuis (for the Greek (...)) says de praecipuis
praedis Abraham Patriarcha Decimas legitur obtul^sse, directing himself still
in the conceit of the word All in Genesis, according to that (...) in the holy
Epistle, which both in Translations enough, and in the Greek Ad cuius
interpretationem etiam consule, si placet, Eustathium ad Odyss. T.
Proverb before rememberd, denotes spoils of War. Yet also the same Father
soon after calls them Decimas omnis substantiae suae generally; but plainly
showing in his former words, that he took omnis substantiae here for nothing
but victoriae praedam. Which, it seems, Philo the Jew also understands, where
in his Anagogicall course of contemplation he says that Abraham being the
tenth degree from Sem; In lib. (...).
(...), that is, consecrated Tenths to the Almighty, as a thanks* giving for
his victory. And Prim^sius, and old African Bishop, interprets de praecipuis
in the Latin text by de melioribus spolijs. But some have cauilled at my
relating, according to S. Hierome, that were it not for the holy authority of
the Epistle to the Ebrews, it might stand indifferent whether Abraham gave
Tithes of the spoils to Melchisedek as to a Priest, or Melchisedek the Tenth
of his estate to Abraham, as a portion to one of his posterity. If there be a
fault in that assertion (I confess I find none) let them be so bold then as to
tax those learned Fathers for it, S. Hierome and Lib. 2. in Genes. cap. 25. and
27.
Eucherius, beside Freculphus Tom. 1. hist. lib. 1. cap. 42.
Bishop of Lisieux* and other ancient Writers, that in the same syllables
affirm it with S. Hierome, from whom indeed Eucherius transcribed the best
part of his more notable passages. Somewhat may be here fitly remembered
concerning two Adjuncts that belong to this Story of Abraham's Tithing, that
is, who Melchisedek was; and where the place of his Kingdom, or Salem, was.
For the first, such of the Fathers Hieronym. tom. 4. in Epist. ad Enagr. and
Eucher. loco citato etc.
as out of the Ebrew text had the true notes of supputation of time, take him
to be Sem, according as the opinion also was generally received among the old
Epiphantus in hares. 55.
Samaritan Ebrews, and diverse Jews Author (...) Midras hagadah apud R^b. Iarchi
in Genes. 14. and alij ibid. item Midras in Psalm. 76. apud Galatin. de Arc^^is
lib. 3. c. 9. quem and vide lib. 10. cap. 6.
also especially of later ages: howeuer some Jews have been long since of
another opinion, in their idle and rash fancies supposing him to be a bastard,
which they took to be the cause why his descent is not spoken of with his name:
others of them, with the Hiera^its, making him D. Ambr lib. 3. de fide cap 5.
Hieronym. and Epiphan. vbi supr. and haeres. 67.
more then a man. But also both the Hierosolymitan Targum, and that other called
Ben-Vziels, expressly tell us, he was Sem the son of Noah; which some of
late time also have in Works purposely written to that end, labored to make
manifest. And doubtless, at the time of the victory, Sem was the chiefest of
the family there, and either a Firstborn also, or else had in him the right of
a first borne, or Priesthood, by translation from his elder brother; which I
add, because the Eam esse Rabbinorum sententiam notat D. Kimch^ in rad. (...)
ita and Iarchi ad Genes 10.21.
Rabbis and diverse other of the learned will have it, that Iaphet was the
elder brother. But how stands that so well with Melchisedeks being Sem, if
according to that old tradition, both among Rabbis and Christians, the
Priesthood were an incident to the firstborn male? Unless the right of
Primogeniture were transferd from Iaphet to Sem in Noah's Genes. cap. 9. comm.
26. and 27.
blessing, as it was to Jacob from Esau, and from C^in, it seems, to Vide
Philonem (...).
Abel, which must be thought on also in the taking their side, who suppose
Abraham not to be the eldest of Terahs sons. For regularly the Ancients give
the Priesthood before the Law to the firstborn. And whereas Moses is said to
have Exodus cap. 24. comm. 5. and vide Numer. cap. 3. comm. 12.
sent young men that offered burnt offerings, the Chalde Paraphrases have for
(...) eth-nairi, i. young men, (...) iath-bocri, i. of the firstborn; these S.
Chrysostom In Gen (...). videsis Eucherium in Genes lib. 2. c. 25. and 27.
elegantly styles (...), that is, Priests of themselves, or made without other
ordination or Suffrages: to which Office also (thus had either by birth, or
blessing, that equalled the birth) a kind of Jsid. Pelusio^a lib. 2. epist. 47.
Imperial and Patriarchique dignity was annexed. That precedence of birth
given to Iaphet, is of no late invention; but many hundred years ancienter
then the Talmud, or any work extant of any Rabbin. For the Septuagint
expressly Genes. 10.21.
affirm it, (...), that is, and sons were borne to Sem, being father of all
the sons of Eber, and brother of Iaphet, being the elder. which in the Ebrew
is not so plain on either side* for, the words being (...) achi Iaphet
hagadol, by reason of the want of termination^ of cases, may be alone as well
turned elder brother of Iaphet, as brother of Iaphet being the elder, which in
the last English translation is brought nearest to the Original, thus: Unto
Shem etc. the brother of Iaphet the elder, even to him were children borne. And
beside such interpretation of the context, the Chronologicall part of the holy
Story affords much to prove, that Sem was not the firstborn in time. For
Noah was Genes. 5.32.
D. years old, and got Sem, Ham, and Iaphet. Sem Ibid. 11.10.
two years after the Flood, being C. years old, got Arphaxad, that is, (as is
most probable, if not plain) in the DC.II. year of Vide ibid. c. 7.6.
Noah, Sems age was only C. years. Then at Sems birth, Noah was D.II. year
old. Who ever therefore was borne when he was but D. years of age, must be
C.II. years old, when Sem had seen only one C. years. If any of them were
borne in Noah's D. year (as the Text seems to teach) it must then be one of
the other two, and not Sem. This argument, used by the Jews and others, which
follow them here, ioind with what is in the Septuagint for Iaphet, makes so
much against Sem's being the first born, that howeuer the great Joseph Scaliger
be In Elench. Orat. Chronolog. Dan. Para^ page 35.
most confident, that he was first in birth, as his name is expressed in
enumeration, and gives his answers to the Chronology objected against it; yet
you may with more probability take the more common and ancient opinion, that
makes Iaphet the elder. Some will have Ham. But I leave that matter; supposing
clearly that Sem being Melchisedek (for, that one man should be denoted by
several names, is no novelty in Scripture) was either the first born or had
the right of it transferd into him by special blessing, and so was (...), as
Philo In lib. (...).
calls him, that is, the great High Priest of the greatest God. For the place
of his Kingdom, Salem; it is taken by Epist. ad ^uagr. tom. 4.
S. Hierom (as he learned from some Jews) and from him by In Epist. ad Ebr.
cap. 7.2.
S. Ambrose, Eucherius, Primasius, and others that this Salem is that which
seated on this side of Jordan, is some LXXX. miles distant from the plain of
Mamre where Abraham lived, and retains its name in the Story Johan. cap. 3.23.
of John's Baptism. and they say that the relics of Melchisedeks Palace were
there to be then seen. But the more common opinion of Christians in S. Hieroms
time, was as now also of greatest Divines, that Salem here and Jerusalem were
the same. Salem nostri omnes, says he and others of that age that follow him,
arbitrantur esse Jerusalem. but himself was not of that mind, having as he
says, learned the contrary. But also, with those old Christians, Josephus and
some later Vide Midras Tehillim, apud Gaelatin. de Arcanis lib. 3. cap. 9.
Jews expressly agree. and a good character of the truth of their opinion is in
the holy Text. For, there the Kings Dale, whence the King of Sodom came out to
meet Abraham in his return is Genes. 14.17.
rememberd, as if it were close by where Melchisedek was. Now it is thought
certainly that the place of Absalons Pillar, that is, the Kings Dale spoken of
in 2. Sam. 18.18.
Samuel, is no other then a Valley, which being hard by Jerusalem, is known to
our age from Absalons name, where yet, they Bredenbach. in Peregr. 14. Iulij.
say, he has a moniment, and such as pass by, use to cast stones at it in
detestation of his disobedience. and also the very place where Melchisedek gave
Abraham the Bread and Wine, is, they say, yet known on Mount Villamont des
Voyagez liu 2. Chap. 13. and 19.
Caluarie. But hitherto brifly of these two adjuncts of Abraham's Tithing.
neither supposd I but that many which think of it for argument either way,
would desire some satisfaction in them.

Of the II. Chapter.
Hitherto could I never see any Christian that has fully taught what was
considerable in the general payment of Tithes among the Jews. The Noble and
most learned Ios. Scaliger, did not every way enough accuratly teach it,
although in a single Treatise he purposely undertook it. How sufficiently among
us, others do that slouthfully and ignorantly (without his help) while yet
their end is to write of Tithes, talk of a third Tithe here, and a fourth
Tithe, and indeed they know not what Tithe, let him judge that shall hence know
their error. This last spring Martin the Title page of Drusius his Observations
upon Iosuah, and some other parts of the old Testament, a new discourse, De
Decimis Mosaciis, written by Sixtinus ab Amama Professor of Ebrew in Franeker,
was promised; but I could never yet see any such thing ioind with that of
Drusius or otherwise published. What we have of them is as the great Doctors of
the Jews have delivered in the Talmud, and their later Comments; which are
testimonies beyond exception, for the practice or historical part. For that
in. 6. of (...), out of Epiphanius; I rather think indeed that it denotes only
a paying of Tithe, not a Tithing of what was already tithed. It is well known
that the language of the Greek Fathers, especially of about his time, is
frequently mixed with phrases of the Septuagint. now they Genes. 28. vlt. Deuteronomy.
26.12.
have (...) and (...), for nothing but to pay a Tithe, which agrees somewhat
with the Ebrew fashion of expression. and as they, so Epiphanius without doubt
understood it. howeuer some of great Names are of another mind. But to what is
there touched for the forwardness of payment of first Fruits among them, I here
add out of Lib. (...).
Philo (who lived under the time of the second Temple, and spoke of his own
knowledge) that they were paid in such abundance, (...), that is, that even
from the abundance only of first Fruits, heave Offerings, or Therumahs, which
were paid by the owner immediately to the Priests, there was not a Priest in the
XXIV. courses of them (so the Priests or Posterity of Eleazer and Ithamar were
divided 1. Paralip. 24.4.
by King David) but might be accounted a very rich or largely furnished man. and
he tells us further that the Jews were so ready in paying them, that (...),
that is, They prevented the Officers demanding them, paid them before they were
due by Law, and as if they had rather taken a benefit then given any, both
sexes of their own most forward readiness in every first fruit season brought
them in with such courtesy and thanksgiving as is beyond all expression. All
which is spoken only of first Fruits and Therumahs, not of Tithes, as it is
falsely in the Latin translation; where (...) alone is ignorantly understood for
Tithes paid by the Laity to the Priests; the truth being that the Laity paid
only first Fruits, not Tithes, immediately to the Priests, but only to the
Leuits, that is, those which were, as Philo says, (...), that is, in the
second rank, and (...), or as Wardeins, Huishers, Singers, and other such
Ministers. And the Leuits paid the Tithe of their Tithe to their Priests, who
so through the Leuits receiud Tithes out of the possessions of the Laity, as
also the holy Author to the Ebrews is interpreted, where he says, That those of
the sons of Leui that had receiud the Priesthood, had a commandment to take
Tithes of the people according to the Law. For the posterity of Aaron that had
the Priesthood, receiud none from the people, but immediately and through the
Leuits. In the same holy Epistle their continuance of payment of Tithes (which
as long as their Priesthood de facto, and the politic form of government,
instituted by the Almighty, continued, was even ex conscientia to be
performed, as some Videsis Suarez de L^gibus lib. 9. cap. 19. 16.
teach) is also manifested after Philo's time. The Jews are told in it, that
here men that die receive Tithes, but there he of whom it is witnessed that he
lives. That here, being plainly referd to the use of the Jews (to whom the
Epistle was sent) under the second Temple. So Primasius an old African Father
interprets it. Hic inquit, says he, hoc est in praesenti seculo, vel in Templo
quod adhuc stabat, Morientes homines, filij videlicet Leui qui mortales ac
moribundi sunt, Decimas accipiunt. But about this time also it appears in
Story that Tithes were still paid by the Leuits to the Priests, which supposes
the peoples payment to the Leuits. Remember that of Fl. Josephus Archaelog.
lib. 20. cap. 6.
where he tells, that when Foelix was Lieutenant of Judea, such a tumult and
sedition happend twixt the high Priests ((...)) and the rest of the Priests,
and the chiefest of the Laity* that the high Priests to satisfy their malice
upon the rest of the Priests, violently took away the Tithes that were kept in
Granges and Barnes for their maintenance, and in so much wronged them that some
of the poorest of them even died for want. This was about the beginning of
Nero; and Eccles. Hist. lib. 2 cap. 20.
Euschius and Lib. 2. Eccles. cap. 26.
Nicephorus relating it from Josephus, refer it to him. although Ruffinus in
his translation of Eusebius rather place it under Claudius. but under both,
Foelix was Lieutenant. By the way you may note that in Nero's time, diverse of
the Priests were grown much poorer then they had been lately before; if Philo
be to be credited, who lived also but little before Nero's Empire. It was very
hard with some of them (it seems) that the taking away their Tithes only
should starve them. Those high Priests here spoken of, are such as were the
chiefest of the XXIV. Orders. for 1. Paralip. 24 4.5
so also were the Priests divided. There was never but one high Priest
properly, and that according to the first institution. but others that had a
supremacy among those orders, were also called so, as both here, and in Vide
D. Matthew. 20.57. and 59.
holy Writ. and they were, to the high Priest, as the (...) Videsis Scalig. in
Prologom. ad Chronic. Eusebij.
in the Eastern Patriarchats which are as Suffragans to exercise the Patriarchs
office in his absence, or as the Bishop-Cardinals in Rome. and the first and
chiefest of these high Priests in the plural number, was as a designed
successor to him that properly bare that name, and was his Prime Vicar, chief
Suffragan, or the second Priest, as 2. Reg. c. 25.18.
Zephaniah was to Seraiah, and as Annas to Caiphas. For so the most learned
understand that of them two, being high Priests together in the Gospel. but
this by the way. yet who knows it not, may soon stumble at the Story; and, if
not admonisht, trouble himself with as good a disquisition about it, as that
Abbot Paschas. Ratb^rt. Abbas C^rbie^s. in Matthew. lib. 10. page 591.
Paschasius long since fell into about what follows out of Saint Matthew, in
the 7.. where the strict payment of Tithes used among the Scribes and Pharisees
is spoken of. He being too ignorant of the particulars of the Jewish state,
doubted much how the Scribes and Pharisees should so pay their Tithes, Cum ipsi
(as his words are) Sacerdotes erant and Leuitae qui magis accipiebant Decimas a
populo quam darent. But I wonder what made him so much as dream so. indeed he
answers himself also. But plainly the Scribes and Pharisees, as known by that
name only, had no more reference to the Tribe of Leui then to any other of the
Twelve. Children in the holy Text or the Jewish story, know it.

That general rule of their Lawiers in the same. taken out of Rabbi
Ben-Maimon, is first in their Seder Zeraim Massee. Maighsh^ Perek. 1.. 1.
Talmud, where also the Gemara, that is, the following opinions of their
Doctors, has many special cases of this or that fruit or increase of the
earth; but often little to the purpose. one thing their Misnah or Text adds
further to that rule; that is, whatsoever fruit or herb is fit to be eaten,
both while it is young or new, as also when it is a full growth, must pay Tithes
as well when it is young, as at full growth. but if while it be young it be not
fit to be eaten, (...) that is, it is not subject to tithe until it be come
fit to be eaten. That in. 8. of them that take the profits of Land among the
Samaritans, or in Aram, that is, Syria, must be understood of a Jew dwelling
among them, and tilling the Land there. For regularly if the fruits of Lands in
Syria were taken by a Jew, residing still in his own Country, he was to pay
Talmud. d^ct. Seder. Mass. Demas Perec. 6. and Mass^^. Maighsh. Perek. 5. 5.
Tithe of them.

Touching their Tithing after the second Temple destroyed; although for want of
a Temple and a Priesthood at this day, they Tithe not legally, yet among their
Aphorisms both divine and moral, they Pirki. Aboth. cap. 3. and notae
adiectae.
tell us, that as the Masoreth is the defense of the Law, so (...) maighsheroth
seag laighsher, that is, Tithes paid are the defense of riches. Whereupon one
notes, that at this day qui religiosiores sunt inter Iudaeos, loco Decimarum,
eleemosynam pendunt de omnibus Lucris; december aureos de centum, centum de mill
etc. But howeuer the deuouter of them may give such alms, it is plain that
their Legal Tithing has now no place among them for want of a sufficient
Priesthood and Temple or Tabernacle. yet without doubt, most of them have long
since exspected a Videsis Galatin. de Arcanis* lib. 5. cap 9.
third Temple. otherwise why were they so careful to have their Laws and
special cases of first Fruits and Tithing, so copiously delivered in five
whole Massecheths of their Talmud, or body of their Civil and Canon Law, which
was, many years after the destruction of the second Temple, made for the
direction of the dispersed of their Nation?

Now, me thinks, he that argues for Tithes from the Mosaicall Laws of Tithing
had need more specially, then any I have yet seen has near done, examine which
of the two kinds are due in the Evangelical Priesthood. Why not the second
as well as the first? and further consider also how the payment of Tithes from
the Laity to the Priests of the Gospel, succeeds to the payment from the
Leuits to the sons of Aaron. But these considerations can only be, where the
knowledge of fact precedes, for without exact Distinction of their several
Tithes, any argument drawn from them, may soon be found a gross fallacy, that
may both deceive him which makes it and those whom he teaches. Let the
ingenuous Reader think of it.

But one thing more here by the way. So much either ignorance or neglect in the
disquisition of what belongs to the Tithes of the Jews, has possessed some great
names, that, touching the proportion of the Tithes and the Receivers, they have
rested fairly satisfied in this; that the Leuits being one of the twelve
Tribes, had the Tenths as a competent maintenance to themselves, being near the
Tenth, that is, being the twelfth part of the people; as if Arithmetically the
People and the Revenues had been so divided. But others have long since easily
showed the slightness and falsehood also of this fancy. And clearly, had such a
ne^r proportion of persons and the name of Tenth held; yet examine all that was
paid to the Priests and Leuits in first Fruits and the several prediall Tenths
only, and it will be near a fifth. and we here omit also the Cities and Suburbs
assigned to them, and their other many profits out of Sacrifices, ransoms of
Firstborn, and the like. But for that proportion of number twixt the Tithes,
we have sufficient testimony in holy Numer. cap. 1 and 3.
Writ, that it was far otherwise The able men for arms of the eleven Tribes
were numberd to 603550. and these all of XX. years old at least. the Males of
the Leuits from a month old were severally found to be but 22273. for so are
the particulars of the Families of Gershon, K^ath, and Merari. Here then the
Leuits reckond, with advantage of all their Male children of above a month old,
make not a 1/27. of the rest of the Tribes. had the rest been accounted also
with all their Males of like age, it is probable enough that the Male Leuits
would not have equalled a fiftieth or sixtieth part. as in the one sex of them,
the conjecture may also be in the other. and afterward likewise Vide 1. Sam.
24.9^. Paralipom. 23.3. and 27.
in David's numbering, we see the Leuits of 30. year old were less then 1/32.
part of the rest of Israel and Judah, that were able to bear Arms. Where then
is any thing toward proportion twixt the number of the Priests and Leuits, and
the denomination of the Tithe? Neither is it to any purpose or consequent to
look after any such thing. I rest in this; that it pleased the Almighty so to
enrich that Tribe, which was reserved only for the holy Service in the Temple.
Why he did so, or with what proportion, let them, for me, examine, who dare put
their profane fancies to play with his holy Text, and so most impudently and
wickedly offer to square the one by the other.

Of the III. Chapter.
IN it, largely out of original Autors of Greece and Rome, is showed the use of
Tithing among the Gentiles. far more largely then by any that has yet touched
it. The truth also, wherein too many are either obstinatly or ignorantly blind,
touching that of their supposed general payment, collected out of a corrupted
place in Festus, or rather in Paulus Diaconus, is declared and brought to its
own limits. neither will any judicious Reader doubt of the corruption of Festus
in that place. whosoever knows but the fashion of his writing (which must be
observed in that of his own, after the XI. book, partly yet remaining in his
very words) cannot at all think that Decima quaeque veteres Dijs suis
offerebant, should be deliuerd by him. he is in all other things more curious.
he would not have talked of Dijs generally or quaeque. But it was no such wonder
that Paulus Diaconus, who ignorantly abridged him under Charles the Great,
should say so; being, as the learned acknowledge him, no small enemy to
posterity, in so cutting and maiming him. he was (says In Epist. nuncupat. ad
I. Monlucium.
the noble Scaliger) Homo meo iudicio confidentissimus ac, vti res ipsa decet,
ineptissimus. Had he dealt with Festus, as Festus did before with Verrius
Flaccus, it had been tolerable. though by Festus perhaps we have lost much of
Flaccus, yet he appears judicious enough and careful in what he delivers from
him. But this Paul (being, I confess, otherwise a man of great reading and
knowledge for the time he liud in) has not only here by conjecture, but in
other places most plainly so expressed things of this nature, that is, touching
the Theology or Rites of the Gentiles, that, had we not found some pieces of
Festus himself, posterity might have been perpetually blinded by him. No man
will deny it that observes but his words, Maleuoli, Nixi Dij,
Praeclamitatores, Nauia, and diverse other which, compard with what is left of
Festus whence he had them, appear to be either mistaken or falsely delivered.
But for the Gentiles; it is true, they were very devout in giving of their
yearly increase to the honor of their Deities, according as the Attique Law
receiud, as is thought, from Triptolemus, and seconded by Hermippus apud
Porphyrium (...). lib. 4.
Dra^o, commanded* that is, (...), that is, To honor the Gods with their
fruits. witness enough of the Grecians is found in their Thalysia that was the
feast immediately after Harvest, wherein they spent T^e^^ritus Idy ^. 5. and
ibid. Schol^astes.
much of their fruits in honor of Ceres; in their Haloa about the same time
which was Eustath. ad Iliad. (...).
the like devotion to her and to Bacchus, and in their several Dionysia. all
which spent no small part of their yearly fruits of Wine and Corn; that we may
omit their other feasts of less note that are to this purpose. And among the
Romans, was a like forwardness to consecrat part of their Corn and Wine to
the Gods; as we see in their Sacrima Festus in his^^ voc. ad quem vide Ios.
Scalig. and in Coniect. ad Varro^^ de L.L. lib. 5.
that is the first of their Must, spent in the honor of Bacchus, their Calpar
or the first and best of their Wine, as it was when they first began to draw
it, sacred to Jupiter Dapalis, their Praemessum or Praemetium before Harvest,
their Florifestum after Harvest, both bestowed in honor of Ceres, and the like
more to her and to Jupiter, Ianus, and Bacchus; that we may omit their
Robigalia, Solitaurilia, and the rest of such kind. But all these plainly were
at the liberty of the Owners. and so was it expressly denoted in the rituall
words of sacrificing of their new Wines as Cato de re Rustica cap. 132.
Macte, or Mactus Jupiter hoc vino inferio esto, as if they had said, Be honored
Jupiter with this Wine, which is as much as I can spare thee. for so much is in
substance denoted by inferio, that is, Vino quod insertur. and therefore was
that word Tr^batius a^ud Arn^hium a^uersus Gentes lib. 7.
added because all the rest might be free from Religion after this were so
severally sacrificed. For until the Sacrifice, all the Wine remaind so sacred
that it might not lawfully be meddled with for common use. But the owner might
^y such arbitrarie giving his Inferium, discharge it of being any more sacred.
and thereupon says Arnobius, jesting at their Ceremonies, Mactus hoc vino
inserio esto quid est aliud quam dicere, tantum esto mactus quantum volo;
tantum amplificatus quantum iubeo; tantum honoris assumito quantum te habere
decerno, and verborum circumscriptione definio. O Deorum sublimitas praepotens
etc. quae per vnius formidinem verbi ab immodicis vini cupiditatibus arcetur!
Among all these feasts not any mention is of a Tenth or any certain part. But
the Tenth came sometimes only at the will of him that had good fortune or post
rem been gestam, as Ad Aene^d. 8. commate 30.
Seruius his words are. So Hersennius who had been a Piper all his youth, and
doubting the success of that Trade, fell thence to be a Merchant, and then re
been gesta Decimam Herculi dicauit. That consecrating use to Hercules was most
usually made with solemnity at that Ara Maxima, near the Forum Boarium or the
Ox-market, upon which, some Halicarnass. (...). ^.
say, but fabulously enough (as the rest of these particulars are deliuerd)
that Hercules himself first spent the Tenth of what he took from Cacus, in a
jolly Feast, with Euander and the rest that honored him for it. and upon that
Altar, says Halycarnasseus, (...), that is, Tithes are there frequently
offered by vow. But the payment of that vow was commonly in feasts made in
honor of him; and those feasts were, it seems, in ancienter time, until the
Vow was performd, celebrated within every ten days by such as were so
religious to him. and in that division of time, for the more conuenience of
entertainment, his Tithe was merrily spent; and the guests always sent home
crowned with Baies in honor of him. So I understand that of Varro Apud Macrobium
Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 11.
when he tells us, Maiores solitos Decimam Herculi vouere, nec december dies
intermittere quin pollucerent ac populum (...) cum corona laurea dimitterent
cubitum. and of this kind of Feasts were those Dinners of Orestes, spoken of in
De O^ficiis lib. 2.
Cicero. Oresti nuper prandia in semitis Decumae nomine magno honori fuerunt.
It seems their vow both of Gain and of Spoils of War, was made to him
chiefly as he was their God of War or of Defense. For it is clear not only in
the old Roman Divinity or Mythologie, that Hercules specially was accounted
Mars (as is plain by their Moniments, which show that the institution of Sacra
Saliaria were indifferent to Hercules or Mars, and made to one Deity under
those two names) but also by the old Astronomy wherein the Planet Mars was
likewise called Plin. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Hercules, and that not only by the Chaldaeans (as Macrobius too rashly
affirms) but also by the Egyptians, from whom the knowledge of the Heavens
came into Europe. For howsoever it be noted out of an old Glossarie at the end
of that most learned work of the noble Scaliger upon Manilius, that Mars was
called among the Egyptians (...) suppose the Northern Egyptians about
Alexandria, where they spoke Greek before the Roman Empire and afterward) and
although Vettius Valon* Antioch lib. 6. Antholog. Ms. Sed verba eius reperuntur
in Syntag^^. 1. De Dits Syrit cap. 6.
some other old testimony, say they, styled him (...) (not (...)) yet Achilles
Statius that was In Arati Phanomena.
an Egyptian says expressly, that Pyrois is the Greek name of Mars, and that
in Egypt he was called the star of Hercules. So the Author of that (...),
attributed to Aristotle; (...), that is, Pyrois being called both Hercules and
Mars; which Apulleius, because Hercules was not so common a name for it, thus
turns, Quem multi Herculis, plures Martis stellam vocant. and his common titles
in old Inscriptions justify the same. Inuicto, Victori, Defensori, Pollenti,
and such more are frequently his additions, being proper to Mars. and under
some such Title was he worshipped almost in every City of Halicarnass. (...).
Italy. and I would Varro had rather here sought the cause of his title of
Victor then in that ridiculous reason which he brings, Apud Seruium ad Aen^id
8. comm. 30.
Quod omne genus animalium decies vicerit. had he said that therefore also the
Tithe was given him because of Decies, he had spoken as probably and as wisely.
Indeed it is a wonder to see a man of that abstruse learning and great
abilities, that Togatorum Doctissimus, to be so childish as he often is, in
unhappily troubling himself about deriuations. But of Hercules, enough. Beside
that of the maritime Pelasgi, in. 1. the other of them that seated themselves
further into the Land in Vmbria, being oppressed with a sterile year, vowed the
Tenth, (...) Myrfilus L^^bius apud Halicarnass. (...). citatur Historia etiam
apud Eusebium in (...).
(...) that is, The Tithe of all that should increase to them, to Jupiter,
Apollo, and the Cabiri. and this they paid also. but they were admonisht by
Apollos Oracle, that their vow was not performd until they had sacrificed also
the Tithe of their children. which was done also. But now see (when you truly
know the ancient Tithing among the Gentiles) how well they conclude here that
draw arguments from the general Law of Nature or Nations, as if by that Law
any such use of payment of Tithes had been established among them, as was
continual or compulsorie.

Of the IV. Chapter.
THat which succeeds is only of Christian Practice, Laws, and Opinion. Which,
any man that sees but the course of our division, may easily know; though he
were as perverse as he was that to confute me in assertion here of no proof of
payment of Tithes, till toward the end of the first CCCC. years, confidently
brought that Text of the holy Author to the Ebrews, Ad Ebraeos cap. 7.8.
Here men that die, receive Tithes: and was ready to sing decidit in casses
etc. as if that had proved a payment in the Apostles time. indeed it proves a
payment among the Ebrews or Jews then, and also is seconded by other authority
before touched. but any reference there had to a^ Christian practice of
Tithing, I suppose no man will affirm that is of a sound brain, and uses holy
Writ with due reverence. But my application of some passages in S. Cyprian in.
1. here are found fault withal; in that I understand not hi^ mention of the
word Decimae to be a note of payment of Tithes in his age. Indeed I did not
think that any man which understood Cyprian, with the use of his time in making
up the Ecclesiastique Tresure, would have therein taxed me. Neither have I given
his words alone and then my own Gloss (as many have done too often, and that
in things of the nature of this subject, and so have deceiud their credulous
Readers) but I have carefully and shortly expressed also the occasion of his
passages; and so, that an understanding Reader may collect as much out of them
as he might do if he had the whole context of Cyprian by him. If I have errd in
the interpretation, it is but my single error and theirs that dare give
authority here to my judgment. whoeuer can think otherwise by Cyprians words,
if he saw him, may equally do so by my relation. howeuer then, I impose not on
any Reader. But for that second place of his out of his De Vnitate Ecclesiae;
observe his words more fully. Thus they are, Domos tunc and fundos venundabant
and, thesauros sibi in coelo reponentes, distribuenda in vsus indigentium
pretia Apostolis offerebant. At nunc patrimonio nec Decimas damus; and cum
vendere iubeat Dominus emimus potius and augemus. So far is this from
denoting any payment of Tenths of annual increase (which is the Tithe we
enquire after) that indeed no such Tenth seems here to be understood in the
mention of Decimae. he speaks of them which sold their whole estates in the
Apostles times. but now, says he, we give not the Tenths of our patrimonies.
that is, we give not the Tenth part of what devout Christians then did, but in
stead of selling for devotion, we buy and increase our estates. What other
Tenth is here spoken of then the tenth part of every man's patrimony or estate?
and what has that to do with the tenth of Annual increase only? and, for any
use of payment in this time: I was not so bold to make the negative, that no
Tithes were paid, but that it could not be proved that any were. He that can
show me aught omitted that might prove it, shall deserve and have thanks of me.
In the mean time further to justify what I affirm, take this of Epiphanius
Bishop of Constance in Cyprus, that about the year CCC.LXXX. wrote against the
Heresies of the primitive times. when he Hares^ 50.
tells us of the Tessaresdecatitae, or those which thought the holy Easter must
be kept on the fourteenth Moon, according to the Law given to the Jews for
their Passover, and that because they apprehended that the keeping it
otherwise was subject to the curse of the Law; he says, that (...), that is,
they do all things or agree generally with the Church, saving that they were
too much herein addicted to the Iew^sh custom. and in his argument against
them, he shows, that the curse has not reference only to the Passover, but
also to Circumcision, to Tithes ((...)) to Offerings. Wherefore (as he goes on)
if they escape one curse, by keeping their Easter according to the Law of the
Passover, they thrust themselves into many other. For (says he) they shall
find them also cursed that are not Circumcised, and them cursed that pay not
Tithes, and them cursed that offer not at Jerusalem. Let any man now consider
if this Bishop that was least unacquainted with the customs of the Christian
Church, understood not clearly that no necessary or known use of payment, was
among Christians in his time, of Tithes, no more then of Circumcision, or
offering at Jerusalem. Does he not plainly reckon it as a thing not only not in
Christian use, but even equals it with what was certainly abrogated? is not
his Objection shortly thus? Why do you not observe Circumcision and Tithing,
and Offerings also at Jerusalem, which are all subject to the like curse? and
because some kind of Offerings indeed were in use among Christians, therefore
in the Objection he prouidently ties them to Jerusalem. But of Tithing he
speaks as generally as of Circumcision. Observe his own context, which I here
give, that the able Readers judgment may be free. (...), that is, So that if
they avoid one curse, they fall under many other. For such shall be also found
accursed as are uncircumcised, such accursed as Tithe not. and they a^e also
accursed (in the old Law) that offer not at Jerusalem. I confess, this may
perhaps seem not to extend to the African Church (wherein S. Cyprian and S.
Augustine lived) that was far remote from Epiphanius, being of the Greek
Eastern Church* and so not to sufficiently prove that in those times no payment
was in use there. The like perhaps may be obuiously thought of in referring it
to the Western Church of Europe. But it seems that the African, European, and
Eastern Greek Churches of those times, had little or no difference twixt them in
the settled policy for their maintenance. And for the African; howeuer out of
S. Augustines Sermons it may be collected, that a payment soon afterward was
there in use, yet herein both the Greek Eastern, and the African Churches are
specially so like each other, that neither in the Counsels or Canons of the
one or the other of them, any Law at all is found for payment or ordaining any
thing touching Tithes; nor as I remember, does the name of Tithes once occur
in them, or in Photius his Nomocanon, or in Zonaras, or Balsam^^, the chief
Canonists that writ on the Eastern Canons. I mean here the Canons of the Greek
Church of credit; not including those called the Apostles Constitutions equally
belonging to all Churches (if under that name to any) of which more presently.
But it had been little to the purpose indeed to have had Tithes of Annual
increase paid, while that most bountiful devotion of good Christians continued
in frequent Offerings, both of lands and goods to such large value, as you see
expressed in that of the Governor of Rome to S. Laurence (being Archdeacon to
Pope Xistus the second) in the ninth persecution under Decius. He tells him
Apud Prudentium (...), hymn. 2.
that the common fame was that the Christians did often Offerre, fundis
venditis,
Sestertiorum millia.
And that Addicta auorum praedia
Foedis sub auctionibus,
Success^r exhaeres gemit
Sanctis egens parentibus.
Et summa pietas creditur,
Nudare dulces liberos.
no doubt can be but that the Governor is here made to speak somewhat beyond
the truth. But also questionless the liberal devotion of the time was very
exceeding in offerings.

But, for Constitutions of this age; lest we should seem to omit any thing
that bears the name of one, although merely supposititious, we shall here add
more to that cited in the 4.. out of the old Clementines attributed to the
Apostles. but all will be of equal credit. and were it not for the inequality
of Readers, none of it indeed deserved a place here. In those Clementines, a
further command is, to give (...). and (...).
all thy Tithes to the Orphan, to the Widow, to the Poor, and to the Stranger.
And afterward some Constitutions attributed to S. Matthew are inserted; wherein
first is ordained the formal consecration of Oil and Water, that may have
power to heal sick men, to cast out Devils, and the like, with (...), that
is, I Matthew ordain. and then (...) (...), that is, I further ordain, that
all first fruits be brought to to the Bishop, and to the Priests, and to the
Deacons for their maintenance. and that all Tithes be offered for the
maintenance of the rest of the Clergy, and of Virgins, and of Widows, and of
poor People. but here is no command of Tithes to be given to the Priests for
their use; but only for maintenance of the less Orders of the Clergy and of
the Poor. and therein these Constitutions still agree with themselves. But, for
the authority of them; take the judgment of our Church, and I think you shall
have a general consent, in this, that they are not of near the Apostles time,
but counterfaits of far later age. and great men in the Church of Rome account
them no otherwise, howsoever Turrian (that first published them in Greek out of
three old copies, as he says) would needs persuade the World that they are
genuine, Apostolic, and collected by Pope Clement the first. But I would then
he had also persuaded us that the Apostles had taught that the Birth of our
Savior or Christmas day, was to be celebrated on the XXV. day of December, as
in this suspisititious Lib. 5. Canon. 13.
Clement is affirmed. The learned know that until about CCCC. years after
Christ, that is till S. Chrysostomes time, that day Vide Clement. Alex. Strom.
(...). Epiphan. Haeres. 51. and D. Chrysostom. hom. (...).
was not settled but variously observed in the Eastern Church, which should
have had special notice of the Apostolic Canons. and S. Chrysostom then
learned the time of the XXV. of December (which yet, most think not to be the
exact time) from the Western or Latin Church. It is likely that till then, the
Apostles Constitutions had slept? Besides, we see, that Dionysius that great
Patriarch of Alexandria, although those of his See and himself were most
curious in the determinations of Ecclesiastique times, could not find whence
clearly to resolve that question to Basilides Bishop of Pentapolis, Apud Th.
Balsamon Ms. in Bibl. Patrij Iunij.
(...), that is, At what hour after the last Saturday of Lent they should
leave of that strictness Videsis (si hanc rem obiter vellis explicationem)
Synod. 6. in Trullo Canon. 99. and ibid* and ad hanc Dio^ysii Epistolam,
Theodorum Balsamonem, and Eusebius. lib. 5. Eccl. hist. c. 23* etc.
of Fasting. in joy of the Resurrection or at what hour of Easter day, or the
feast of the Resurrection should begin. Basilides tells him, some think at the
Cocks-crowing toward the morning, some at the Sater-day evening. and Dionysius
acknowledges that difference in use. But to set a certain hour of it, he
answers him, is (...), that is, both hard and without sufficient ground. and
then falls to examine it by the holy History of the time of the Resurrection.
But had these Constitutions been then in authority, clearly Dionysius might
soon have resolud the question. for in them it Lib* 5. Can* 18. and 19.
is determined, that this strict fasting should be kept, but (...), that is,
until the time of Cock-crowing. This learned Patriarch (his Greek Epistle
never yet published in Greek, with Balsamon upon him, was communicated to me by
that most learned and courteous Mr. Patrik Young, in the rest of Balsamon Ms.)
lived about CC. years after the supposed time of the collection of these
Constitutions, and surely had used them if they had then at all been, and
deserved credit. and who would have made a controversy about the holding of
Easter, that had in those elder times found it so established as it is in those
Constitutions. But it is not difficult to conjecture out of what kind of shop
they came, if you but note the supremacy of all power Lib. 2. Canon. 34.
so arrogated in them to the Clergy. the Autors of them command that Priests
be honored as Kings and have tribute paid them as Kings, and are so bold as to
apply that in 1. Sam cap. 8.
Samuel, touching what a King would do in taking from his Subjects, to the
power of Bishops, as if they should do so. and they affirm it, as much more
reasonable, that Bishops should do so; and ordain also with (...), that is, We
constitut, the like wholly (...), that is, touching Bishops, as there, they
say, is ordaind (...), that is, touching Kings. which well agrees also with
their reckoning up of the ten Commandments, and making the Tenth to be Lib. 2.
Can. 36.
(...), that is, Thou shall not appear empty before the Priest. He that made
these words to fill the place of one of the ten Commandments, seems not to
talk like one of the Apostles. A thousand things more might be found to
disprove the authority that some attribute to these Canons. and the answer to
Turrians reasons for maintenance of them, are obuious enough. For my part, I
think confidently that most of them, if not all, are hardly M. years old; and
therefore no sufficient cause is, why they should have place of credit in any
part of our Division, as they bear the name of Canons or Constitutions. For if
they were in truth made so long after those whose names give them all their
authority, they are all one, for Constitutions to be relied on, as if they had
been but of yesterday. I only touched part of them in this first CCCC. years, as
they were in the Latin; the Greek being neither then by me nor much material;
although some passages in other translations and to this purpose, if not
examind by the Greek, may soon deceive a Reader of too ready a faith. For one
of those other Canons attributed also to the Apostles as Autors, and to this
Clement as Collector, is translated, In Zonara. edito a l. Quintin^ Ca^. 4.
Aliorum Decimae primitiaeue fructuum omnium mittantur Episcopo ac Presbyteris,
and non super Altar, the Greek that is turned and set by the Latin in the same
Volume, having not a syllable of Tithes, but speaks only thus. (...), that is,
Let all other fruit (being first fruits) be sent home to the Bishop and to the
Priests, but not brought to the Altar. the meaning being that only first fruits
of new grapes before Vintage-time, or of young herbs fit to be eaten, or such
like (comprehended under the words (...) in the next Canon before) should be
brought to the Church and so are the expositions of Zonaras and Theodore
Balsamon, two great Canonists of the Eastern Church.

Of the V. Chapter.
THose Abbots spoken of in the 1.. were not of the ministering Clergy properly
taken; but only principal Governors of such as had chosen a separated and
single life; such as are in good number found in Pailadius his Lausiaca
Historia, Cassimus, and the like more. For that of giving Tithes to the use of
the Poor; it seems it must be understood that they were most commonly given
into the hands of those Abbots or some of the Clergy for their use. and that
they dispensed them. which may be collected out of the testimonies of that age
wherein the goods and treasure of the Church is accounted but as the Poors
chiefly in property. Beside those attributes of Tithes and other things
consecrated, as tributa egentium animarum, and patrimonia pauperum, and the
like, an obseruable admonition is, to this purpose, found in Isidore Pelusiota
(that liud about the beginning of these CCCC. years) made to one Maro a Priest
(whom he often reprehends) but specially Lib. 1. Epist. 269 and vide ibid. 425.
for not leaving the goods of the Church and of the Poor (that is, what was
offered in Tithes, Rents, and other bounties) to be kept only by the OEconomus
or Dispenser, or Steward (who in those times receiud them for the Bishop, and
dispensed them by direction of him and his Clergy) but carried them home to
his own house. (...) (says he) (...), that is, Leave off this wicked course.
For the Dispenser has his name from his Dispensing to the Poor what is theirs;
as the goods of the Church are properly. So S. Basile In Epist. 229. edit.
nuper a V. Cl. R. Montacutto.
styles the goods and revenue of the Church, (...), and the Greek Lawiers call
them generally Balsamon and Zonaras* ad Can. Apost. 59. and vi^e de hac re
^nonymu^ de recuperat. Tetra Sancta cap. 14. in vol. Gesta Dei per Francos
dicto.
(...) or provision for the Poor. And hence is it that diverse Schoolmen to and
fro dispute that question, whether the dominion or property of the revenue of
the Church be in the Clergy; and whether what they give to the Poor be due
debilo Iustitiae, or debito Claritatis.

I supposed enough had been said in. 3. to convince the common error of them,
which derive Feudall Tithes from the Clergy of the time of Charles Martell, or
affirm any common payment of them then in practice. But it is a hard task to
teach obstinat ignorance. Let that of Eucherius his vision be as it will (which
yet cannot stand with the time of his death, calculated according to the story
that remains of him; howeuer indeed Vide Adrenald. lib 1. de Mir^s. S.
Benedicto cap. 14. and Flo^oard Rhem. hist lib. ^ cap. 12. and Capitular.
exhibit Lutour 2 Imper post Ca^onem 59. c. 10 q. 1. edit. Gregoriana.
very ancient Autors help to justify it) it still rests certain that the
Constitutions of his time, which have reference to the many sacrileges
committed by him and others, upon Monasteries, Bishopriques, and the rest of
the Demesnes of the Clergy, never spoke word of Tithes* and with that which is
there noted in the margin, observe the several transcripts of that Law of
Restitution, made in the Synod or Diet at Ratisbon, held under Caroloman in
DCC.XLII. as it is in Constit. Imperial. tom. 1. page 15.
Melchior Goldastus. in his first Volume he gives it thus, Decimas, bonae
Ecclesiastica occupata a prophanis restitu^mus. as indeed both Annal. Boi^rum
lib. 1. page 179. edit. B^s. a. d. 1615.
Auentin and the Centur. 8. cap. 7. and 9.
Centuries have it also literally before him; both out of corrupted Copies. But
afterward the diligent Goldastus, finding a better Copy, entirely again
publishes the Laws of that Synod nearer the original; and this one Tom. 3.
page 117.
thus: Fraudatas pecunias Ecclesiarum Ecclesijs restituimus. Some other Copies
having fundatas. but none, of any authority, Decimas. pecunia being only their
wealth or estate in Lands; as in more ancient time pecunia denoted chiefly
estate in cattle, and then money, as now it does. I know also it had a
signification that included offerings Festus Pauli in Pecunia and ib. Scalig.
of fruits and corn, and so might be drawn to denote Tithes offered. but that
signification was of rare use, and only among the Gentiles. Neither (as I
think with some confidence) can any man show me such use of the word in any
Christian Author of the ancients. And the very decree of Thierry King of France,
and that Charles Martell the Maire du Maison, of the year Goldast. tom, 3.
page 648.
DCC.XXX. touching the taking from the Clergy their possessions, Vt
subueniatur necessitatibus publicis and solatijs militum pro Dei Ecclesia, and
bono statu Reipub. and vniuscuiusque propria pace pugnantium, as the words of
it are, and that of Caroloman Idem tom. eod. page 118.
in DCC.XLIII. speak not a word of Tithes, but only of terrae and Casatae
(which were the Ecclesialis pecunia) and the small Rents to be reserud to the
Church upon leases made of them, which is, it seems, understood in the more
common giving of them into Lay hands so much spoken of by Flodoard. that is,
Lay men had the benefit of them by having Leases of them at small Rents without
Fines. Neither is any other thing spoken of in the Post. c. 59. c. 16. q 1.
edit. Gregor^
Capitularie exhibited by the Bishops of the Provinces of Rhemes and Rhosne, to
the Emperor Jews the second. When I see any testimony near Martells time that
so may justify the receiud tale of his profaning of Tithes as I may change my
mind. But seeing so much of his sacrileges left in the story of near his age,
and that not a syllable touching such Tithes as we here enquire after, nor any
thing else that has reference to the common payment of them, is found in the
Laws made under him, I still remain confident in what I have admonished; and I
think so will every man else that has an impartial eye of judgment. But, for
that which I have here noted touching Casata; perhaps Casata should rather have
been interpreted a Mesuage, or dwelling house. For it appears in that
Capitularie exhibited to the Emperor Jews, and in some other testimony of
that Vide Goldast. tom. 3. page 64^.
time, that the reseruations ad restaurationem terrarum (which may be
satisfaction given by the Lessees of the Clergy, in Rents of land) were Nonae
and Decimae (where Decimae have not to do with payment of Tithes out of mere
lay Fees, but only were receiud by reservation) and out of every Casata xijd.
So it may be that Casata is no quantity of Land there, as I have coniecturd,
but a house only. if it be, you see whence I was deceiud. pardon me. perhaps it
was an error. I willingly acknowledge so much upon this Reuiew. I acknowledge
it, if that Capitularie of the Bishops and the other testimony be therein
authentic. I somewhat doubt them, because the most known and certain Laws of
Martells time speak only of xijd. to be serud out of every Casata, and the
Nonae and Decimae grow not elsewhere into use till after the beginning of the
French Empire. and if nothing but Casatae were spoken of, there were reason
enough why they should be taken for Land. But the Nonae and Decimae in those
autorities are referd to Land, and the xijd. only to Casatae.

That in the 4.. of the Tithe of time in Lent out of S. Gregory, is not easily
perhaps apprehended by every Reader without a little more explication. The
Sundaies as they were exempt out of the number of days, so were they from the
fasting of Lent, thence comes his conceit of the Tithe of Time in XXXVI. days,
which is 1/10. of CCC.LXV. so Fractions be omitted. and to make up forty which
is expressed in Quadragesima, the known name for Lent; the four days preceding
Quadragesima Sunday, are to be added. this was the intent of that fancy. But
how slight and nothing to the purpose, that observation of the Tenth of Time
is (howeuer the Canonists, as sworn to their Text, make of it) is easily seen,
not only in the abusd liberty of calculation of it, but also by the customs
and Laws of both Churches the West and East in their various limits of this
time of fasting. Popes Telesphorus. they Anastasius in vita eius. and vide
Baronium sub ann. 154. and Polydor. de Invent. rer lib. 6. cap. 3.
say, made it VII. Weeks. and other diversities has it had in the Western
Church. and the Eastern church exempted Synod. 6. in Tull. Can. 55. and videsis
etiam Constit. Apostolorum dictas lib. 5. Can. 13.15. and 18. and Consule
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 26. and Socratem Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap.
81.
both Saterdaies and Sundaies from fasting through all Lent, except only the
Saturday that next preceded Easter Sunday. as also they fasted not on the day
of the Annunciation. What regard had they then, think you, to the Tithe of Time?

Of the VI. Chapter.
THe practice of payment in the third CCCC. years; was Parochially observed in
some Praeter ea quae ad hanc rem. 1.2. and 3 habemus Videsis Hinc maru^ in
opere Capitum 55. ad Laud Episcop. cap. 1. and Rabanum apud Centuriatores cent.
9. cap. 7. de iureiurando quod exigebatur nonnunquam de decimis rite solutis.
places, but especially by Clergy men, to Clergy men, who (with such as were
reputed among them) subjected themselves more to their Canons then the Laity
could be brought to do. But it seems somewhat plain by the many examples of
Arbitrarie Consecrations to Monasteries and other Churches, related in. 2.
(whereto join also the English practice in the XI. Chapter, and the Apud
Auentin. Annal. Bae^rum lib. 6. page 379. edit. Bas. 1615.
Charter of Henry the eighth, Duke of Bauiere, of the Tithes of Rannesh^fen,
given to the Church of S. Pancrace) that the payment of them Parochially
performd by Lay men, was yet frequently omitted or continued to their own
wills. Whence otherwise could the Founders and Benefactors of Monasteries have
made Tithes part of their endowments? it was not, in these elder times, so much
by giving them Churches (as the most that speak of this, ignorantly think,
telling us that all Tithes came into Monasteries by appropriating of Parish
Churches) as by conueying to hem diverse Tithes alone and newly created. and
after those gifts, Consecrations, or new creations, n^ other Tithes were paid
upon any other right, out of that Land which was so charged with them. But most
of those Consecrations were at one time or another at length confirmd by Popes
and Bishops, and so clearly after enjoyed; which plainly also supposed a former
strength in them. For regularly, Confirmatio ex proprio significatu denotat
firmitatem actus confirmati, as Ad tit. de Dec. c. duaum. number. 11.
Panormitan and other Canonists say, and nihil Innocent. ad dict lec. and tit
de confirm. vt and in^til. c. eum dilecta 4.
iuris noui tribuit, sed tantum vetus confirmat. But it is plain, that after
Parochial right established, that is since about M.CC. when the Canons grew
more powerful and obedience to them became more ready, such confirmations by
bishops and Popes, and such consecrations, creations, or new grants by Lay men,
of Tithes, have bin taken and declared clearly void, as you may see in a decree
Tit. de his qua f. apral. sine etc. c. 7. cum Apostolica.
of Pope Innocent the III* touching Tithes, so granted by a Knight of Berry in
France, and confirmd by the Archbishop, and Tit. de Dec. c. dudum 31.
in another of his about Tithes so given or created to a Church by the King and
Queen of Hungary, and after confirmd by a Pope or two. and who can doubt now
but that all such grants (in regard of prevention of the Parsons right) be not
only void by the practiced Canon Law of this day, but also by the Secular or
common Laws of most States (if not of all where Tithes are paid) in
Christendom. For admit at this day, that Titius grant Decimas suas of such an
Acre to the Parson, Abbot, or Bishop of such a Church, and this be confirmed by
whom you will; The Tithe due from him Parochially is not touched by it. why?
because they are settled iure communi (as the Law is practiced) in the Parish
Rector but in those elder times, such an arbitrarie grant vested the Tithe in
the Church to which it was given, and no other afterward was paid. Why? because
then notwithstanding the Canons, no ius commune, no Parochial right of Tithes
was settled or admitted in the practice of the Laity. And for those ancienter
grants; be not deceiud by such as tell you they were always of Tithes formerly
infeodated from the Church. that has no ground to justify it* neither can any
man at al prove any common course of such Infeodation of Tithes from the Church
into Lay hands, to have been in any State till the later times of Reformation
of Religion in some places, and dissolution of Monasteries. and those two
examples which are in Pope Innocents decrees are expressly of new creations, at
least not of infeodated Tithes, as every Canonist will acknowledge. But clearly
they both were in themselus according to the many other, but they had not the
fortune to be confirmd in such time as the Pope or Clergy usually gave way to
the former practice of arbitrarie Consecration. And doubtless also, after such
time as the Clergy saw that the Canons, made for Parochial right of Tithes,
had gotten force, and that the former creations or grants of Tithes by Lay men
(which were indeed practiced agianst many Canons both Papal and Synodall)
were, by that name of Laymens grants, creations or consecrations, declared
utterly void by the Pope and his Canon Law, although confirmed by whomsoever;
such of them as had originally no other true titles to Tithes so commonly
consecrated by Lay men, subtly enough in the next four hundred years, left
off the pretense of their Lay grantors bounty (especially if the Grantor had
been a common person) and betook themselves only to prescription Extr. tit. de
pr^script. c. 6. and 8.
of XL. years, and to what other times might be allowd to setle a right to them
upon a possession of Tithes. and, by what way, retaind safely what otherwise,
if they had held themselves to the deeds of their Lay grantors and to
Confirmations, had been in danger enough of being recovered from them by Parish
Rectors. So that, when the prescription was good in regard of time and
possession; although the original Title it self were naught; yet because any
other just Title might be pretended to ground the prescription on (which also
was Vide Innocent. 4. ad tit. le pr^script. c. si diligentia and ad tit. de
Decim. c. dudum etc.
not of necessity to be proved incorporeall things) it was not difficult to
have a fair course to maintain their possessions and right of such
consecrated Tithes, as had been possessed so forty years before they were
questioned by Parsons which claimed them iure communi. For against them, such a
prescription by any other Church, Abbey, or Bishoprique or such like is a good
Title. Remember also their erecting of Parochial Chappells within the larger
Territories, out of which they had portions. plainly, the erecting of such
Chappells for Parish Churches (the Cure being there served by some Monk or
Vicar, instituted upon the presentation of them which had the granted portions)
made those portions at length also in many places be reputed for Parochial
Tithes, due in regard of those Parochial Chappells. But what course soever
they took; it seems certain, that the Titles deriud from Lay consecrations were
after this third CCCC. years carefully conceald by the Possessors in such
public records of their revenues, as were of more common and open use in their
legal proceedings at the Canon Law, howeuer they remaind still in their
ancienter and more secret Chartularies. and with us I have very rarely, scarce
at all, seen an Instrument of them in their Lieger books or otherwise, written
in a hand that is later then King John's time. the most are before him. But I
have seen Catalogues of the time of Henry the third and Edward the first, of
many large portions of Tithes, that doubtless came first from arbitrarie
Consecrations, and that through most of the Dioceses of England, wherein not
the least mention is of any Grantor. only possession is rememberd. and that, by
prescription. was to be justified. Some Titles also I have seen made to Tithes
in Libells of the time of Henry the third, especially in the Lieger books of
Reading, Osney, and Pipewell. but in none of them ever any deriud from
Consecrations. Neither indeed, in that ancientest Formularie of the Canon Law
(I mean Durand, that lived about CCC.L. years since) is any other Libell for
Tithes, then such as make the Title Canonical. None that touches Lay
consecrations; which diverse years before his time became as much concealed in
legal proceedings of the Canon Law, as they had been in the more ancient times
desired and hunted after by such as were enricht by them. This of arbitarie
Consecrations, I presume, is like strange Doctrine to most men. it may well be.
for the truth of it, I think, was never before so much as pointed at by any
that has written of any part of our subject. But I doubt not but every
understanding Reader will think these things here now shortly noted on them to
deserve his consideration, which I desire him also to refer to the XI.
Chapter. and also let him apply to them the Admonitions touched presently in
Appropriations.

For Appropriations which are in the 3.. they consisted (as you see there and
in the XII. Chapter) for the purpose, either in conueying Parish Churches
appropriated with Tithes settled in them sometimes by a continuance of payment,
sometimes by Consecrations, or by both; or of Churches that were then
appropriated when (according to the use of the time) none or few Tithes were
paid to them, yet afterward in the hands of the Monks or such like, when the
Canons for payment of Tithes came into force, got Parochial payment to be made
to them; or thirdly in passing of Tithes formerly created and in esse. So that
as by Consecrations, Tithes newly created, were settled in Monasteries and the
like, so, by Appropriations, Churches with Tithes in esse, or with the
pretended right to them, and Tithes alone (but formerly in esse) were conueid
to them. The whole Appropriation of Tithes with Churches or Churches alone (we
show) in that ancienter time was made by the Patron. The Churches with Tithes
(by the name of Ecclesia cum Decimis, when Tithes were paid to it) was in point
of interest given by him. And many more Churches have been so appropriated,
then by the later and more known course. Neither, I think, have many new
Appropriations been since made. not many in regard of the number of the other.
But deserves not this then another kind of consideration then is commonly
dreamt on, among them which make Tithes due by the Divine Moral Law to the
Evangelical Priesthood? if they be so; what had the Patron as Patron (were he
either Temporal or Spiritual) to do with them in conueying them to Monks,
Friars, Nuns, poor people in Hospitals? none of these, by that name, are of
the Priesthood. and that way, they were so equally due to the ministering
Priesthood before the Patrons title to the Church, that what ever he could do
after he were Patron (although also his act were confirmd by whom you will)
could not at all, it seems, touch them, or convey them from him that should
afterward exercise the spiritual function of the Church. Consider Tithes so
due; and how could any Monastery derive to it self any Title to that self
same Tithe that was so due to the Priesthood? And if it had not the self same
Tithe, but by prescription or other civil Title, having the glebe of a Church
had also a profit by the name of Tithe as annexed to the Church, no otherwise
then other Lay endowments (for no man can doubt but that any kind of persons
may enjoy a profit under the name of Tithe or Tenth, as well as a Rent of the
Ninth part or of the Eleventh) who then is it that now detains the Tithe due by
the Divine Moral Law, in cases of Appropriations? does the Monastery, or
those which have such appropriated Tithes by conueyance from it? or rather does
not the Parishioner, that is bound to whatsoever is by that Law due, although
he pay never so many other Tenths due only by some civil Title? or by that
Opinion, is not he that receives the appropriated Tithe bound to pay a Tenth of
it to the Minister, and the Parishioner a Tenth of his Nine parts. I affirm
nothing here. it is no place for me to do it. But let these things be first
considerable to every one that talks of Appropriations, and concludes Tithes
due iure diuino morali. And, for Lay men's right to the appropriated Tithes
(that is, such as did either vest in the Monasteries by Appropriations, or at
least have been enioied by reason of them) let him examine it rather thus: may
that which either Grant or Prescription, or other civil Title once settled and
so even consecrated to God and holy uses, although abusd, be afterward
profaned to Lay hands? But it is a gross error to make it clear as many do,
that if Tithes be not due to the Priesthood iure diuino morali, then
Appropriated Tithes may be still possessed with good conscience by Lay men; and
that if otherwise, then they may not. For though they be not due so; yet is the
consecration of them in the Appropriation, nothing? for if they be not due so,
then it will be clear, I think, to all, that they might pass in the
Appropriation, as other things, subject to the Titles of humane and positive
Law. The many execrations annexed to the deeds of conueyance of them, and pourd
forth against such as should d^uert them to prophan uses, should be also
thought on. and let them remember also, who says, that Proverb. 20.25.
it is a Destruction for a man to devour what is consecrated.

To what we have here of Episcopal right pretended to Tithes especially in
Germany, and of Tithes appropriated by Bishops, you may add the examples of
Thietmar Bishop of Werden in Saxony, that Krantz. Metropol lib. 6. cap. 19.
and cap. 29. and lib. 7. cap. 48.
about M.C.XL. Contulit Ecclesiae suae vndecem Decimas, and Contulit fratribus
Decimam in Esse. As also his successor Herman, Contulit Ecclesiae suae mediam
Decimam de Haselwerder, and integram in Rakestede, and Tunderling. and Luder
Bishop there about M.CC.XXX. Contulit Ecclesiae Decimam in Emelendorp cum
aduocatia, and ordinauit Scolaribus Decimam in Mendorp. It seems this their
giving of Tithes to their Church was an assignment of them to the increase of
their Prebends, or such like. for it cannot, I think, be understood of Tithes
given to the Bishoprique by themselves, who as Bishops possessed or pretended
right to Tithes generally in their Diocese. But also, with that noted here
touching Gerold Bishop of Oldenburg (or Lubek) his urging them of the Deserts
of Wagria to pay; observe the words of his perswasiue Letter sent to them to
get their Tithes. Deo, says he, Helmoldus presb. hist. Seliuiorum cap. 92.
gratias ago, quod multarum in vosiis parent vil tutum insignia, quod videlicet
hospitalitati and vlijs misericordiae operibus propter Deum insistitis, quod in
verbo Dei promptissimi and in construendis Ecclesijs solliciti estis; in
legitimis quoque vt Deo placitum est, castam ducitis vitam; quae omnia tamen
obseruata nil proderunt, si caetera mandata negligitis, quia sicut scriptum
est, qui in vno offendit omnium reus est. Dei enim praeceptum est, Decimas ex
omnibus dabis mihi, vt been sit tibi and longo viuas tempore, cui obedierunt
Patriarchae, Abraham scilicet Isaac and Jacob, and omnes qui secundum fidem
facti sunt filij Abraha, per quod laudem etiam and praemia aterna consecuti
sunt. Apostoliquoque and Apostolici viri hoc ipsum ex ore Dei mandauerunt, and
sub anathematis vinculo posteris seruandum tradiderunt. Cum ergo Dei
omnipotentis proculdubio hoc constet esse praeceptum, and sanctorum Patrum fit
autoritate firmatum, nobis id incumbit negotij vt quod vestrae saluti deest,
nostro in vobis opere per Dei gratiam suppleatur. Monemus ergo and obsecramus
omnes vos in Domino, vt mihi, cui paterna in vos cura commissa est, animo
volenti, quasi filij obedientiae, acquiescatis, and Decimas prout Deus
instituit and Apostolica Banno firmauit Autoritas, ad ampliandum Dei cultum and
ad gerendum pauperum curam Ecclesiae detis, ne si Deo quae ipsi debentur
subtraxeritis and substantiam simul and animam in interitum mittatis aeternum.
Valete. It seems he was in some confidence, that because he was a Bishop, he
might make them believe any thing of the Patriarchs and the Apostles. and you
may see he loved the profit of the Tithes so well, that he would not stand upon
any unlucky venturing his credit in Divinity, or upon offering a plain
falsehood, in writing for them. For though they were due generally as he would
have them, yet how would he have proved that all the Patriarchs and all that
were by faith as the sons of Abraham, paid them? or that thereby they all had
gaind praemia aeterna? and whence could he have justified it, that the Apostles
ordaind that they should be paid? it may be therein he meant the Constitutions
of the Apostles, of which enough before. if he did, how could he have
strengthened their authority? But they to whom he sent remaind still as far
from obedience as the historical part of his Letter was from truth. And the
truth was, he could by no means get any Tithes of them. But for that (in this.)
of Episcopal right, or the right of the Evangelical Priesthood, so much
pretended against Tithes enioied by Monks, that were indeed Lay men, howeuer
reputed as a kind of part of the Clergy; it seems that in those days the
Bishops and Priests often stood so much on it, and so much and so often labourd
against Consecrated and Appropriated Tithes, possessed by the Monks (for they
knew it was to no purpose to urge the Lay owners, who after they had given
Tithe by consecration would give no more to any of them) that the most common
place which in their Synods and Sermons they dealt on, was the right of Tithes,
as due to the Priesthood. and in so much also and so untimely was that common
place used, that there talking of it was become a Proverb to denote their
frequent going from the matter. as if most usually they fell into that, when
they should have talked of something else. This is justified by a passage of the
Monk Aimonius in the life of Abbo Abbot of Floriacum, where he speaks of a
Synod held under Robert King of France, about the year M. (when Aimonius liud)
in the Abbey of S. Denis. Very many Bishops, says he, were present at it, Vita
Abbonis Floriac. cap. 9.
Qui cum de fidei puritate and de corrigendis tam suis quam subditorum prauis
moribus sermocinari debuissent, iuxta vulgar prouerbium, Cunctum suum sermonem
ad Decimas verterunt Ecclesiarum, quas Laicis ac Deo seruientibus Monachis
auferre moliti, resistente eis in hac re hoc V. Dei Cultore Abbone, promiscuam
in se vulgi concitauere manum. and such danger did the Bishops, in urging it,
draw on themselves, that they were driven all to dissolve the Synod by running
away. you see here Sermonem ad Decimas vertere, was as a proverb to go from the
matter. and for those words, Laicis ac Deo seruientibus Monachis; I think, they
are not to be interpreted Lay men, and Monks, but Monks that were lay, and
spent their time in the service of God* For there is no doubt but the Bishops
and Priests objected the name of Laici to the Monks here; and so was it fit, in
the relation, to name them. and it was no wonder that the common people (whose
bounty, in bestowing of Tithes on Monks, should thus have turned to nothing) so
fiercely opposed them. If you understand Laicis by it self here, then it may
denote the arbitrarie detaining or disposing of Tithes by mere Lay men, which,
I must confess, Abbo and his Monks and all other Monks whatsoever had some
reason to withstand. for they gaind much by it. But, I doubt, it cannot have
reference to Lay Infeodations. For as yet I could never see the least
testimony of an Infeodation of Tithes until many years after Abbo's time. it
might perhaps denote them also. but I dare not clearly affirm or deny here.

The 4.. is of ancient Infeodations of Tithes. What is in old testimony of
them, is there deliuerd. but for time; we neither fetch them from Charles
Martell, nor from the holy War of between M.XCV. and M.C. as others do.
plainly both those Opinions are false. And it is as certain that they are
false, as it is difficult to find the true beginning of Infeodations. Neither,
I think, did any man ever refer them to Charles Martell, before Martinus
Polonus Archbishop of Cosenza and Penitentiarie to the Pope, who wrote about
M.CC.LXXX. Ecclesias (says he of him) spoliat, Decimas militibus conferendo;
and this being through many hands receiud, has to this hour abusd many men's
credulity. But thereof, enough already. They are as far out, that derive
them all from gifts made by Churches, or impositions by Princes. yet that most
common opinion, that they all came first out of Churches is elder then the
other, and as ancient at least as Frederique Barbarossa. For in the
controversy twixt him and Pope Urban the third about Inuestitures, Scimus (are
the Apud M^l^hior. Goldast. Gonstit. Imper. tom. 2. page 50.
word) Decimas and oblationes a Deo Sacerdotibus and Leuitis Primitias
deputatas. sed cum tempore Christianitatis ab Aduersarijs infestarentur
Ecclesiae, easdem Decimas Praepotentes and Nobiles Viri ab Ecclesijs in
beneficio stabili acceperunt, vt ipsi defensores Ecclesiarum fierent quae per
se obtinere non valerent. There is no question butt his opinion had soon Autors
enough among the Clergy. For, the pretense of it was like enough a great
persuasion to some Lay men to give in their infeodated Tithes to the Church.
and this the Canonists, for the most part, and generally the Lawiers of most
States, take for a clear truth. which I much wonder at, seeing that while they
take it so, yet they interpret that Et vide cap. 7.. 3. ad sin^ m.
Canon Prohibemus (which is the principal provision against Feudall Tithes,
and was made by a Council, that best knew the practice of the near former
times, against such as were created by Lay men to Lay men) to have been the
stay only of further Infeodations into Lay hands, that is, every lay
Infeodation that has force they suppose to be of before the time of that
Canon. as if the Infeodations from Lay to Lay, there forbidden, were those from
which such (for the most part) as continue had their original. and therein
doubtless they are right. and the later Canonists that would apply it to all
Infeodations then in esse are grossly deceiud, or wittingly strive to deceive.
for in that respect, the Canon is in no State in force. Neither was it
anciently so interpreted by the Canonists. but in the other, that is, touching
new creations of Feudall Tithes (in prejudice of the Church) by Lay men to Lay
men, it has been ever admitted, and is in practice both in France and Spain.
and what better interpretation of it can be then the continual practice upon
it since the making of it? and so how can it then be supposd but that Lay men
before were chiefly the original Autors of them? But some Bertrand ^ Argentre
in Cons. Brit. tit. des Appropriances ^rt. 266. page 1110.
Lawiers here to justify their receiud opinion, bring this argument. Had they
not come from the Church, they say, then had the Tithes themselves, which are
now possessed by Lay men through Infeodations, paid Tithes also to the Church
by reason of the many Canons made for payment out of all yearly increase. But
this reason clearly moves nothing. for the self same might have been objected
against the known beginning of Tithes created and consecrated to Monasteries by
Lay men. plainly by the Canons, notwithstanding such consecration, the
Parochial right to the Evangelical Priesthood could not be diminished. and by
them also, as well a Tithe out of the Tithe consecrated, as out of the Nine
parts of the Parishioner, might, for aught can be proved against it, be
demanded by the Parish Rector. But we see clearly both the original of those
consecrations to have been from Lay men; and also that no Tithe was or is paid
either out of them or out of the rest of the profits of the Nine parts. How
then can the other argument touching Infeodations better conclude here? beside
it insists upon Canons. and would conclude practice from Law. which course of
proof, vsd by most men that write of these things, is gross and ridiculous.
For who ever but indifferently observes the story of the elder time together
with the Laws, shall soon find that in the Canon Law especially, an argument
from debere fieri to factum esse, is scarce so sound as that so hist at among
children, a posse ad esse. The truth seems to be, that both in Consecrations,
and Infeodations, and Appropriations of Tithes, there was not any other thing
thought on then the name of Tithe, and the right of Tithes generally due to the
Church; as if every thing being the Tenth, and by that name as it were
specificated, were presently the Clergies. so that whatsoever was by that name
given away to mere Lay men or to Monasteries by new creation in either
Consecrations or Infeodations, was, it seems, taken always to be the self
same individual Tithe which was supposd due to the Clergy. which also
doubtless was a cause why many Infeodations having original only from Lay
men, were falsely supposed to have first come from the Church. for how easy was
it that that which out of its own name only of Decima was presently taken as to
be due to the Church, should be titled an Ecclesiastique right, and then in the
passages of them which would have had it so, be reckond among such things as
the Church had a title to by a former possession? and clearly many of the
Laity also could not but be very inclinable to that opinion. for so long as
that held it is likely they resolud they needed not to pay any more to the
Church. for when the Church would not keep the feudall Tithes when it had them
(they thought it once had them al) they conceived doubtless there was no
reason why they should pay it any more or other Tithes. Thus perhaps upon
diverse grounds and causes, both the Laity and Clergy deceiud themselves in
thinking of the original of these Infeodations. But herein that which we have
touched before to be considered in Consecrations and Appropriations is also
considerable. for what could such Infeodations by Lay men to Lay men, hurt the
right of tithes which was in the Priesthood? especially if due either iure
diuino morali, or by any positive Law ancienter then the Infeodation. But we
have not affirmd, that no Infeodations came originally from the Church.
Questionless some did. and beside the examples already noted, you may see
that of Racherius Iuo Epist. 289. editione secunda. primae deest.
who Ecclesiae de Hauchis (in France, about the year M.C.XX.) Decimam laicali
vsurpatione tenebat, as Iuo's words are, and he gave the Church to an Abbey of
S. Martins, and minutas in praesentiarum Monachis demittendo concessit Decimas,
and Decimam de Culturis Monachorum eis concessit ha^endam post sui decessum.
here it seems he had inheritance in the Tithes. For that other conjecture; that
they came first from Impositions made by Princes; I doubt it has no kind of
probability. Indeed it appears that anciently in Turingia, the people were
driven before theiri^ Christianity Centur Magdeburg. 8. cap. 8.
to pay Tithes to the Kings of Hungary, both of thein annual increase, and of
their children also; and in the government of the King that was declared by 1 Samuel cap. 8.
Samuel: it is said, He will take the tenth of your Vineyards and give it to
his chief Servants, and to his Officers. But where shall you find the least
mention of Infeodations made of such kind of Tenths? or any touch of them in
the complaints of the Clergy against Infeodations? and withal, nothing has
been of less practice then giving away in perpetual right any such revenue
due to any Crown or State, only by special right of Supreme Majesty. But
admit, these had their original this way or any other as you will; unless
they can be proud to have been made of the very self same Tithe which is due
to the ministering Priesthood (which can never been down; saving only where the
infeodated Tithe was at first receiud and possessest by the Church by force of
the Law of Tithing, not by arbitrary Consecration; in which case also it is
considerable whether a Lay man could be at all capable of the fructus only of
them, if due by an immediate express Law of God.) I see not how they should more
prevent Parochial payment to the ministering Priest, then the payment of rents
in Eiusdem generis, sub Decimae etiam nomine, prouentus Dominis soluuntur in
Gallijs, in Germania, alibi. videsis Bertran. d'Argentre, Cons. Brit. art. 266.
page 1109. and Specul Saxon lib 2. a^tic. 58. 2. etc.
Terragies, or quantities in Corn, under the name of tiths to land^ards should
diminish the right of the spiritual Tithe. which way had either such a fifth as
was Pharohs, or the tenth spoken of by Samuel, to be taken by the King, touched
the Tithe due by a superior or former law, to the Leuitical Priesthood? both
might well have stood together. might not so, nay, should not so Tithes remain
paiable from the possessors of the nine parts to the Euangelical Priesthood,
notwithstanding infeodations or any reseruations whatsoever, if they be due by
a superior or former Laws, especially if due by the Moral Law? and that Law
should be urged rather against the Tenants of the Land then against the
Pernors of the feudall Tithes. And that common distinction of the Canonists, of
ius percipiendi, and fructus Decimarum here, is a mere shift, and nothing
satisfies, unless they could also teach us how the fructus were the very
self same always in Infeodations, and that they were derived from a ius
percipiendi in some Clergy man. Perhaps too much of these things; which are
little or nothing applicable to England, where we have scarce any example of a
Tithe, that was in its nature feodall, other then in such as were taken from
Monasteries by the Statuts of Dissolution, and may still be called, as
originally, by the name of Consecrated or Appropriated Tithes, although now
Infeodated. But thereof see the XIII. Chapter.

To the 5.. that speaks of Exemptions, for matter of story may be added that of
the Hospitalars. After their exemptions given them with the two other Orders;
about the year MCLX. in the Eastern parts they tam Domino Will. Tyrius de bello
sacro lib. 18. cap. 3.
Patriarchae quam caeteris Ecclesiarum Praelatis multas tam super Parochiali
iure quam super iure Decimationum caeperunt infer molestas, etc. and receiud
such as were excommunicat for non-paiment of them De praedijs autem suis and
vniuersis redditibus quocunque iure ad eos deuolutis omnino Decimas negabant.
Where by the way note that in this Eastern Church (which, after Jerusalem was
recovered and made a Kingdom subject to Western Princes, should have been
fashiond according to the Canons of the Western Church) Tithes were now
appointed paiable, although no authentike Law of that old Eastern Church, once
mentions them. But both in this and other things, the people of that Church
were still (notwithstanding the new Kingdom of Jerusalem possessed by
Europians, and the Popes authority extended to them) most Quod constat ex
Marini San^ti T^^s^lli Secret. Fidelium lib. ^. part. 8 and epist. 8 and
Anonym. de recuperat Terr^ Sancta cap. 18.
obstinate and refractarie against the policy and Institutions offered them
either in command or example from the Western.

After the Opinions of the age in the 6.. the Laws both Imperial, Provincial,
and Pontificiall follow in the 7. upon which let it be considerd, whether a
consecration of Tithes were so made by the power and law of the Church and
Common wealth or both (in several Territories, according to the Laws extended)
that no profanation or detaining them or any part of them, might afterward be
lawful. and the like should be carefully thought on in the 1.. of the VII.
Chapter, and in the VIII. Chapter which has the Laws of England, for the same
purpose. The force of the words of all those Laws; the Authority that made
them; and the Territories to which they were extended, are especially to be
obserud by every one that here looks after humane positive Law. For many
talk and write of that, and tell us here of ius Ecclesiasticum (at least if
they fail in their Arguments from Ius diuinum) but whence that Ius
Ecclesiasticum is, and where or when made, they little enough know. For what
has a Provincial Council of one Nation to do with another? What has the
Imperialls of the old French Empire to do with England? Nay, what has the
Popes Decrees to do here? But because there was a time when their authority was
more largely acknowledged; their Decrees that bred much of what now justly
continues in some States (which also justly now deny their authority) remain
most obseruable. and we have given them in their places.

Of the VII. Chapter.
IN the last CCCC. years, beside the establishment of Parochial right in
Tithes, and the various Opinions touching the immediate Law whereby they are
due; the Practice of most Christian Nations, as it might be had out of their
Laws and Lawiers, is faithfully related. And to what is there brought, add
that of the Law of France, whereby the right of the Tithe of all the Minesis
claimd by Ordonances de France liu 2. tom. 2. de Mines and Mineries.
the King, as a droit de Souerainte, according as it is declard by two Edicts
published of Charles the IX. and verified also by the Parliament of Paris.
according also, the old Imperial Law was. But through all here, you may see
that the Customs Statutes and Common Laws, especially of France, Italy and
Spain, and of most other, if not all States, permit not, so favorably for the
Clergy, an exaction of them, or suite to be so generally brought for them, as
the Laws of England did before the Statutes of Dissolution of Monasteries, and
still do, if you exempt those cases which are founded only upon those Statutes.
What Statute or practice is in this Kingdom, that equals, the Carolines of
Spain, or the Philippine of France, which are general Laws for Customs (
quatenus Customs) de non Decimando? And whereas England until the
Dissolution, had scarce a continuing Infeodation into lay hands (of which see
the XIII. Chapter) nor could a lay man by the common Law before the
Dissolution, make any title to Tithes as to lay inheritances; in other Nations
Tithes infeodated have been from above D. almost DC. years frequent in use, and
still continue legally in lay hands, and are subject wholly to Secular
Jurisdiction, as also other Tithes paid to the Church are, whersoeuer any such
suite is commenced for them in their Spiritual Courts, as stand not with their
liberty challenged from their Secular or Common Law. For every Christian
State has its own Common Laws, as this Kingdom has. And the Canon Law
every where, in such things as are not merely spiritual, is always governed
and limited (as with us) by those Common Laws. For by that name are they to be
called as they are distinguished from the Canon Law, which has properly Persons
and Things sacred only and spiritual for its object in practice, as the Canon
Laws deal with Things and Persons, as they have reference to a Common, not
Sacred, use or society established in a Common wealth. Who knows any thing in
Holy-Writ knows the use of the word Common to be so distinguished from Sacred.
Indeed it has other notions there also, and it is otherwise understood in ius
commune, frequently among Canonists and Ciuilians. But these nothing at all
hurt the conuenience of this denomination. For by them, Ius commune is used as
it is opposd to Municipale or Consuetudinarium. But here, and in the nomination
of the English Laws, as it is distinguished from Sacred or Spiritual. and so in
this sense the allowance of Customs, and Parlamentarie Statutes (as they
ought) fall under the name of Common Law with us. Here I doubt not but it will
be an obuious objection, that I should rather call the supreme and governing
Law of every other Christian State (saving England and Ireland) the Civil
Law; that is the old Roman Imperial Law of Justinian. For such a reigning, but
most gross Ignorance, is every where almost to be met withal in England, that
you shall have it affirmd for clear that al other States are gouernd only by the
Civil Law. Indeed, if they which say so, understood Civil for that which is
the Ius Civil of every singular State, it were but the same to talk of Civil
and Common Law. For the Common Law of England also is the Ius Civil Anglorum.
But it is even with one mouth pretended usually, that the Body of the
Imperialls, read and professed in the Universities, is the Civil Law, that
gouernes (as they say) all other States. But this, howsoever received through
lazy Ignorance, is so far from Truth, that indeed no Nation in the world is
governed by them. For whersoeuer they are supposed to govern (let the brief
clearing of so common an error, get pardon for the digression) it must be
taken, that they either gourne by their own original authority, as they are
Imperialls, or from their being received for Laws into other States, which are
not in that first way subject to them. According to that first way; only the
Empire and perhaps a good part of Italy, should be ruled by them. But it is
plain, that for the most part, the disposition of Inheritances, punishing of
Crimes, course of Proceedings, Dowers, Testaments, and such other, which are of
greatest moment under the Legal rule, are even in those States, where, by
reason of their first Institution, they retain a kind of authority, ordered by
most various Customs and new Statutes of several Provinces and Cities, so
differing from those old Imperialls; that the whole face and course of them is
exceedingly changed in practice. This is plain to every one, that observes but
the diverse Customs and Ordinances of the States subject to the Empire; the Ius
Camerale collected by Petrus Denaisius; the Nemesis Karulina, as it is set
forth by Georgius Romus; and the many published Decisions or Reports both of
the Imperial Chamber, and the Rota's of Rome, Naples, Piemont, Mantua, Genoa,
Bologna, and other parts of the Territory of Italy. You shall find those
Decisions, in matters of greatest moment, most commonly grounded on Customarie
Law, or later Constitutions. So, that to affirm, that in these places the old
Imperialls, or that Civil Law (as they call it) gouernes, is as if (for
example) an equal ignorance should tell us, that Spain were governed only by
Alfonso's Parfidas, and Scotland only by Malcolms Laws or the Quoniam
Attachiamenta; or that in the time of the old Emperors the Roman State had been
always governed only by the XII. Tables, or that England were legally ruled
only by the Grand Charter, or by the two volumes of old Statutes. Like
accession and alteration as any of these have had, is found in the Empire and
in Italy, where the Imperialls have, through the power of the Emperors and
Videsis did. 10. c. 22. and 13. and extr de noui ops. is nuntiatione c. 1.
Popes, any now continuing authority. Now, for other Christian States, which
acknowledge no superior, or any subjection to the Empire (except Portugal,
where the Roman Civil Law is autorized, by an Videsis Suarez. de legibus lib.
3. cap. 8.. 3.
Ordinance of State, in cases which are not literally comprehended in the
Customs or Constitutions of the Kingdom) as France, Spain, Scotland,
Denmark, Poland, the City of Venice, and what also in Germany has made it
self from from the Empire; what color is there, that the Imperial Civil Law
should govern in them. Indeed in all of them, I think, the reason of it
brought into method, is used and applied commonly to ar^^ment, when any of
their Customs or Statutes (which are especially in France and Spain very
voluminous) come in question, because the Practicers studied it in the
Universities, and had thence their Degrees given them; which yet they had not,
till about some CCCC. years since, neither before about that time was a Doctor
or Professor of them known on this side the Alpe^. But as it is Law, it neither
binds nor rules with them, no more then the old stories of Heredotus,
Thucydides, Diodore, Polybius, Josephus, Liute, Tacitus, and the like, or
Cicero and Demosthenes, or Plato's Laws, and other of that kind; which are
equally sometimes used for reason or example, specially by the Practicers of
France. And so the old Imperial Civil Law valet pro ratione (as Bertrand d'
Argentre, President of the Parliament of Rennes Ad Consuet. Brit. tit. 22. de
Succestionibus, ad rubricam.
says) non pro inducto iure; and pro ratione only quantum Reges, Dynastae, and
Respublicae intra potestatis suae fines valere patiuntur And in France and
Spain, Laws Vide Chappin. du Domain^ etc. liu. 2. tit. 15.. 5. Bodin de Repub.
lib 1. cap 8. Suarez vbi supra etc. Philip. 2. in pragmatica ante collect.
L^gum Ro^ni.
were some CCC. years since expressly made, that the Imperials should have no
force in the^. And in Scotland it is ordaind, that no Laws have force there,
but the Kings Laws Parl. 3. Iacobi 1. cap. 48.
and Statutes of the Realm, and that it should be governed by the common Parl.
6. Jacob. 4. cap. 79.
Laws of the Realm, and by none other Laws. Doubtless, Custom has made
some parts of the Imperialls to be received for Law in all places where they
have been studied; as even in England also, in Marine causes, and matter of
personal Legacies. But is England therefore governed by them? It were as good
a consequent to conclude so, as to affirm, that any of the other States were,
because some petie things are ordered according to some Imperial Text received
and established by Custom. But this may seem no fit place to speak more
(perhaps not so much) to clear this gross error of such as yet pretend to
know more then vulgarly, but can make no difference twixt the use of Laws in
study or argument (which might equally happen to the Laws of Vtopia) and the
governing authority of them. If any desire to search further here, beside the
Autorities cited in the Vide extr. tit. de Priuileg. c. 28. super specula, and
ibid. Hostiens. l. Andr. Anton. de Butrio. item Choppin. du Domaine, liu. 2.
tit. 35.. 5. Bodin de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 8. and ante alios Suarez de Legibus,
lib. 3. cap. 8. v^de etiam pr^sat. ad Statut. Polonia, Prilusij.
Margin, let him especially see I. Baptista a Villalubos (...) Antinomia Iuris
regni Hispaniarum ac Ciuilis, and note especially la Conference du droit
Francois auec le droict Roman, composed by Bernard Automne, and observe both
the Volumes of Statutes and Ordinances of Spain, France, Scotland, Poland, and
of other Countries, together with the various Prouincial Customs, especially
in France, with the Arrests, Decisions and Playd^^es of that Kingdom, and he
shall soon be confirmed in that which a great Ciuilian of Italy is ingenuous
enough to tell us; Hispania, Anglia, Scotia, Balia, Hibernia, Alemania, Datia,
Suetia, Vngaria, Boemia, Polonia, Bulgaria Hieronym. ^igas tract. de Crin. lasa
May. lib. 3. quast. ^3.. 18. and 19.
non vtuntur legibus seu iure civilly, sed specialibus consuetudinibus (...)
statutis, that is, they are all governed by their own common Laws. (...) that
most learned Friar In Compond. Theolog. citatur in Notis, ad Furtisc. page 43.
Bacon, of his time; Omne regnum habes sua (...) aquibus laici reguntur vt iura
Angliae and Franciae, and ita fit Iustitia in (...) per Constitutiones quas
habent sicut in Italia per suas. This was then, and is now true. And the
Interpretation of those common Laws in most places, save England and Ireland,
has of late time been much directed by the reason of the Imperialls, and only
by the reason of them (not by their authority) and that also in case when they
are not opposite at all to the common Laws, but seem to agree with the Law of
Nations or common reason. And this use of them, at the furthest, began in its
youngest infancy, not C.D.LX. years since. For before that, even from
Justinians time, they lay wholly out of use: saving only, that some pieces of
them, with the Interpolations of Alaricus and his Chancellor Anian, together
with Lumbardine Additions and Interpretations, had their power in some parts of
Italy and the Empire. But for about D.C. years together, that is, from
Justinian till Frederique Barbarossa, no Profession was of them in any
University, no Doctorship, no other Degree taken in them. But after that time,
they grew into a common Profession in this Western world (although by their own
authority they are confined to Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus) and even here
in England were, about Henry the thirds time, often applied to the common Law
in discourse and argument, as you may see in Bract^n his frequent quotations of
them. And heretofore some texts of them have been in our Courts cited; not only
as at this day sometimes is done (when the words only of some of the regulae
iuris is brought into an argument) but the Title and Law, after the Ciuilians
fashion, has been rememberd at the Bar, and so afterward expressed in the
Report, as I have seen in an example or two in the Mss. years of Edward the In
Biblioth. Int. Templi.
second. Yet, notwithstanding that, it is clear, that England was never
governed ^y the Civil (or Imperial) Law, as it was also affirmd by the upper
House of Parliament in 11 Rich. 2. where the King and Lords protested also, that
their meaning was, it never should be governed by it.

Of the VIII. Chapter.
OVt of this fulness of Laws that were made for Tithes in England, let it be
considered (by such as enquire here de iure) what interest was of right settled
in the Clergy by them (howsoever they were little obeyed) And by what Autorttie
made (we have carefully added still what might help to a judgment in that
also) and how extensiue, in regard of Persons and Territory, they were, and
some such other; and how far the Tithes might be, after such Laws, detained
or made subject to Customs, or possessed as things of common use, The Laws of
before, as well as of after the Norman Conquest (as it is vulgarly called) are
here gathered, and are perhaps equally obseruable, as the rest, in the
consequent of a general consecration of Tithes to the Church in England. For
neither were the Laws formerly made, abolish by that Conquest, although, by Law
of Vide Quintilien lib. 5 Institution. cap. 10. Atheric. Gontil de iure belli
lib. 3. cap. 5 and Hetoman. Illust. quast 5.
War, regularly all Rights and Laws of the place conquered, be wholly subject
to the Conquerors will. For in this of the Norman, not only the Conquerors will
was not declared, that the former Laws should be abrogated (and until such
declaration, Laws remain in force, by the opinion of Caluins ^ase, fol. 17. b.
some, in all Conquests of Christians against Christians) but also the ancient
and former Laws of the Kingdom were confirmed by him. For in his fourth year,
by the advice of his Baronage, he summoned to London, Omnes Nobiles sapientes
and l^ge sua erud^tos, vt eorum leges and consuetudines audiret, as the words
are of the Book of Lichfield, and afterward confirm them, as is further also
related in In Hen. 2. page 347.
Roger of Houeden. Those Lege sua eruditi were common Lawiers of that time, as
Godric and Alswin were then also, who are spoken of in the Book of Ms. lib. 2.
page 33. and 36. in Bibl. Cotton.
Abingdon, to be Legibus patriae optime instituti, quibus tanta secularium
facundia and praeteritorum memoria euentorum inerat, vt caeteri circumquaque
facile eorum sententiam, ratam fuisse, quam ed cerent, approbarent. And these
two, and diverse other Common Lawiers then lived in the Abbey of Abingdon,
Quorum collationi nemo sapiens (says the Author) refragabatur, quibus rem
Ecclesiae publicam tuentibus eius oblocutores elingues fiebant. You must know,
that in those days, every Monk here in England, that would, might remain so
secular, that he might get money for himself, purchase, or receive by descent
to his own use. And therefore it was fit enough for practicing Lawiers to live
in Monasteries. But what had those praeteritorum memoria euentorum (that is,
Reports and adjudged Cases of the Saxon times) auailed in their skill, if the
former Laws had not continued? More obuious Testimonies to this pupose are had
out of Videsis Cok^ Praesat. ad Relat. 3. and 8. and si placet Hot. ad Fortese.
page 7. and 8.
Geruase of Tilburne, Ingulphus, and others, and we here omit them. But also,
indeed, it was not to be reputed a Conquest, or an Acquisition by right of
War (which might have destroyed the former Laws) so much as a violent
recovering of the Kingdom out of the hands of Rebels, which withstood the
Dukes pretense of a lawful Title, claimed by the Confessors adoption, or
designation of him for his Successor; his neerenesse of blood on the mothers
side not a little also aiding such a pretense to a Crown. For the Confessors
mother Emme, was sister to Richard the second, Duke of Normandy, to whom,
William was Grandchild and Heir. But these were only specious Titles* and
perhaps examined curiously, neither of them were at that time enough. And
howsoever his conscience so moved him at his death, that he professed he had got
Historia Cadonensis.
England only by Blood and the Sword, yet also by express declaration in some
of his Patents, he before pretended his right from the Confessors gift. Chart.
Eccles. Westminster. in Inspex. part. 7. 1 Ed. 4. membr. 26. and vide Camden. page
104.
In ore gladij, says he, Regnum adeptus sum Anglorum, deuicto Haraldo Rege,
cum suis complicibus, qui mihi regnum cum prouidentia Dei destinatum and
beneficio concessionis Domini and cognati mei gloriosi Regu Edwardi concessum
conati sunt auferre etc. And the stories commonly tell us that the Confessor
successionem Angliae ei dedit. And although Harold also pretended a Devise of
the Kingdom to himself made by the Confessor in extremis, and urged also that
the custom of England had been from the time of Augustines coming hither, Ms.
sieve Author Gu^l. Pictau. sieve quis alius sit. in Bibl. Cotton.
Donationem quam in vltimo fine quis fecerit, eam ratam haberi; and that the
former gift to the Norman and his own Oath for establishment of it were not of
force, because they were made Malmesb. lib. 3. de gest. Regum. page 56. a. alij
in Will. 1. and videsis Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. page 1257. edit. Londin.
absque generali Senatus and Populi conuentu and edicto; yet for his own part
he was driven to put all upon the fortune of the field, and so lost it. and the
Norman with his sword and pretense of the sufficiency and precedence of the
gift made to himself, got the Crown as if he had bin a lawful Successor to the
Confessor, and not a universal Conqueror. All this is plain out of the
stories, and justified infallibly by that of the Titles of many common persons
made to their possessions in England after his Kingdom settled, upon the
possession of themselves or their Ancestors in time of the Saxon Kings,
especially of the Confessor. but this was always in case where they by whose
possession the title was made, had not incurrd forfeiture by Rebellion. many
such Titles are clearly allowd in the book of Domesday, written in the
Conquerors time. one specially is noted by the most learned Camden in his
Norfolk. that, as I remember, is touched in Domesday also, but enough others are
dispersed there which agree with it. How could such Titles have held if he had
made an absolute conquest of England, wherein a universal acquisition of all
had been to the Conqueror, and no title could have been deriud but only from or
under him? More might be brought to clear this; but we add here only the
judicious assertion of a great Sharde in Caes. in I^i^. Temp. Ed. 3. fol. 143.
b.
Lawier of Edward the thirds time. Le Conqueror (says he) ne vient pas pur
ouster eux que anoient droiturell possession mes de ouster eux que de lour tort
auoient occupy ascun terre en desheritance del Roy and son Corone. It was
spoken upon an Objection made in a Quo warranto, against the Abbot of
Peeterborough, touching a Charter of King Edgar, which the Kings Counsel would
have had void, because, by the Conquest, all Fra^chises, they said, were
deuolud to the Crown. But, by the way, for that of his neernesse of blood,
which could not but aid his other pretended Title; let it not seem merely
vain, in regard of his being a Bastard. There was good pretense for the help
of that Defect also. For, although the Laws of this Kingdom, and, I think, of
all other civil States at this day, exclude Bastards (without a subsequent
legitimation) from enheritance; yet by the old Laws vsd by his Ancestors and
Country men, that is, by those of Norway, a Princes son gotten Vide Roger de
Honed. in Richard. 1. fol. 425. and 347.
on a Concubine bond or free, was equally inheritable as any other born in
Wedlock; which was, I believe, no small reason why he stood at first so much
for the Laws of Norway to have been generally receiud in this Kingdom. and some
Stories also which make mention of Duke Robert his getting William on that
Arlet or Arir^ (as she is sometimes written) say that she was to him a good
while vice vxoris So Henry of In Bibl. (...).
Knighton Abbot of Leicester: Transiens, says he, Robertus aliquando per
Phaleriam vrbem Normanniae vidit puellam Arlec nomine Pell^parij filam inter
cateras in chorea tripudiantem: nocte sequente illam sibi coniunxit, quam vice
vxoris aliquamdiu tenens Willielmum ex ea generauit. And he tells us also the
common tale of tearing her smock. If she were so his Concubine or Viceconiux
(between whom and a wife even the old ff de Legate. 3. L. Item Legato 49.. 4.
Imperialls make no other difference but honor and dignity; and by them also
some kind of inheritance is allowd to Authent. 89. c. 12. dis^reu^ igitur etc.
such Bastards as are Naturales liberi, that is gotten on Concubines;) it was
much more reasonable that her son should be reputed as legitimate, then that
the son of every single woman bond or free, whether Concubine or no, should
be so, as those Laws of Norway allow. and when he had inherited his Dukedom,
he made, doubtless, no question but that his blood was as good in regard of
all other inheritances that might by any color be deriud through it. and
therefore William of Malmesburie well styles him proxime consanguineus also to
the Confessor, as he was indeed on the Mothers side. and those Videsis Malmesb.
de gest. Reg. lib. 2. fol 52.
of the posterity of Edward son to Ironside, were then so excluded or
neglected that their neernesse on the Fathers side could not prevent him. you
may see the common stories of them. But whereas that excellent 18. Ed. 4 fol.
30. a
Lawier Litleton says, that William the Conqueror was called a Bastard because
he was born before marriage had between his Father and Mother, and that after he
was born they were married (which indeed by the C. tit. de Not. lib. c. cum qua
10. etc.
Imperialls and by the general Law of Videsis Bacquet de Domaine in Fr.
^ra^ct* du Bastardise chap. 9. etc.
France would have made him wholly legitimat) I doubt he had but little or no
ground to justify it. Had he been so legitimat, it is not likely he should
have been styled so commonly and anciently Bastardus, which name even in his
Apud Camden in Richmondia.
own Charters he sometimes used with cognomento, as also the Bastards of the
old Philip Duke of Burgundy were wont to do; although of later time it be
reputed as a name of dishonor; and the actio iniuriarum, or an action upon the
case lies where ever it be falsely objected, as some will Videsis Pont. Hen^erum
de liberis Natural, cap. 12.
have it. But these things prove enough that this William seized the Crown of
England, not as conquered, but by pretense of gift or adoption, aided and
confirmd by neernesse of blood; and so the Saxon Laws formerly in force could
not but continue. and such of them as are now abrogated, were not at all
abrogated by his Conquest but either by the Parlaments or Ordinances of his
time and of his successors, or else by non-vsage or contrary custom.

The Laws that are here gatherd are for the most part Latin, Saxon, or French.
The Saxon is interpreted by the old Latin. But the Latin and French are left
only in their own words. I presume, scarce any man that with the least care
studies the subject, will confess he understands not the context of such Latin.
And the French I translated not, specially because it is but the same which is
in our old year Books and Statutes, and may indeed even as soon be understood
by any fit Reader of the rest, as I could have translated it. and I think the
judicious Searcher desires rather the original tongue whateuer it be, then a
translation. Therefore I suppose (if he have not studied the Laws, or otherwise
know it) he will rather take some minutes pains then blame me for not turning
it. and howsoever to diverse peevish Ignorants, out of their dainty stomachs,
and a pretense of nothing but the more polished literature, it may here seem
barbarous and distasteful; the truth is, it was the plain and genuine French of
elder time spoken in the English Court, and now lothed only by such a know not
at all how to judge of it, nor understand the original whence it came to be
and remain so with us. I remember that old In Pan^gyric. ad Originem.
Father Gregory of Neocaesarea (whom they call Thaumaturgus) speaking of the
old Imperialls of Rome, as they were in their Latin (which both then was, and
now is a most accurat and polite phrase) commends them for that they were
indeed in an admirable and stately language, and in such a one as fitted an
Imperial greatness, (...), says he, Yet to me it is crabbed and
troublesome. and so he says he was ever driven to think of it. yet in his
youth he was put to study them at Berytus, and was taught Latin to that
purpose. If to so great a man that curious language could seem no pleasanter
when he studied it, it is the less wonder that the Law French (which does as
truly and fully deliver the matter in our Laws, as the Latin in the
Imperialls; though indeed far from polite expression) should be so
contemptible among the many petie Ignorants which usually despise what ever
their lazy course of studies has not furnished them withal, and most
indiscreetly censure things only as they see them present, without regard to
the cause or original of them, which made them that they were first inevitable
and afterward remained, not without exceeding difficulty (if at all)
alterable. But this by the way.

Of the IX.X.XI.XII.XIII. and XIV. Chapters.
Upon the discovery of the Original of our Parishes, of the ancient and late
Practice of Tithing here, of Arbitrarie Consecrations of Tithes made by the
Laity, of the first settling of Parochial right to Tithes in England, of
Appropriations, of Exemptions, of Infeodations, and the ancient Jurisdiction of
Tithes (all which take up these VI. Chapters) no fit Reader can be so blind as
not to see necessary and new assertions and consequents to be made out of them
in every inquiry that tends to a full knowledge of the true and original
nature of Tithes, as they are possessed or detaind by either Lay or Clergy man,
in respect only of any humane positive Law or civil Title. But we should here
briefly admonish somewhat of our appropriated or consecrated Tithes, and
conclude all with a touch of the Canon Laws ancient authority, which in
practice made such alteration in England, as is showed, about the year M.CC.

To the matter of Consecrations and Appropriations here, apply what is
admonisht touching them in the Reuiew of the VI. Chapter. and let every man
first carefully look that he know the course of old Appropriations. and the
way how the Monasteries and Colleges came by them, before he conclude rashly
of the Tithes that are possessed through them. Tithes consecrated and
appropriated were purposely dedicate to the Almighty and his Service, although
not without mixture of superstition, that we are sure of. But although a Tithe
generally were due to the Evangelical Priest iure diuino (without any civil
Title) yet we are nothing sure that all or the most appropriated or
consecrated* Tithes are the self same Tithes so due. which yet is supposd as
clear, and never further thought on by such as have troubled themselves and
their Readers which arguments for the Church, in the point of Appropriations.
Let him that shall now write of them, see here the way how to consider them.
And let him that detaines them (and beleeus them not due iure diuino) think of
the ancient Dedications of them made to holy uses. and howeuer they were abusd
to superstition, as the other large Indowments of the Church, before the
Reformation; yet follows it not, without further consideration, that
therefore, although so dedicated, they might be prophand to common uses and Lay
hands. Consult herein with Divines. But I doubt not but that every good man
wishes that at our dissolution of Monasteries both the Lands and Impropriated
Tithes and Churches possessed by them (that is, things sacred to the Service of
God, although abusd by such as had them) had been bestowed rather for the
advancement of the Church to a better maintenance of the laboring and
deserving Ministry, to the fostering of good Arts, relief of the Poor, and
other such good uses as might retain in them, for the benefit of the Church or
Commonwealth, a Character of the wishes of those who first with devotion
dedicated them (as in some other Countries Christop Binder as bo^is Ecclesia in
ducat. VVitenberg. page 94. etc.
upon the Reformation was religiously done) then conferd with such a prodigal
dispensation, as it happend, on those who stood ready to devour what was
sanctified, and have (in no small number) since found such enheritances thence
derived to them, but as Seius his Horse or the Gold of Tholense. But I abstain
from censure, and add here by the way, a complaint made to the Parliament not
long after the Dissolution, touching the abuse that followed in the Church
through Lay men's possessing of Appropriated Churches and Tithes. It deserves to
be seriously thought on by every Lay man that now enjoy any of them, especially
where Divine service is not carefully provided for. Ye that the Lords and
Burgesses of Parliament house (so are the Ex libello dicto. The complaint of
Roderik Mors sometime a Gray Friar etc. olim impress. Geneu^.
words of it) I require of you in the Name of my poor Brethren that are Inglish
men and members of Christ's body, that ye consider well (as ye will answer
before the face of Almighty God in the day of judgment) this abuse and see it
amended. Whanas Antichrist of Rome durst openly without any viser walk up and
down through out England, he had so great favor there, and his children had such
crafty wits (f^r the children of this world are wiser in their generation
than the children of light) that they had not only almost gotten all the best
lands of England into their hands, but also the most part of all the best
Benefices both of Personages and Vicarages, which were for the most part all
impropred to them (the Impropriations held by them were much more then one
third of all the Parish Churches in England divided into three parts) And when
they had the gifts of any not impropred, they gave them unto their friends, of
the which always some were learnd, for the Monks found of their friends
children at scole. And though they were not learnd, yet they kept hospitality,
and helped their poor friends. And if the Parsonage were impropred the Monks
were bound to deal Alms to the pore, and to keep hospitality, as the
writings of the gifts of such Parsonages and Lands do plainly declare in these
Words, in puram eleemosynam. And as touching the Alms that they dealt, and
the Hospitality that they kept, every man knows that many thousands were
well received of them, and might have been better, if they had not had so many
great men's Horse to feed, and had not been ouercharged with such idle
Gentlemen, as were never out of the Abbaies. And if they had any Vicarage in
their hands, they set in sometime some sufficient Vicar (though it were but
seldom) to Preach and to Teach. But now that all the Abbaies with their lands,
goods, and impropried Parsonages, be in Temporal men's hands; I do not here
tell that one halpenie worth of Alms or any other profit comes unto the
people of those Parishes. Your pretense of putting down Abbeys, was to amend
that was amiss in them. It was far amiss, that a great part of the lands of
the Abbeys (which were given to bring up learned men that might be Preachers,
to keep Hospitality, and to give Alms to the poor) should be spent upon a
few superstitious Monks, which gave not XL. pound in Alms, when they should
have given CC. It was amiss, that the Monks should have Parsonages in their
hands, and deal but the XX. part thereof to the Poor, and preached but ones
in a year to them that paid the Tithes of the Parsonages. It was amiss, that
they scarcely among XX. set not one sufficient Vicar to preach, for the Tithes
that they received. But see now how it that was amiss is amended, for all the
godly pretense. It is amended even as the Devil amended his Dames leg (as it
is in the Proverb) when he should have set it right, he brake it quite in
pieces. The Monks gave to little Alms, and set unable persons many time in
their Benifices. But now, where XX. pound was given yearly to the Poor, in
more than in C. places in Ingland is not one meals meat given. This is a saire.
fear amendment: Where they had always one or other Vicar, that either
preached, or hired some to preach, now is there no Vicar at all; but the Fermer
is Vicar and Parson altogether; and only an old castaway Monk or Friar,
which can scarcely say his Mattins, is hired for XX. or XXX. shillings, meat
and drink, yea in some places for meat and drink alone, without any wages. I
know, and not I alone, but XX.M. mo^, know more than D. Vicarages and
Parsonages thus well and Gospelly served, after the new Gospel of Ingland. And
so the Author goes on with sharp Admonitions to the Lay men, that fed themselves
fat with the Tithes of such Churches, while the souls of the Parishioners
sufferd great famine for want of a fit Pastor; that is, for want of fit
maintenance for him. for without that, he is scarce to be hoped for.

But we conclude with that of the Canon Laws getting such force, and making
such alteration in matter of Tithes about the year M.CC. when through it,
Parochial payment became first to be performd here, or elsewhere, generally,
and as of common right (where other titles prevented it not) and through it
only; not through the ancienter secular Laws made here for Tithes. For the
suits for them in the Spiritual Courts either were all grounded upon the
Canons; or the common right of Tithes was now supposed in the Libell as a
known duty to the Clergy, without secular Law. It may soon be apprehended,
that it was much less difficult about that time, then any other, for the Popes
and their Canon Laws to gain more obedience among subjects, and execute more
authority over Lay possessions, when also they so easily usurped power over
supreme Princes, which yielded to them. For no time ever was, wherein any of
them more insolently bare themselves in the Empire, never near so insolently
in England, as in the continuing times next before and near about this change.
And to all States the Church of Rome now grew most formidable. Remember but the
Excommunication and Correcton sufferd by Frederique Barbarossa, Henry the sixth,
and other Princes of the Empire, and by our Henry the second, and King John.
the stories of them are obuious. And our Richard the first, between those two,
to gratify the Clergy here for their exceeding liberality, in contribution
to his Ransom from Captivity, with great favor gave them an indulgent
Charter Apud Innocent. 3. Epist. Decretal. lib. 2. page 242. edit. Colon.
of their Liberties; which being ioind with those other prone and yielding
Admissions of the Ecclesiastique Government over the Crown (^o were the times)
doubtless gave no small authority to the Exercise of the Canon Law in those
things, which before about that time were diversely otherwise. Neither was that
part of the Canon Law, which would have a General and Parochial payment of
Tithes, not only second to any, in regard of the Clergie's profit; but also
none other, doubtless, was so great as it, in gaining the Clergy a Direct and
certain Revenue. Therefore it was not without reason on their side* at such
time as they saw the Power of Rome, that is, the authority of Decretals and of
the Canons grew most dreadful to Prince and subject, that they should urge
this on to a continuing practice, and that with execution of the reigning
Censures of the Church. Hence have the Canons, in this point, hitherto here
continued, and have been and are binding Ecclesiastique Laws, saving wherein
the later express Laws of the Kingdom cross them. And thus out of the
quality of the time, with regard to the practiced insolency of the Pope and
his Clergy, in putting their Canons and Decretals in execution, that receiud
general practice of Parochial payment (near almost according to the Canons)
and other such alterations, that suddenly varied from former use, and from the
liberty of the Lay subject, must have its original; not from any want of the
Canons of the Church of Rome, as if they had not been here at all had or read,
before about that time. For doubtless, the Canon Laws were here used and
practiced as far forth as the Clergy could make the Laity subject to them.
For, about D. years before this alteration, good testimony is of the public
and solemn receiving of the Codex Canonum vetus Ecclesiae Romanae (mentioned
by old Popes Did. 19. c. 1. Si Romanorum. Did. 20. c. de Libollu.
for the eldest and most authentic Body of the Canon Law of the Western
Church) and that in a National Synod held in D.C.LXX. under Theodore and
Wilfrid Archbishops; where, with one voice, the Clergy answered Theodore,
Optime Beda hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 5.
omnibus placet quaecunque definierunt Sanctorum Canones patrum nos quoque
omnes alacri animo libentissime seruare. quibus statim (says Theodore) p^otuli
eundem librum Canonum etc. But at that time there was no Law for Tithes, or
mention of them in the known Canon Law of the Church of Rome, or in any other
Provincial Canons, saving in that of the second Synod of Mascon. Afterward
also we find that Leges Episcopales Vide Cap. 14.. 1.
, which were served by William the first from the Hundred, and confined to the
Bishops Consistory; that we may omit the National or Provincial
Constitutions of this Kingdom, made in those elder times, according to the old
Canons of the Church of Rome. And X. years before Gratians Decree written, it is
certain, that the Canons of the Church, generally by the name of Canones and
Canonum Decreta (for diverse collections were of them, an some also confirmd by
Papal authority, beside the Codex Vetus, before that of Gratian) were
familiarly talked of and urged in that great G. Malme^b. hist. Novel. lib. 2.
page 103. b.
Controversy in the Synod of Winchester, in the fourth year of King Stephen,
touching the Castles of Newarke, Salisburie, and the Vies; where the King
denied utterly, Censuram Canonum pati; that is, to have it determined by them,
whether, or no, the two Bishops, Roger of Salisburie, and Alexander of
Lincoln, might lawful keep their Castles that they had fortified. But while
the rest of the Bishops stood so much upon their Canons, and even in the face
of Majesty professed a rebellion, the King and the Lay subjects, it seems, grew
so exasperated against them, that by public command, for preservation of the
liberty of the Crown and Laity, they were forbidden to be of any more use in
the Kingdom. For so perhaps is that to be understood (as we have elsewhere Ian.
Angl lib. 2. 43 vide, si ^lacet, Not. ad Fortisc. page 43. and 44.
noted) in John of Chartres, De nug^s Curtae lium, lib. 8 cap. 21.
where he says, that Tempore Regis Stephani a regno iussae sunt Leges Romanae
quas in Britanniam domus Venerabilis Patris Theobaldi Britanniarum Primatis
asciuerat. Ne quis etiam libros retineret, edicto Regio prohibitum est. What he
calls Leges Romanae, the most learnd Friar Bacon mentioning the same story,
styles Leges Italiae, and takes them for the Roman Imperialls, and not for the
Canan Law. I confess, I see not enough clearly here to judge (upon the words
of John of Chartres) whether it were the Canons or the Imperialls. on the one
side, If we say he meant that Theobald or his Clergy, brought the Roman Canon
Law; it might so seem as if it had not been here before in the hands of the
Clergy, nor partly practiced by them. Which doubtless is otherwise. If on the
other side we understand the Imperialls (Copies of which indeed might well be
at that very time brought as a novelty hither; for they were then newly found;
and plainly in Henry the seconds time, they were here in the hands of the more
curious Scholars, as you may see by John of Chartres his citing of them) how
then is that true which he presenly after says of the increasing power and
force of those Leges Romanae? Sed, says he, Deo faciente eo magis virtus legis
inualuit quo eam amplius nitebatur impietas infirmare. What force or power at
all had the Imperial here afterward? where is any sign of it? But the
objection against that which might prove them not to have been the Canon Laws,
may not difficultly perhaps be answered. It is true that the Canons of Rome
were here before, and read, and partly practiced in the Church. But diverse
Collections were of them about this age of King Stephen, and perhaps some later
and larger Collection might be brought hither by Archbishop Theobald, or some
of his Clergy, which are understood, I think, in that Domus Venerabilis Patris
Theobaldi. He himself perhaps might bring Iuo's Decree (when he came from Rome
in 3. of King Stephen) and endeavor the strict practice of it here; which the
King and the Lay subject had reason enough to dislike) or some of his Clergy
might perhaps afterward bring in Gratians Decree, that was both compild by
Gratian and confirmd by Pope Eugenius the third, about ten years before
Theobalds death, that is, about 16. of King Stephen. And this way those words
of Legis virtus inualuit, may have their truth. For howeuer that opposition
against the Canon Law were, it is most certain that this first part of the body
of it (the Decree) was presently upon the first publication of it in use in
England, and familiarly cited by such Divines as talk^ of what had reference to
it, witness especially In Symbol. elect. (...). in Bibl. Cot.
Giraldus Cambrensis in his Epistles. and the practice of the Canon Law here
for the time of Henry the second, is seen in the Epistles of that John of
Chartres; which yet remain and are, I think, the ancientest examples of
proceedings in our spiritual Courts. But notwithstanding that first part of
the body of the Canon Law, which expressly commanded Tithes to be generally
paid, were here soon receiud among the Clergy, yet about L. years after that,
the former course of Arbitrarie Consecrations of them continued. and both that
and the rest of those courses in disposition of Church-reuenues which so differ
from the Canons, and from the practice of this day, was not fully alterd till
some Decretalls came hither with more powerful and dreadful authority (as the
times were) of some of the following Popes, especially of Alexander the third,
and Innocent the third, which two alone, I think, sent as many commanding
Decretalls into every Province as all their Predecessors had before done; and
especially into England, as is already showed, they sent diverse (only for the
matter of Tithes) which were all first of Papal authority for the particular
ends for which they were sent, and so were obeid as Canon Law, although none of
them became parts of the general Canon Law until Gregory the ninth put some
of them into his Decretalls autorised by him in the year M.CC.XXX. about which
time perhaps and diverse years before, the Canon Law of Rome was not only read
here privately among the Clergy, but professed also in Schools appropried to
it. so I guess is that close Writ of 19. Hen. 3. to be understood, which
prohibited the holding of Scholae Legum in London. it was directed to the Mayor
and Shrifes commanding them, Claus. 19. Hen. 3. membr. 22.
Quod per totam Ciuitatem London Clamari faciant. and firmiter prohiberi ne
aliquis Scolas regens de Legibus in eadem Ciuitate de caetero ibidem Leges
doceat. Et si aliquis ibidem fuerit huiusmodi Scolas regens ipsum fine
dilatione cessare faciat T. Rege apud Basing. XI. die Decembris. This was five
years after the Decretalls published. and it seems most probable, that these
Leges were Canon Laws, perhaps mixed (as usually they were) in the profession
also with the Imperials (for both of them were, it videsis 39. Hen. 3. apud
Matthew. Paris hist. maiori a. d. 1255.
seems, studied here under Henry the third by the Clergy, more then any other
part of learning) and therefore were forbidden as being both, in regard of
their own authority, against the supreme Majesty and independencie of the
Crown of England.

The end of the Reuiew.
The ancient Records and other Manuscripts, Used in this History of Tithes;
with references to the places where they are cited, and to the Offices and
Libraries wherein they remain.
they are specially therefore here collected that the more learned Reader
(being perhaps, out of his own Studies, furnished with the most or all of what
we have out of printed Testimonies) may at one view, without pains of reading
the whole, be directed to all of them. I presumd he might wish for such a
collection; which was neither difficult for me to make; nor will it be hard for
any man that hereafter transcribes or Prints it, to alter the numbers of the
Pages according to his transcribed or printed Copy. the Margin will easily
help him.

With these I reckon also that book of Parlaments (for the most part, of the
time of Ed. 1.) remaining in the hands of that courteous and worthy Gentleman
Mr. I. Borough. it is cited, page 285.286.366.367.

Records in the Tower of London. Of the time of King Ethelbert, p. 252. William
the first, page 351.413.483. William the 2. p. 416. Henry the first, p.
325.352.353.417. Henry the 2. p. 350.351.445. King John, chap 2.. 8. and p.
352.353.387.4^5. Henry the 3. chap. 6.. 2. and page
194.265.267.284.286.352.358.391.4^3.435.436.437.444.445.446.491. Edward the
first, p 364.435.438. Edward the 2. p. 368.436. Edward the 3. p.
106.176.237.238.239.240.241.436.441.442.443. Henry the 4. p. 242.3^3 Henry
the fifth* p. 369.
With these I reckon also that book of Parlaments (for the most part, of the
time of Ed. 1.) remaining in the hands of that courteous and worthy Gentleman
Mr. I. Borough. it is cited, page 285.286.366.367.

In the Office of Receipt of the Exchequer. The Book of Domesday, p.
203.216.279.280.281.361.405.483.
Records of the time of Richard the first, p. 374.381.386. King John, p.
382.383.384.439 440. Edward the first, p. 366.367^389.390.332. Edward the
second, p. 448. Edward the third, p. 363.
In the Office of the Kings Remembrancer. The Red Book of the Exchequer. page
227.
In the Princes Library. King Knouts Laws (page 223.224.) It is a most
ancientest and perfect Copy of them in Latin.

In the public Library of Oxford. Ioannes Anglicus his Historia Aurea. page
275. The Legend of the Lord and Parson of Cometon, at the end of Johannes de
Grandisono his life of Thomas Becket. ibid. An Epistle of the University
(touching Personal Tithes) to the Convocation of the Clergy. p. 171. Thomas
Elmham Prior of Lenton his Chronicle of Henry the fifth. Chap. 1.. 4.
In the Inner Temple Library. The years of Edward the second at large. page
481.
In the Library at Paul's. Iuo his Decreta. Chap. 5.. 5. twice.
In Sir Robert Cottons Library. Chartularies or Leiger-bookes of the Church of
Vtrecht, chap. 5.. 2. in marg. and chap. 6.. 2. Abbey of Abingdon, chap. 5.. 3.
and p. 208.282.298.299. etc. to 306.419.420.482. Church of Worcester, chap. 5..
3. Church of Landaff, or Tile, p. 250. in margin. Priorie of Gisburn, p.
272.308.441. Church of Rochester, p. 282.310. etc. to 318. Abbey of Reding, p.
283.284 319. Abbey of Osney, page 306.307.308.357.397.398.399.400.401.402.
Nunnerie of Clerkenwell, p. 319. Nunnerie of Chartris page 363. Abbey of S.
Albons, p. 324.325. to 329.447. Priorie of Bosgraue, p. 330. to 334.397.
Priorie of S. Needs, p. 334.378. Hospital of S. Leonards, p. 336.337. Priorie
of Merton, p. 440.
A most ancient copy of the Synod of 742. held under Carloman, bound with a
Ms. Ansegisus, chap. 5.. 3. Fridegodus, page 271. And a Bull of Lucius the
second, in the same Volume, page 97 Bernardus Morlanensis, page 118 Iuo's
Epistles. page 125 A Volume of Decretall Epistles, wherein are the most of
those in Appendix Concilij Lateranensis, page 145. and 161 Henry Knighton Abbot
of Leicester his History, page 147.484 Excerptiones Ecberti Arch. Eboracensis,
page 196.197 Nicholas of Gloucester, page 204 and a French fragment in the same
Volume, page 205 Robert of Gloucester, page 206 John Pike, page 206 Saxon
Chronicles of Peterborough Abingdon Canterbury
page 206. Statuta Synodorum, page 210.211.212.263.264. Saxon Laws in Saxon,
page 213.219 222. And an old Exhortation in one of the Volumer of them in 8.
chap. 5.. 6. Historia Iornallensis, written by John Brampton, page
213.214.215.219.222.223. Saxon Laws in Latin, p. 214 Bid in Saxon, p.
253.259.271.276. Fleta, p. 216.428. The story of the Church of Landaff, page
250. and a Council of the year 816. (used in page 261. and 277.) and some
Decrees of Odo Archbishop of Cant^rburie are bound up with it, cited page 217.
And in the same Volume, the life of S. Cadoc. page 276 A Council under King
Ethelred, page 220.221.222. A Book full of late collections out of some Saxon
and Latin Moniments of this Kingdom, in a large 4. page 225.226.227.
Lanfranks Epistles, page 227 Regularis Concordia Monachorum etc. page 263
Fulcardus Dorobernensis, page 272. and in the same Volume a Bull of Gregory
the ninth, and a Charter of Athelstan, cited page 271. and 272. and a Writ to
the Shiriffe of York about Tithes, page 417 Turgotus Prior Dunelmensis, page
276. The life of Saint Cuthbert, page 282. Thomas Sprot, a Monk of Canterbury,
p. 321.322.323.397 Petrus Blesensis his continuance of Ingulphus, p. 323
Matthew Paris his lives of the Abbots of S. Albons. p. 329 Original
Instruments remaining there, page 193.338.339 to 350.359.373.379.414.415.
Anselmes Epistles, page 376.377. the published copy wants very many.
Giralaus Cambrensis his Symbolum electorum. p. 382.383.490 Matriculus
Ecclesiarum in Archidiacon. Leicest. p. 385 Radulphus de Diceto, p. 388.389 The
ancientest Book of Ely, p. 412. The Epistles of Robert Grossetest, p 430. 431.
The history of Lichfield, p. 482 Gulielmus Pictauensis his life of William the
first, p. 483. It is now on the Press at Paris, with other things belonging to
Normandy.
In the Library of Mr. Tho. Allen of Gloucester Hall. Robert of Gloucester, page
206 Annals of the Monastery of Burton, page 216.229. in margin. 232
266.422.429.433. And in that Volume are bound Constitutiones cuiusdam Episcopi,
cited page 231. Turgotus Dunelmensis, page 229. in marg. and 276.
In Mr. Patrik Yongs Library. Theodore Balsamon upon the Councels and some
Canonical Epistles, in Greek, page 463
In my own hands. Our Provincial Constitutions in course of time, p. 236 A
Book of Constitutions and other things belonging to the Church of York, page
337. and 418. And a Reference is in page 232. to one of the Constitutions of
the same Province, that I long since found in the Library of Mr. Henry
Sauill. The Eire of Darby, of 4. of Edward the third, page ^87 Roger of
Houeden, page 202 Exposition of old Law-termes, page 216. An English
Penitential, to direct Priests in Auricular Confession, page 169 Two of those
(commonly called) Bretons, much corrupted in the Print, page 390 Bracton (much
corrupted also in the Print.) page 405

Faults committed in the Print.
PAge 93. l. 10. Epistles. p. 125. l. 21. Ecclesia, and l. 22. lege. Sed ita se
habet etiam editio secunda Iuonis. autorem vero prima in eo loco vsus esse
videtur; atque eam recte in exemplari quod accerit typographus, emendabat. p.
138. l. 21. was for were. p. 163. l. 11. broacht for brought. page 167. in
marg. 10. Hen. 7. etc. p. 173. l. 9. honorabiles. p. 176. l. 19. licet. p. 178
l. 6. Church. p. 179. l. 15. droict. p. 182. l. 9. M.CCC.IV. p. 199. l 17.
deferes p. 207. l. 28. thenceforth* p. 218. l. 6. Domini. p. 219. l. 6 (...).
p. 220. l. 17. Minister. p 221. l. 16. suprascripti. p. 229. in marg. l. vlt.
dele in. p. 230 l. 10. innuant. and l. 24. proueniunt. p. 248. l. 9. first. p
277. l. 11. iubemus. p. 280. l. 16. Ipse for Iose. p. 283* l. 26. known. p.
285. l. 2. revenues. p* 292. l. 18. tell. p 352. l. 28. Decimarum. p. 355. l.
19. magnates. p. 358. l. 4. are for is. p. 358. l. 20. istum. p. 364. l. 14.
Domino. p. 376. l. 10. solicit p. 386. l. 21. Hospitale. p. 392. l. 17. has
for had. p. 398 l. 13. men's for man's. p. 422. l 11. By the Writ etc. p. 428. l.
7 read or more of etc. and in l. 8. blot out more. p. 433 l 29. veniunt.
Consilium etc. p. 4^6. l. 25. Cuius the Abbess etc. p. 438. l. 23. demanded
for commanded. p. 440. l. 24. read we for some. p 46* l. 9. supposititious. p.
466. l. 33. blout out as. p. 469. l. 13. for what read that. p. ^76. l. 17. be
done for been down, and l. 23. Terrages. and l. 31. Law. p. 478. l. 29 and 30.
for Canon, Common. and l. 38. read denomination. p 487. l. 2. enioies.

The Printer to the Reader
AS I found the Copy partly Printed partly Written, so is this done off; saving
only where those faults, and perhaps some other which your courtesy, Reader,
may amend) are committed. Neither thought I it fit to alter any thing without
the Autors presence, whence even the syllables of those passages in which
mention was as if it were yet but in part only printed (as my Copy was) are
also retained.


