THE CASE AND CURE OF A deserted Soul.

OR, A TREATISE Concerning the nature, kinds, Degrees, Symptoms, Causes, Cure
of, and mistakes about Spiritual Desertions.

BY JOS: SYMONDS Minister of St. Martins Iremonger-Lane London.

I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone;
I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.
Cant. 5.6. Venit cum manifestatur, et cum occultatur abscedit, adest tamen sive
occultum, sive manifestum. Aug. ep. 3. p. 10. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher,
for Luke Fawn, and S. Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Church yard.
1639.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and much Honored Lady, the Lady REBECCAH RUMNY.
Madam,
Four years agon, I preached upon this subject of spiritual desertions, not
having then the least thought to put it to the Press. But a strong stream of
importunities has borne me down. My love to my friends has subdued me to
them. They besieged me so strongly, that they have entered and taken away the
keys of the City, and pillaged me of my purpose; and this little thing, which
they call good booty; but they are mistaken: But now they have it, much good may
it do them; I stood out against them, not because I prized it, but because I
thought it not good enough for them. It shall much please me, if they having
made a prey of it, find it worth their having. Since it does fall into their
hands, the good blessing of GOD go with it, that it may be better to them
than the richest spoils. Madam, in this business, the next thing that I
desired was to reserve the first for you; and to stamp upon every one, some
small impresse of my obliged respects unto you: Ladyship. Besides mine own
engagements, which are neither few nor mean; your great worth was sufficient
to wheel my thoughts in this kind toward you.

Among other excellencies, your charitable disposition, like a rich fountain,
running with large streams of goodness many ways, renders you deservedly
honored of all. It is true nobleness to be of a large and diffusive spirit.
He that is all for himself, must receive all his thanks from himself; but to
do good to others, begets a strong reflection of true honor. Self is a poor
center of a man's actions. This is right earth: All things that have affinity
with the Heavens, move upon the center of another which they benefit. Madam, I
beseech you seek to be still more blessed in a close conjunction, and sociall
operation of true charity, and sincere piety, that these may stand as
unwithering Crowns upon your head: and when your old age shall give up to
approaching death, you may go to Heaven full of faith, and full of works.
These asunder are dead; but where they meet they have life in themselves, and
give life to their owners. This life, when your life shall end, he wishes to
you, who is and will be

Your Lapps. ever bounden, Ios: Symonds.

A Preface.
ACcesses and recesses are not proper to him that by his immense presence
fills all, Locis corporalibus non extenditur nec includitur. Aug ep. 53. p.
235.
and cannot be where he is not, nor cease to be where he is. True motion is
found in such things only as are subject to local circumscription: God is
said to come or go, to be present or absent, 1 In respect of manifestation, as
the Father speaks, He comes when he is manifested, and goes when he is hid
Aug. ep. 3. p. 10. Novit venire non recedendo ubi erat, novit abire non
deserendo quo venerat. id ibid.
. 2. In respect of operation: So God is said to be where he works, as we say
the Sun comes into a house, where it shines into it. Time was, when God was
with all men, both by gracious manifestation and operation, and this was man's
happiness: But sin has separated betwixt God and man, and they are departed
each from other: the division began from man, yet the Divine goodness tenders
reconcilement, but man will not. In this, man is become unhappy, that he has
lost his God, and knows it not: yea he counts his loss gain, and his gain
loss; he would be happy, but he erreth in his choice; he is ever moving,
never at rest; willingly absent from the greatest good, unwillingly laboring
with the greatest evil. Though other things are quiet in their place, and rest
in their end; yet man's place where he is pitched is strange to him, and his end
vexes him: all his life is labor Sicut quo plus a centro recedis ut ad plura
pergas, eo magis amittis omnia, sic animus a seipso fusus imme^sitate quadam
diverberatur. and mera mendicitate co^teriturcum natura cogit unum quaerere,
and multitu^^o non sinit. Dionyapud Gibe. p. 77. Non ille ire vult, sed non
potest stare, Sen. ep. 94. Nihil potest quietare hominis voluntatem, nisi solus
Deus. Aquin.
, and his motion is but a vexatious shifting from vanity to vanity, from evil
to evil, from bad to worse: this soar cries for healing, and that which he
thinks to find a lenitive, becomes a corzive: while he thinks to cure the
wound, he makes it deep, Postquam posuisti me contrarium tibi, factus sum
contrarius mihi. Eern.
and is his own tormenter.

The Heathen blundered in confused guesses how to redress the state of man:
they saw an unhappiness, but neither knew the cause, nor cure; yet something
they assayed, when they propounded those two rules to repair the breach: 1. To
reduce things to the first principles of nature. 2. To live according unto
nature.


These rules are useful, if rectified and rightly used.

First, reduce things to their primitive originalls, and lay them again in the
womb whence they sprang: This experiment would profit much. Look into the
world, and you shall see a confused mixture of good and evil, but you must
divide them wisely, and pursue them to their beginnings. Ascend by the
scattered beams of happiness in the world, to the Sun of righteousness
from whence they flow; and descend by the black and bitter streams of misery,
to the poisoned spring that sends them forth, and you will see two originalls
of both; God the fountain of life, and sin the root of death. In this way of
reduction of things to their causes, a man may see as in a glass, what he was,
and what he should be, what made him miserable, and what would make him happy.
It is men's unhappiness of two guides to choose the worse, brutishly declining
reason to be led by sense; seeing, enjoying, and suffering things, without
inquisition into their parentage. This is true folly to dwell in the surface of
things, not penetrating into their inmost nature, utmost end, foremost rise. A
wise man sees things quite through from first to last; he asks three
questions of the things be meets with; What are you? Whither go you? Whence
come you? He lives not like a subject to the world, but as a Lord; he examineth
and judges all things, he suffers no vagrants, but keeps all in order, has
the genealogies of all things, and reduces them to their several Tribes.
There is a certain voice in things inviting home, and proclaiming the causes
to which they owe their being; they carry a tie in which they are linked to
their principles, and by this line men might have conduct through the labyrinth
of the Universe, to the first causes.

Secondly, Another rule is given, Live according to nature. This sounds harsh,
Qui mali sunt, cos malos esse non abnuo, sed eosdem esse, pure atque
simpliciter nego; nam uti cadaver hominem mortuum dixeris, simpliciter vero
hominem appellare non possis etc. ^oeth. d. consolaet. Phil. l. 4. Pros^ 2.
Quicqu^d a bono deficit esse destitit, quo fit ut mali etiam desinant esse quod
fuerant. Idem Prosa. 3.
but it is because it is in their mother language, who never heard of Christ:
but a good Interpreter will easily help the business. There is in all men an
implanted inclination to happiness, and an home borne Pilot to carry this in a
right course; but it is true, though the former be not hurt, yet the latter is;
a man is another thing then he was, the soul is quick of foot, but dull of
scent; her sails are strong, but her compass is marred. The practical
judgment, the souls stearesman, is dim sighted, and takes rocks for harbors,
sea for land, west for east, earth for heaven. But herein is man's great
unhappiness; God has opened a way to renew those blurred characters of
knowledge, which yet remain as the light in the air after sun set, but man
regards not. The Scriptures are given by inspiration of God to make wise unto
salvation, but men are so far from due seeking to lighten that glimmering
snuff of natural understanding at this fountain of light, that they are in
love with their own darkness: they hate the light, because their deeds are
evil. Finding the power of conscience a check to their lusts, they resist it;
whereas they should rectify conscience by the word, and affections by
conscience, they perversely cast off conscience to give way to sin; yea of a
grave counselor, they turn it into a base flatterer, to applaud their
greatest folly and wickedness.

But what will the end be? Shall God come again with tenders of mercy, and a
new league of friendship, and shall man hang off? Let those especially consider
this, to whom God has come with many gracious visits and potent workings, yet
they come not in. I did purpose and promise in the beginning of this Treatise,
to speak of Gods leaving such, but I wanted opportunity at present. I say no
more now to them, but this, It is dangerous to despise grace, and to resist the
Spirit; if he depart, woe unto you: your latter end will pay you for your folly
and stoutnesse.

The day is coming, in which God will follow after foolish man no more; wonder
at his patience that has waited on the world some thousands of years already;
but this long lasting patience has fixed its period; then blessed are they
that enjoy him: as for all the rest, adieu for ever: then God will depart fully
and eternally; it shall no more be said, Come, but then Go ye accursed into
everlasting fire.

You have now your choice, here is God and the world; But this is folly, men
take that in a disjunctive sense, which is offered in a conjunctive: It is not
said, God or the world, but God and the world. In some consideration indeed
they are divided, but most make the worst choice: Here begins that vast
distance betwixt the Saints and the wicked; they set out at first from one
point, but more diverse, yea adverse ways, according to the difference of
their ends: a godly man when first he chooses God, becomes an happy man, for
his choice is his guide, which sets all the wheels in a right motion: love is
as the wing to the foul, or as the oars to the boat, which move it and order
it Nec faciu^t bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores Aug. ep. 53. p.
236.
.

When this is done, God and man brought together, this sweet meeting and
amiable conjunction is a great part of the plot of that eternal love of God,
who chose us that we might be enhappied by answering his choice of us, with
our choice of him; that he may dwell in us, and we in him.

Me thinks this world is like the Kings Court: Si terram amas, terra es: Si
Deu^ amas, quid vis ut dica^? Deus es. Aug.
children here are taken with pictures, and feed their eyes and fancies with
hangings and fine things; but the wife and grave Statesmen pass by these,
their business is with the King: most men stay in the out rooms, and low
things of the world, and so are mean; but blessed is the generation, whose
eye, desire, and way are unto God.

The creature is not capable of an higher blessedness, then to have God for
his God. They that dwell in God have a true dwelling; men who live upon the
creature, do not dwell, but roll as Ships at sea, or travel as wandering
vagrants: in God there is quiet abode, and perfect rest; for here is no evil,
nor want of God; here is enough, and such as may fit all times, all conditions,
all occasions, soul and body fully. Here in these deepes are wonders for the
mind to feed on: here also is sea-roome of goodness for the vast appetite of
man to floate in Tu Deus te diligenti ostendis te, and sufficis ei. Id. conf.
12. c. 15.
, and the satiety of the appetite breeds all repose and joy. Oh the
delectablenesse of this condition! In this is a depth of riches, deep riches
that cannot be sounded, and rich deepes that cannot be exhausted: the Man
CHRIST is the blessed channel betwixt the Fountain and the Cisterne, through
which grace, life, peace, strength, glory come by a gracious and a glorious
convoy; every vessel shall have its fullness to all eternity; sometimes indeed
(while this life lasts) the streams come fuller, and sometimes slower:
sometimes Christ stays the current that we may thirst, that after thirsting
we may drink again with redoubled pleasure.

This is the maine of a godly man's unhappiness, that he neither has a full,
nor a fixed state of comfortable communion with God in the world: after sweet
meetings come sad partings. Nothing is fixed, there is a flood and ebb as well
on land as in the sea, and as well in things spiritual, as in things natural:
even those that are strongliest knit, have a time of parting. Nothing in nature
is more conjunct then its own frame, yet this compacted composition admits a
dissolution: Man, the epitome of the world, is in this case; soul and body one
day will shake hands, yea and the body will fall asunder from it self, those
four elements that came in, in a vital league, will go out again with a
deadly war. The tie betwixt God and the soul is the firmest thing in the
world, the bond of grace is stronger than the bond of nature, yet even here is
a kind of parting also; but as the conjunction is stronger, so the separation
is less: but sometimes it is so great, that the Saints by enforcement of
sorrow cry out, My God has forsaken me, my Lord has forgotten me.

This sad condition is the subject of this little Treatise, concerning which I
would have put here some advertisements; but my pen has deceived me, and has
led me out into a larger and another way then I intended in this Preface.
Nothing more is now to be done, but to leave this small help in the hands of
such, whose souls long after the return of God, with quickening and comforting
influences upon them.

J. SYM.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. OF Desertions in general, as they concern the godly. 1. That there
is such an estate, p. 3. Demonstrated. 1. By the experience of the Saints. page
4. 2. By the witness of God. page 6

CHAP. 2. 2. In what sense the godly are Deserted. 1. In Appearance only. page
8 2. Really. page 9 Three Limitations. page 10 1. God leaves them not for ever.
ibid. 2. Not in respect of his love, but the Acts of Love. page 12 3. Not the
Acts of Love which are for our being, but for our well being. page 15

CHAP. 3. Four considerations about Desertions. 1. That a man may miss much
of Gods external presence, and yet enjoy inward communion with him. page 19
Two causes of this. page 21 2. He may want the comforting presence, and yet
have the quickening presence of God. page 22 3. He that loses Gods quickening
Presence, loses also his comforting presence. page 23 Two evils that befall
such a man. ibid. 4. All these may befall a man at once. page 25
CHAP. 4. Of Desertions in special. These are of two sorts, the withdrawing of
Influence of Grace. Of Comfort.
The first sort of Desertions, is the withholding of Assisting Grace, and is
Real. In appearance only.
1. Real. 1. The state of it: Gods suspending the arbitrary and wonted
Influence of the spirit of grace. page 26 1. The Act: a negative act. ibid. 2.
The object: expressed in three things. 1. It is the influence of the Spirit of
Grace, not the presence. page 27 2. It is the Arbitrary Influence. ibid. The
necessary influence is constant both for sustentation, and augmentation. page
28 The arbitrary influence, what it is, and why so called. p. 30. To what end
it serves. 1. To Actuate: which it does, 1. By exciting. page 31. 2. By
enabling to Act. page 33
2. To Regulate. page 34 3. To Corroborate. page 35 3. It is a suspension of
the ordinary influence which we were wont to have. page 37 There is a twofold
Influence. ibid. Four advertisements concerning Gods withdrawing his
Assistance. page 38 1. It is never wholly withdrawn. page 39 2. Desertion is
only when the abatement of life is eminent. page 41 3. When the deadness is
universal. ibid. 4. When the deadness abides upon the heart. page 42

CHAP. 5. 2. The Symptoms of a Deserted state. page 43 Two things in general
observable. 1. A man may be deserted and not know it, with the causes of it.
page 44 1. Much activity from false principles. ibid. 2. Gods departure is
graduall. page 45 3. Men rest too must on other things that deceive them:
expressed in three particulars. page 46 4. They consider not their estates.
ibid.
2. It is needful to know whether we be deserted or not: see three reasons.
page 47 1. Else we shall be unthankful. ibid. 2. We shall be secure and not
enquire after him. page 48 3. Not to know, this is to contemn God. page 50


CHAP. 6. The Rules for our help in judging of our estates. 1. Consider our
graces, in which if we be deserted, there will be a decay and change. 1. In
respect of Activity. p. 52. in two particulars, 1. In unfruitfulnesse in good:
where are three things considerable. page 53 2. Indisposednesse to good:
discerned in two things. page 56

CHAP. 7. 2. There will be a change in our light and sight. page 58 A
fourefold evil when God hides himself. 1. Obscurity. page 59 The enlightening
work of the Spirit explained in four things. page 61
CHAP. 8. 2. Inefficacy. p. 67. expressed in four things. 1. When a man is not
so affected with the things he knows as before. page 68 2. Not so impelled to
duty. ibid. 3. Not so restrained from evil. page 70 4. Not so humbled as
before. page 72
CHAP. 9. 3. Vacuity and emptiness. page 74 In this estate the soul has lost
a threefold excellency. 1. There is less complacency in thoughts of God. page
76 2. Less frequency. page 77 3. Less consistency. page 79
CHAP. 10. 4. Incredulity. Q. What is the cause of unbelief prevailing in
desertion. 1. The inevidence of the object of faith. page 82 1. When the object
is hidden. page 84 2. When the subject is dark. page 85
2. Satan's working. page 87
CHAP. 11. 3. There will be a change in the Affections. page 88 1. In those
Affections that have God and things spiritual for their object: those all
comprised in Love. The acts of love are Desire. page 90. Hope. page 90.
Delight. page 90.
1. Desires are abated. ibid. Abatement of Desires expressed in two things.
page 92 Q. How a man may know when God is his end. page 92 A. 1. Consider the
place of the end. page 93 2. The power of the end: which is fourefold. 1. It
Draws to it. ibid. 2. It Rules. page 95 3. It Retains and holds the heart
with it. page 97 4. It quiets the heart so far as it is attained. ibid.
2. Hope is weakened. page 99 The decaies of hope are 1. In the certainty of it.
ibid. 2. In the Acts of it Desire. page 101. Expectation. page 101.

Three things for the trial of these. ibid. 3. In the efficacy of it:
expressed in four precious effects of hope. page 102 3. Delight in God is
lessened. page 104 This may be known. 1. By forgetfulness of God. ibid. 2. By
excessive delight in vanities. page 105 3. By unwillingnesse to walk with God:
noted in five things. page 106
2. Consider those Affections that have for their object sin and things
carnal, there is a change in them. page 109 1. Hatred of sin is abated. page
110 This may be known. 1. If occasions of sin be less disliked. ibid. 2. If
the Law be less loved. page 111 3. If there be less prayer against sin. page
112
2. Grief of sin is lessened. page 113 Thus of the first Rule to judge
Desertions.
CHAP. 12. The second Rule to judge of desertions. 2. Consider the increase of
sin. page 114 When God departs, sin increases: two reasons. page 115 Two
considerations about the renewed power of sin. page 118 Two cautions in
concluding Desertions by the renewing of sin. page 122 Q. How it may be known
when sin is grown stronger. A. By the Root, which is, 1. The Affection.
page 123 Four degrees of love to sin. page 124 2. The mind: and that gives
strength to sin. 1. By good opinion of it. page 126 2. By working unto sin:
which it does three ways. page 127
2. By the Branches: the spreading of sin appears in three particulars. page
128 3. By the fruits of sin Inclination. page 129. Action. page 129.
In the acting of sin the power of it appears in four particulars. page 131
4. By the soil that feeds sin. page 134
CHAP. 13. 3. The third Rule to judge of Desertions is the consideration of the
means of Grace. page 135 Two considerations propounded for the Discovery of
this. page 136 Thus of the Symptoms of Desertion.
CHAP. 14. 3. The causes of Desertion Instruction. page 141. Correction. page
141.
1. Desertions are instructions and teach the knowledge 1. Of our natures.
ibid. 1. Our sinfulness. page 142 2. Our weakness. page 145
2. Of our graces. page 145 1. In the freeness of grace. page 146 2. The
necessity of grace. ibid.


CHAP. 15. 2. Desertions are corrections. page 149 1. Of Pride. ibid. 2. Of
Carelessness. page 151 1. In not accepting the seasons of grace. ibid. 2. In
neglect of the means of grace: showed in two particulars. page 153 3. In
neglect of duties of godliness. Three failings in duties. page 156 4. In
neglect of watchfulness. page 159

CHAP. 16. 3. Grieving the Spirit. page 161 How the Spirit is said to be
grieved. page 162 Two things by which the Spirit is grieved, Dishonor. page
163. Disobedience. page 163.
1. The Spirit is grieved by Dishonor. 1. Directly, in five things. page 164
2. Indirectly, when we do such things as occasion it. page 167

CHAP. 17. 2. The Spirit is grieved by Disobedience, and resistance of the
Spirit. page 167 The Spirit may be resisted in others, two ways. page 168 The
Spirit may be resisted by our selves. page 169 1. When we hang off from that
good to which we are strongly moved. page 170 The sinfulness of this in four
things. page 172 2. By sinning against light. 1. By willing evil. page 172 Q.
Whether it be worse to will evil, than to do it. page 172 2. By doing evil:
especially in 7. cases. page 176
3. By voluntary impenitency. page 182 Three Reasons of it. ibid.
CHAP. 18. 4. The Cure of Desertion: where are Rules prescribed. 1.
Preservative for all: 1. By way of persuasion, that men would labor to
maintain a constant communion with God. ibid. Six considerations to persuade
us: 1. We may lose much of God. ibid. 2. We may lose that quickly which will
hardly be recovered. page 185 3. The loss will be grievous. page 186 4. It is
possible to be kept. ibid. Two objections answered. page 187 5. It is an
excellent thing to enjoy God. page 189 6. It is necessary to have the assisting
presence of God. page 197 1. We always stand in need of divine presence;
showed in many things. page 197 2. Especially at some times; as in seven cases.
page 198



CHAP. 19. 2. By way of Direction, how to retain the happiness of Divine
Assistance. page 204 1. When you have it acknowledge it. 1. With thankfulness.
ibid. 2. With faithfulness. page 206
2. Use it; else we grieve the Spirit. page 209 The Spirit is grieved. 1. By
omitting of a known duty. 1. The sinfulness of this aggravated. page 210 2.
The foolishness of it: showed in four things. page 214
2. By remissness in good. page 217 The difference between our deficiency in
doing good, from the insufficiency of strength or malignity of heart: in two
things. page 217 Sinful defect is, 1. By doing less for quality. page 218 2.
Less for quantity than we should. page 219


CHAP. 20. 1. Q. How may a man know when his deficiency is imputed as sin to
him: answered in six things. page 221 2. Q. How may a man know that he does
his duty, when the heart is still pressed to more than is done: Answered, 1. By
way of Caution: 1. Be liberal. page 224 2. Be rational. page 225 Two things
vene the soul with a kind of spiritual oppression: 1. An erroneous
conscience. page 226 2. Satan: two reasons of it: page 228 Q. How a man may
know when he is pressed to good, that it is by Satan; Answered in three
things. page 230 2. By way of proposition. 1. Pro: There are bounds of duties
of godliness. page 233 The bounds of action are, 1. Of extrusion: showed in
three rules: page 234 A threefold molestation by doing less than God calls
for. page 235 2. Of limitations. page 238 Q. Whether a man may do too much.
page 238 Three considerations about the limits of Duties. page 240
2. Pro: There is a prudence directing as well in measure as in matter and
manner. page 245 3. Pro: It is safer to exceed, than to come short. page 246 4.
Pro: A man must not make his own disposition a rule always. page 247 Three
further considerations to clear the question. page 250

CHAP. 21. 3. Direct: Beg assisting grace. page 254 In prayer for help three
things considerable: 1. The Rise: which must be 1. A strong desire of walking
with God. ibid. 2. Necessity. page 256
2. The carriage of our Prayer. page 258 3. The end of our Desire. page 261
CHAP. 22. 4. Direct: Keep Gods favor, and cross not his will. page 263 Two
Rules for this: 1. Keep up love. page 265 The efficacy of love showed in five
things. page 267 2. Hold fast this truth, that that is best which God wills.
page 272 Means to hold fast this truth, expressed in many particulars. page 273

CHAP. 23. 5. Direct: Keep in Gods way. page 279 Two things to be carefully
observed. ibid. 1. Q. How a man may know that he is called to any work: three
answers to it. page 280 2. Q. Whether evil men have that flush of Spirit which
they have in duty of God, or no: Answered in many particulars. page 283
CHAP. 24. 6. Direct: Be doing, and wisely and diligently use the means of
grace. page 289 The faults of men in the use of the means. 1. Profaneness.
page 290 2. Confidence misplaced. page 291 3. Not coming to them for this end.
page 292 4. Not using them in faith. page 293 5. Not drawing out the efficacy
of them. page 294 Inducements to seek God in this way. 1. It is Gods way. page
294 2. His promise is with us. ibid. 3. God has been found. page 296 4. It is
Gods glory to meet his people. page 297 5. Consider with whom we have to do.
ibid.


CAAP. 25. 2. Counsels to such as are Deserted. page 299 1. Consider if it be
not so. page 300 2. Make haste to recover. page 302 1. You are at a constant
loss. page 302 2. There can be no reason of delay. page 304 3. Delay is very
sinful: expressed in five things. page 305 4. Delay is dangerous: expressed in
two things. page 307
3. Put on to purpose: with strength, with continuance. page 308

CHAP. 26. Motives to use those counsels. 1. It is possible to recover. page
310 Three Reasons of it. page 311 Three encouragements. page 313 1. The life
you have is from Christ. page 313 2. You have a promise. page 314 3. You have
experience. page 316

CHAP. 27. 2. It is necessary; Desertion is no state to be rested in; for it is
1. Sinful. page 320 This is aggravated in three particulars. ibid. 2. It is
hurtful 1. It cuts off the comforts of the soul. page 321 2. All things are
dead, when you are dead. page 322 The loss in this showed in two things. page
322 3. The heart grows worse and worse. page 323 4. You may have a worse time
to seek unto God than now. page 325 5. God will fetch you in if you come not.
page 326 6. God is not well pleased. page 328
3. As Gods presence with you is, so is your life. page 326 Six incentives to
enforce this; 1. If you have but little, you can do but little. page 330 2.
Your works will be more perfect if you have much. page 331 3. The more grace
is raised, the sweeter will your way be. page 332 4. The less grace, the more
corruptions. ibid. 5. The greater measure of grace brings in more comfort. page
334 6. That little you have is for this end least defective. page 336

CHAP. 28. 3. Directions to further endeavors. 1. Quicken desires after God.
page 338 A twofold advantage of it. ibid. 2. Bewail your loss. 1. Mourn for
the loss it self. page 339 God will not deny mercy to mourners. 1. When their
sorrows are great. page 343 Four reasons of it. page 345 2. When sorrow is
ingenious. page 348 This showed in six things. page 348
2. Bewail the cause. page 352 1. Q. Whether the substraction of the
Influences of the Spirit be always for sin; Answered in three particulars.
page 353 2. Q. How a man may find out what sin is the cause. A. 1. Sometimes
the cause is visible: as in two causes. page 354 2. When the cause is not
transparent. 1. Pursue the loss to the birth of it. page 254 2. Consider what
things have been most pressed by God upon you. page 355 3. Listen to
conscience. page 356 4. Pray the Lord to show you the cause. page 357


CHAP. 29. 3. Direct: go to Christ. page 369 Two cautions in this. page 369 4.
Direct: Set your hands unto the work. page 375 That men Regenerate have a
power to do something of themselves: proved by four reasons. page 376 Two
objections answered. page 378 The things to be done. 1. Stir up your selves
and work upon your hearts by your understandings. page 379 Seven Rules helping
to quicken the heart by the understanding. page 382 2. Attend the Ordinances.
page 384 3. Take the help of the Saints. ibid. 4. Do your first works. page
385 An objection answered. ibid. Thus of Desertions as they are Real.
CHAP. 30. 2. Desertions may be in appearance only. page 388 The causes of this
mistake: 1. Fearefulness. page 388 2. Mistake in the cause of present deadness.
page 300 3. Misjudging our selves. ibid.
Error in judgment occasioned by three things. 1. Spiritual poverty. ibid. 2.
Hungring and thirsting after more grace. page 392 3. Much love. ibid.

CHAP. 31. False Rules of our judging our selves causing mistake. 1. False
Rule: Because we have less vivacity. page 395 Considerations about vivacity of
Spirit. ib. 1. Distinguish betwixt Gods working in gifts and graces. page 395
2. God sometimes gives more than he will continue; expressed in four cases.
page 397
2. False Rule; because we do less than we have done. page 404 Three
considerations about this. page 406
CHAP. 32. 3. False Rule: Because we find more stirring of corruptions. page
409 Five considerations for the clearing of this. page 409 4. False Rule: Men
are too much swayed by the opinion which others have of them. page 413 5. False
Rule: Men think they grow not. page 415 The mistake in this showed in four
things. page 416
CHAP. 33. 2. The second sort of spiritual Desertions is, the eclipsing of the
comfort of the soul. page 422 Three considerations premised about the comfort
of the soul. 1. The nature of it. page 423 The Saints have but an imperfect
comfort, expressed in two things. page 425 There are 3. degrees of spiritual
comfort. 1. Peace: which is twofold. page 426 2. Joy. 4.7. 3. Triumph, which
consists in two things. page 429
CHAP. 34. 2. The cause and root of comfort. page 431 1. Efficient cause, God.
page 431 1. That comfort is of God, appears in three things. ibid. 2. How this
comfort is wrought by God. page 433
Three Acts of God concurring in this work. 1. Act: Preparation, and that: 1.
By illumination, expressed in four things. page 434 2. By the working of
faith. page 437 3. By sanctification. page 439
2. Act: Collation of matter of comfort. page 441 3. Act: Attestation. page 443
The doubts by which the soul is vexed, reduced to two heads. 1. About the
truth of the Gospel: expressed in diverse things. page 444 2. About themselves
and their interest in the Gospel. page 447
Many things make true faith hardly discernable. ibid. We have need of the
help and witness of the Spirit: proved by four Arguments. page 449 Three
things observable concerning this Testimony. page 454 2. The matter of
spiritual comfort. page 457 The proper object of spiritual comfort expressed
in two things. page 458 Four things observable about this. page 459 3. The
defectibility of it: comfort may be lost. page 460
CHAP. 35. In the particular consideration of this sad state of the soul, is
expressed, 1. The case: and in that is considered, 1. The nature of it: set
forth in four things. page 461 1. It is a loss of comfort in God. page 462 2.
It is a loss of usual comfort. page 463 The special seasons in which God
gives such a fullness of comfort, as shall not continue: expressed in five
cases. page 464 3. It is an eminent loss. page 465 4. It is not a fit of
uncomfortableness, but a state. page 465
2. The degrees of it. page 466 1. When his quieting presence is much abated:
this expressed in three things. page 466 2. When there is much quickness, but
no quietness. page 469 3. When there is neither comfort nor liveliness. page
470 4. When God not only suspends his comforts, but afflicts the soul, page
472. And this is done, 1. By rebukes of the Spirit: four ways. page 472 2. By
tradition of the soul into its own hands, or Satan's. page 476
5. When to all this is added an accumulation of other miseries. page 479 6.
When all this is continued. page 481


CHAP. 36. 3. The effects of this sad condition; these are expressed according
to the quality of the persons thus Deserted. 1. As they are sleeping
Christians: and they are, 1. Careless. page 483 2. Declining in affection. page
484 3. Apt to he drawn to evil. ibid.
2. As they are awakened: in these there are different workings: 1. Evil
effects: as 1. Heartless complaints. page 485 2. Fruitless complaints. page 486
3. Great unquietness: expressed in three things. page 487
2. Good effects: as 1. Sorrow. page 490. 2. Longing desires. page 491 3.
Repentance. ibid. 4. Subjection. page 492


4. The cause of the restlesness of the soul without God. page 492 1. From the
condition of the subject: expressed in five things. page 492 2. From the
object; in respect of, 1. The quality of it. page 498 There are three things in
God which cause the wound to bleed much. ibid. 2. The relation in which God
stands to a beleiver. page 503 3. The operation of God. page 504

CHAP. 37. 2. The causes for which God deals thus with his people. page 506 1.
To put a difference betwixt Heaven and earth. ibid. 2. In judgment to the
world. page 510
3. To establish the godly in more full comforts. page 512 Affliction of the
soul does advantage much to further establishment: four reasons of it. page
513 4. The correcting and healing of some evil in his people. 517. These evils
are, 1. Deadness and dullness of heart. ibid. 2. Fearelesness of God. page 519
3. Slightness of heart, 521. expressed in three things. ibid. 4. Living too
much upon the creature: expressed in three things. page 525 5. Intractableness
and stifness of heart. page 528 6. Rigidness and unmercifulness to the
spiritual estate of others. page 530 7. Some great transgression. page 533
5. To show that God is the God of all comfort. page 534 6. To revive their
esteem of mercy. page 536 7. That others may be instructed. page 538 8. To fit
them for special service. page 539 2. The cure of this sad condition. page 542
1. In those in whom the cause is natural. page 543 2. In those in whom the
cause is spiritual: and it is applied, 1. To those that have slumbring and
drowsy spirits. page 544 2. To those that are awakened, and see their loss:
to these are propounded, 1 Perswasives: 1 Comfort is their strength. page 546
Three great assaults that a man is exposed unto. ibid. 2. Sadness does much
hurt both to themselves and others. page 549 3. Recovery is possible: proved by
five things. page 550
2. Directives: 1. Seek the Father in the Son. page 551 2. Seek peace much.
page 555 3. Come in much love to God. page 556



Love shows it self in two things. page 557

December. 4. 1638.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES.
THE DESERTED SOULS Case and Cure.
CHAP. I. That the godly are sometimes deserted.
THough most men, since God and they parted in Adam, live without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. and are so far from him, that they neither enjoy him, nor
know him; yet there is a generation of men whom God has made nigh by the blood
of Christ, with whom he has renewed that old acquaintance and amity which at
the first he had with them, Heu Domine Deus, rara hora, and brevis mora. Bern.
in. Cant. 13.
and they with him; which blessed estate, as it is not here perfected, so it is
often interrupted; their comforts are sweet always, but short often: there are
but few (if any) whose joys in a comfortable communion with God, are not
sometimes clouded with sorrows in a doleful elongation from him, so that if
you lay but your ear to the door of their closets, you shall often hear the
daughters of Sion (as heirs of their mothers miseries) complaining in their
mothers language, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, Esaias
49.14. If you six your eyes upon them, you shall see Sions tears in their
eyes, her palenesse in their faces, her sorrows in their souls; in
consideration of, and compassion to these mourners, I spent some thoughts upon
this sad subject.

Desertions then are either Common, or Special.

These which I call common, are such as all men share in by nature, God having
forsaken and withdrawn himself from Adam, and all his posterity, with
Apostate Angels.

The special, I shall handle as they concern Godly. The special, I shall
handle as they concern Hypocrites.
Desertions, as they concern men truly regenerate, are Gods withdrawing
himself;

In respect of quickening quicting or co^forting of the soul.

Desertions, as they concern men seemingly regenerate, are Gods withholding of
those influences, by which they had a kind of life comfort spiritual.

To begin then with desertions as they concern the godly: I shall first speak
something in general of them, and then descend to the more specials. That
which I shall say in the generals, I will comprize in two things: 1 That there
is such an evil as spiritual desertion. 2 How they are deserted.


That there is such an estate, That the godly may be deserted, proved.
its almost lost labor to prove; yet because as all in Christians is hidden
and secret, so nothing more than their comforts and discomforts. I will, and
that in two words make it good; we will call in two witnesses to give evidence
to the truth.

The experience of the Saints: Sion, By experience.
you have her verdict; Esaias. 49.14. And Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me,
and my God has forgotten me. You see here the Church clad all in black,
bewailing her widowhood, as one bereft of her dearest husband; every word of
her speech is bedewed with tears (...). Plut. l. de consolat. ad Apol.
, and bears a drop from her bleeding soul. The Lord, Jehovah, he whose power
and fidelity has been to me as the pillars of the earth, he has forsaken me,
he has cast me off. My Lord, he who was mine in covenant, mine in communion,
he who was the joy of my life, the life of my joy, the strength, the stay, the
spring of my life, he has forgotten me: he has cast me not only out of his
arms, but out of his heart; I am quite out of his love, not only forsaken,
but forgotten.

And in this, Sion is not alone: Ask David, and you shall hear him as soon as
you come near him, sighing, sobbing, crying, soaring; but what says he, what
ailes him? he tells you, Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? See how well their testimony agrees: how can a man look upon David, and
not count him as a poor Orphan, that is left in woe case, friendlesse,
helpless, comfortless a but yet we will hear a greater than David, that is,
the Captain of our salvation, the first and head of the whole order Christus
Primicerius. q. in prima cera, vel primus in cera; antiqu s^ ilicet cereis is
ebanturtabulis, and primus in tabula vocabatur Primicerius, sic Aug. appellat
Stephanum Primicerium martyrum; and (...). Phavorin.
, and what he says, and we will go no further to ask of others. David was
here a type of Christ, and as himself was but the shadow of Christ's person, so
was his sorrow but a shadow of Christ's sorrow. David did but taste of the cup
which Christ afterward drank more deeply of, when in the anguish of his souler
upon the Cross, he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Matthew. 27.46.

And this Cup has gone round ever sinder, so that few have ever tasted of the
wate^s of life, but they have drunk also of these waters of Marah (...). Hom.
and Plut. l. de consolat. ad Ap.
; The experience of all the Saints almost contributes to the evidence of this
truth: where shall we find a man that has not met with these rocks and sands,
and has not seen some gloomie days, and winter storms, passing through many
changes, sometimes rejoicing as the plants in the Spring (...). Odyss. 8.
, in the sight and sense of Gods gracious presence; sometimes again mourning
for his loss of God; sometimes lift up to heaven in his soul, and mounting as
it were on Eagles wings; sometimes again depressed to the deeps of hell, and
held as with chains of brass or iron; now quickened, but growing dull again
Aliquando infirmior fit regenitus regeneratione progrediente, quam ineuate.
Camer. amic. Coll. p. 289.
? few can say they have once found God, but may say they have often lost him.

Add to the experience of the Saints, Divine testimony.
David, and Heman, and Job, and Zion, might speak much out of distrust,
impatience, passion, etc. but when God himself shall come in and confirm
their evidence, it is past doubt. But God does so; for does Sion bewail
herself as a widow forlorn without an husband? God says it was so: The Lord
has called thee as a woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit, and a wife of
youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God, Esaias 54.6. God says he had in a
sort divorced her from him: yea, and whereas Sion complained that God forsook
her, its no more than God says himself, verse. 7. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee; so that this is sometimes the sad portion of the Saints, to be
deserted.

And this I have the rather spoken, that the mourners in Sion may see this
uncomfortable state may consist with grace; it is a comfort to know that thy
deeps are passeable, and thy case cureable; others have walked in this heavy
way, and are now in heaven; others have been in these storms, yet have safely
arrived at the land of promise: None other affliction has befallen you, but
that which is common to men; therefore be not overwhelmed in grief, give not
thy self for lost: disquietnesse will hurt, but it cannot help; rather stir
up thy self to take hold of God, repent, pray, believe, wait, for God is
faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but
will with the temptation also, make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

CHAP. II. How, or in what sense the godly are said to be deserted.
THe second thing follows, how, or in what sense they are said to be deserted.

First, Sometimes in appearance only.
sometimes only in appearance, Quosdam deserit, quosdam deserere videtur.
Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Aug. in Ps. 44. Obscuris super nos dispositionibus Deus
saepe unde nos astimatur deserere, inde nos recipit; and unde nos recipere
creditur, inde derelinquit, ut plerunque hoc fiat gratia, quod ira dicitur, and
hoc aliquando ira sit, quod gratia putatur. Greg. mor. l. 5. c. 5.
not in truth: men are in nothing so much deceived as in themselves; man's heart
and ways, yea, his judgment and thoughts are subject to many variations; and
frequent mistakes are found in men's opinions about these great questions, am I
truly changed, or am I an hypocrite? do I believe, or not? is God my God, or
not, etc? And the errors of men's judgments arise from ignorance, unbelief,
passion; false rules of judgment, etc. of which principles of error I shall
speak hereafter; but through such impediments men are often puzzled, and think
they are evil, when they are good; and worst when best, and furthest from God,
when nearest to him.

But as desertions are sometimes in appearance only, Sometimes really.
so sometimes they are real, God truly withdrawing himself, and denying that
fullness of communion which his people were wont to have with him. But though
he desert them really, yet not totally; The Lord will not forsake his people
for his great Names sake, 1 Samuel 12.22. his truth is engaged in it, For he has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. the words are
emphaticall Est negationis conduplicatio, ut sit vehementior pollicitatio.
Estius in locum.
, (...); here is to be observed a duplication of the subject of the Promise, I
will not leave, I will not forsake: and a multiplication of negatives; there
are five negatives in the promise, by which he intimates that he will not,
yea, he will not, surely he will not forsake his servants, he will never wholly
reject them, nor utterly leave them.

To clear this point a little, Yet with limitation.
I will lay down three limitations, or distinctions, by which we may the better
understand in what sense this is a truth, that the godly are sometimes forsaken
of God.

God leaves them for a season, Not for ever.
If he go from them, it is but as one that goes from home, to return again:
I will not leave you comfortless, or as Orphans; But I will come again, Joh.
14.18 (...).
. When Sion was in this uncomfortable case, God said unto her, For a moment
have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee; in a little
wrath have I hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Esaias 54, 7,
8. He may frown, but he will smile again; though his compassions may be
restrained, yet they cannot be extinguished; his anger endures but a moment;
in his favor is life; weeping may endure for a night, but In the morning joy
comes. Psalm. 30.5. in his favor is life In benevo lentia ejus, vita, i. e. diu
durat, contrarium ejus quod praecessit, momentum in ira ejus. Drus. quaest.
Ebraic. l. 1. q. 49.
, weeping may endure or lodge as a passenger, to be gone in the morning; but
joy comes in the morning as an inhabitant, and enjoys his habitation to
himself. As the Sun sets to rise again, and as the tender mother lays down
the child to take it up again; so desertions are but short interruptions of a
Christians comfort: God will not stay long, when his people cry unto him; he
will return, and exchange their doleful Winter, into a joyful Spring. Though
the River has her ebbings, yet it has her flowings; the tide of comfort will
come in again.

There shall be a day of their joyful meeting with their beloved; they shall
see their God, enjoy his presence, and be embraced in the arms of his love;
and when this day shall come, there will be more joy in meeting, then there was
grief in parting; God will power in comforts upon them, as they have powered
out tears for him; and will recompense their love with kindness; their
desires, with fullness; their mouring, with gladness; their short heaviness,
with everlasting consolations.

Desertions are not the interruption of Gods love, Not in respect of Gods love,
but the acts of love.
but of the acts of his love; his affection is the same, but the expression is
varied: nore that there is a twofold love of God, or a twofold consideration of
the same love.

There is the love of Benevolence, and the love of Beneficence, or as some call
it, the love of Intention, and the love of Execution Suarez. de praedest. l. 1.
c. 11.. 5. Baron. de p^ccato mort. and ven part. 1.. 5.
. The former to the faithful from eternity to eternity, and is immutable, and
incapable of any intention, remission, augmentation, diminution, or any
alteration; it is like God himself, unchangeable, but the latter, the love of
Beneficence, or of Execution, Vid. Greg. de Valent. t. 2. disp. 8. q. 3. punct.
2.
which is his love, as it expresses it self in doing good to us, may be in a
degree suspended and restrained for a season. As in the Summer there is a Lux
and Lumen, light inherent in the Sun, and light fluent from it; that is ever
perfect and permanent, but this may suffer changes, it may be obscured and
lessened, yea, extinguished, and quite cut off, as in the night it falls out.

A father may have a dear affection to his child, yet show but little in his
carriage. David shut in his love from Absalom, not ceasing to love him, but
forbearing the wonted acts and expression of his love: A fountain may have her
streams cut off, or dammed up, though it self have the same fullness and aptnes
to power itself out as before. The root does not always give so much sap as to
make branches bud and blossom at all times, yet when she is most sparing in
her beneficence, her good will is the same, she sticks as close to them as ever.

We often keep back mercies from our selves, and God would more abundantly
power in himself, Sene^. ep. 50 Rogat paedagogum ut migret, domum tenebrosam
esse ait.
but that we open not unto him; and so as that blind woman complained the house
was dark, when she her self was blind, so we often complain, as if God had
restrained mercy, when we our selves restrain it: and it is as true, that
sometimes God is provoked by our sins, and keeps in his mercy, that he comes
not with such gracious visits as before, yet his love is not shortened, though
the fruits of it are; Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save, nor his care heavy that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid (or made him
hide) his face from you, that he will not hear. Esaias. 59.1, 2.

Though God may vary in the operations of his love, yet his love in it self is
the same, and shall be the same for ever; Necuit hic dici quod Orontes de regum
amicis esse ut digiti rations supputa^tium modo modo unitatem repraesentantes.
Plut.
it is an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. The hills may be removed, and the
mountains may depart, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on
thee, Esaias 54.10. This was spoken to the Church in the day of her sorrow; he
tells them he loved them though he afflicted them: and that speech of God to
David is full for this purpose; I will visit their transgressions with rods,
and their iniquities with stripes, nevertheless, my loving kindness will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my covenant
will I not break, etc. Psalm. 89.30, 44.

When God deserts his people, Not acts which are for being, but those only
which for well being.
he withholds those acts of love only that are for our well being, not those
which are for our being. Though a Christian may want that without which he
cannot have peace, yet not that without which he cannot live: Whatsoever is
necessary to his constitution, life, compleatnesse, and stability, that is
never denied; no such Good thing will God withhold from them that walk
uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. He will ever hold their souls in life, not leaving
them in weak beginnings, but continually leading on unto perfection: As he is
the Author, so he is the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. Qui operatur ut
accedamus, operatur ne discedamus. August. de bon. persev. c. 7.
We are confident of this very thing, that he that has begun the good work
in you, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. The Saints
shall have of him, whatsoever is so necessary, as without it they cannot hold
their state, or attain their end: but that which is rather for their ornament
than supportment, for the sweetness of their way, than surenesse of their end,
for comfort rather than necessity, may be, and is often in great measure cut
off and decayed.

This then is the thing: when God leaves his people, he does not so leave them
to the will of the flesh; the tentations, and snares of the world, the power
and tyranny of the Price of darkness, as never, or not at all to look after
them; but his care is over them in these times, and he is with them by a
secret and powerful manutenency, both guiding and upholding them, and is often
most in power, when least in appearance. The metals that lie deep under ground,
and see not the heavens in their light, yet partake of their influence, yea
ordinarily the most precious operations of Gods gracious power are there where
is least sense and feeling of them, and they have most of God when they see him
least. As when God covered Moses his face in the cleft of the rock, Exodus
33.22. then he passed by, and gave Moses to see his glory: so the clouds and
veiles that cover our eyes, are often forerunners of the cleerest light, and
sweetest sight of God.

And when God seems to be turning a man into a desolate and ruinous heap, yet
even then is he building, and preparing him to be a more excellent structure.
The gardener digs up his garden, pulls up his fences, takes up his plants, and
to the eye seems to make a pleasant place, as a waste; but we know he is
about to mend it, not to mar, to plant it better, and not to destroy it: So God
is present even in desertions, and though he seem to annihilate, or to reduce
his new creation into a confused Chaos, yet it is to repair its ruins, and to
make it more beautiful and more strong. The glory of the second temple was
greater than the glory of the first, Hag. 2.9. In the repairing of an house, we
see how they pull down part after part, as if they intended to demolish it, but
the end is to make it better: it may be some posts and pillars are removed, but
it is to put in stronger: it may be some lights are stopped up, but it is to
make fairer lights: So though God take away our props, it is not that we may
fall, but that he may settle us in greater strength; he batters down the life
of sense, to put us upon a life of faith; and when he darkens our light that we
cannot see, it is but to bring in fuller light; as when the stars shine not,
the Sun appears, repairing our loss of an obscure light, with her clear
bright shining beams. So then we see, that though God do forsake his people,
yet not totally, not for ever, not ceasing the affection of love, but the acts,
and not those which concern our being, but such as concern our well being: As
abundant quicknings, and aid of grace, victorious and triumphant power over
sin, the clear and satisfying testimony of his Spirit, etc.

CHAP. III. Four other considerations about desertions.
HAving premised these things in the general, I shall now come to the
specialls, to speak of these desertion in their several kinds, and first as
they befall the godly.

Desertions as they befall the godly are of two sorts.

Withdrawing of 1 Influence of grace. 2 Of comfort. 1 Inward. 2 Outward.


For all the complaints which the Saints do make of Gods hiding and
withdrawing himself, arise from one of these three grounds, or all.

2. That he gives not that peace, joy, comfort, assurance as he was wont. A man
may want Gods gracious presence in outward things, yet enjoy his internal
presence in the soul: yea often there is most of God within, when least
without.
3. That he brings them into outward straits, and does not deliver them.
Before I come to speak directly, and particularly of these, I will propose
four brief observations about them.

1. That a man may miss much of Gods external presence in the sweet and
comfortable way of his providence, providing, protecting, and ordering all
occurrents to contentment, yet may enjoy inward communion with him, his soul
may be most abundantly animated, and quickened with the Spirit, when he has
most discouragements without: yea, God is wont when he gives least in the
world, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5.
to give most of himself; and his people seldom have much of the fatness
below, and of the springs above at once, as the sun and the stars appear not
together. But when he shuts up all doors of hope, and help in the world,
then he sets open the doors of heaven. So Saint Stephen, when he saw nothing
but death in the world, Then saw heaven opened, and Christ sitting at the right
hand of God, Acts 7. Such mercy found Jacob, when he was a poor pilgrim in a
strange land, then he saw that heavenly ladder, and the Angels ascending and
descending as a pledge of Gods care, and their readiness for his good, Genesis
28.12. The abundance of the spirit both of grace and peace, is usually powered
forth in a day of sorrow, as when the dough which the Israelites brought from
Egypt was spent, God gave them bread from heaven.

And there are 2. causes of it. Gods tender love, which is such, that he will not
add affliction to his peoples sorrow. Because Gods love is such, that he will
not add sorrow to sorrow.
When therefore he is pleased in his wisdom to put a cup of affliction into
their hands, he is wont to give them also the cup of consolation; when he casts
them into outward straits, he does recompense it with inward inlargements. The
Church never had such full predictions of Christ, and precious promises of
great mercy, as when the most dreadful evils hung over her head, as appears
in the prophecies of all the Prophets; And the faithful usually find their
worst days, their best days, and when they meet with troubles, they find most
peace. This the Apostle witnesses, As the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.4. And though our outward
man perish, yet our inward man is renewed day by day (...), die, and die, ut
Tertul. legit in li. de resur. carn. i. e. quotidie. Vid. Esti. com. in lo.
, 2 Cor. 4.16.

The capacity of the soul is widened, The capacity of the soul is enlarged in
affliction.
and enlarged in affliction; heavenly communion with God is sweetest in an
evil day, and the soul longs after God, that in him it may find all supplied,
which it wants in the world. Now the more God stirs up desires of himself, the
more the soul is prepared to communion with him, and the more it has of him,
the hungry man eats most, and he that is most athirst, drinks most. When the
life of nature, and sense is cut off, the soul seeks a life in God, and is
much in all endeavors of enjoying God; now she seeks him in prayer, she
enquires for him in the word, and by all means reaches hard after him. So
David, when he was in the wilderness, panted and breathed after God, he
prays, he cries, his thoughts are with God all the day, yea in the night he
meditates upon him, and (says he) My soul followed hard after thee, Psalm.
63.8.

2. One may want the comforting presence of God, yet have the quickening
presence.
One may want inward comfort, yet not be deserted in respect of the influence
of grace; the tenure of grace and peace is not the same; a man may lose the
sense of grace, and yet retain the life of it. Though he be more happy that
has grace and peace, yet he may be as holy that has grace without peace: yea
and as the clouded summers sun yields more comfort to the earth than a bright
shining winters sun; so when the soul is most clouded, it may be most
quickened; when the light of Gods favor is hid, the quickening heat of the
spirit may most abound.

He that loses Gods quickening presence, loses also his comforting presence.
The comforting presence is never without the quickening presence.
Though a man may have grace, living and stirring without peace, yet he cannot
have peace, without the life of Grace. Peace and Comfort are fruits of the
sanctifying Spirit, and as there may be a root without fruit, but there cannot
be fruit without the root; so though there may be the spirit quickening and
sanctifying without comfort, He that wa^ts Gods quickening presence, is either
in a lethargy,
yet there cannot be true comfort without the quickening spirit.

One of these two evils befall a man from whom God is departed, Aut furit aut
patitur mirum gravitate soporem. Ovid. met. 15.
and to whom the workings of the power of God is denied.

Either he falls into a spiritual lethangie, being as one asleep, whose
spirits and senses are bound up, so that he is in a shadow of death, neither
hearing, nor seeing, nor tasting the things of God, and so is bereft of all
spiritual joy and comfort. When a man is in a state of deadness, he is dead
to all things that are spiritual, and they also are as dead things to him. The
promises that are fountains of life to a living man, are as dry and empty
cisternes unto him: yea Christ, and heaven, and the love of God, though they
are the food, the strength, the life of a man in a healthful state, are to the
languishing soul, as meat to a sick stomach: the glorious things of the
Gospel are to him as a withered flower, or as a sealed book, he has no use of
them.

Or (...) spiritual frenzy: In the day of estrangednesse of God, Or in a
phrenzie.
a man is often much disquieted; now the remembrance of his former blessed
days torments his soul with grief, and the fears of utter Apostacy, and
irrecoverable declination from God, do vex it with fears and horrors, yea
Conscience may pronounce sad judgment upon him, and he may conclude himself
an hypocrite, and Apostate, and one under wrath: so that either through
insensiblenesse, or unquietness of spirit, he that has not his former
vivacity and vigor of grace, cannot have comfort in such a state. It is
possible to be deserted of outward and inward gracious presence in a great
measure.


4. All these may possibly befall a man at once: he may have outward straits,
and inward troubles at once, and this is the lowest pitch of misery that a
believer can fall into.

CHAP. IV. Of the first sort of desertions, the withholding of assisting grace.
THe first sort of desertion, is in regard of spiritual life and grace: And it
is either Real, Or in appearance only.



Concerning this malady and sickness of the soul as it is real, I will
treat in this order: Handling 1 The state. 2 The symptoms and consequents. 3
The causes. 4 The cure.



First of the state, which may be thus described: The first kind of desertion
is a suspension of the arbitrary and customary influence of the spirit of grace
Then we are deserted of God, when he suspendeth or withholdeth the arbitrary
and wonted influence of the spirit of Grace.

That I may more perspicuously express the thing, I will take this description
in pieces, and explain it in the parts of it. In the description are two
things that require opening.

1 The Act. 2 The Object.
The Act is Gods suspending, Here note, 1 The act, suspensio^, a negative act,
not taking away, but not giving, etc.
it is a negative Act, a not giving, or putting forth that which was wont to
be; it is not the taking of any thing from a man which was inherent, but a
denying of something that was assistant; it is not ataking out, but a not
putting ^n: as when a cock is stopped or turned, there is no diminution of
water in the vessel under it, but only no addition, the vessel is not made
emptier, but not fuller; or as a child when he is set down out of his Fathers
arms, is weaker, yet not by any loss of his personal strength, but by the
withdrawing of his fathers help: The Father takes not away any of his childs
ability, but denies his own aid; so God when he deserts his servants,
withdraws himself and his Spirit, yet so, as that we must conceive it, not to
be a spoiling them of what he had planted in them, but a not conferring of that
assisting Grace which he was wont to give, this will be a little more clear in
the next thing.

The next thing in the description is the object, or the thing which is
withholden from a man in this case, which is the Arbitrary or wonted influence
of the Spirit of Grace, here are three things in the object to be observed.

1. 2 The object, 1. not the presence, but influence of the spirit.
It is the influence of the Spirit of Grace. The presence of the Spirit is one
thing, and the influence is another, there may be the former without the
latter, the influence may be abated, but the presence never fails. As the
soul in the body is ever equal in her habitation, but not in operation, her
power not acting, yet her presence continuing.

2. 2 Not influence which is necessary to
It is the Arbitrary influence of the spirit which is Suspended, There is a
twofold influence of the spirit.

First, necessary and constant, Secondly, arbitrary and inconstant.
The necessary influence of the spirit, is never denied, and it is that which
God affoords his people.

to life, growth.

uphold his Saints in life, Sustentation.
that though diseases may molest them, yet their feet shall not be moved, they
shall not sink. Psalm. 66.9. As that hand of power which wrought in the
creation, works still in the preservation of all things, John 5.17. so the
spirit works still, and by a Divine power supports the new creature, so that
it shall not fall back into its first nothing. David found this hand of God,
staying him in the midst of all his weaknesses. Nevertheless I am continually
with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand. Psa. 73.23. Psalm. 17.5.

Augmentation.
never dies; and as the spirit works always to the conservation of spiritual
life, so it works ever to the growth of grace; a Christian is ever growing,
he grows when he seems to himself and others to stand at a stay, yea to
decline, he grows always really, though not apparently, nor equally; as there
are seasons in nature, so in grace; Grace has her springs and Autumnes: but as
nature is ever tending to perfection, so grace is ever ripening and increasing,
yea even in tentations and desertitions; when God seems to leave his people,
he is about the work of perfecting the new man, as in the lopping of a tree,
there seems to be a kind of diminution, and destruction, yet the end and
issue of it is better growth; and as the weakening of the body by physic,
seems to tend to death, yet it produces better health, and more strength; and
as the ball by falling downward, rises upward, and water in pipes descends,
to ascend, So the new man when it seems to decay is still carried on by the
hidden Methods of God to increase; the plants are as well profited by the
nipping blasts of winter, which cause not only the fruits, but the leaves also
to fall, as by the warm beams of the Sun in Summer: a Christian is a member of
a thriving body, in which there is no Atrophie, but a continual issuing of
spirits from the head, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19. every part is supplied by the
effectual working of the Spirit of Christ, so that the influence that tends to
life and growth is necessary, and certain.

But there is another influence of the spirit which I call Arbitrary, But the
arbitrary influence, which is
which is given and withheld according to the pleasure of God.

This is assisting grace, Assisting grace.
or Gods gracious concourse with that habitual grace which he has wrought in
his people. I call it arbitrary, because though all grace depend upon, and flow
from his good pleasure, yet in this God is free, he has more absolutely
promised to conserve and increase holiness than to quicken, actuate and excite
that principle of life: this he does with great variations according to his
good pleasure, being more mightily present by the working and actual aid of
his Spirit to some than to others, yea more to the same man at some times, and
in some conditions than in others, sometimes the same Christian is as a burning
and shining light, sometimes as smoking flax; the Spirit blows where it
lists, John 3. sometimes he fills the soul with fuller gales, sometimes
again she is becalmed, a man has more at one time than at another.

This assisting grace is to actuate, This assisting grace is to regulate, This
assisting grace is to corroborate.
Actuating assistance Cum nullu^ agens secundu^ agat nisi in virtute primi,
sitque caro spiritui perpetuo rebellis, nonpotest homo licet jam gratiam
consequutus, per seipsu^^perari bonu^ et vitare peocatu^, absque novo auxilio
Dei ipsum moventis, dirigentis, et protegentis, quamvis alia habitualis gratia
ad hoc ei necessaria non est. Vid. Aqui. sum. 1. 2ae. q. 109. d.g. Cumel.
varias disput. t. 3. disput. 2. conclus. 1. and dub. 1. conclus. 2. optime
Parisiens. c. 1. de tent. and resistent. and Alvarez de auxil. great. disp. 88.
number. 6, 7. etc. 1. By exciting.
is that by which God carries his people, Which is 1 to actuate.
to action and fruitfulness, causing that inward seed which he has sown to
bud and bear.

This, God works first by exciting and blowing up that latent spark of grace
in the heart; Grace is an active thing, yet needs to be excited, because of the
indisposednesse of the subject in which it is; as fire though it be apt to
burn, and is very active, yet when it is in wet wood, it needs blowing up,
because it meets with strong opposition in the subject, wetnesse of the wood
which gives check unto the active spirit of the fire: and (besides this
contrariety in us, in whom the flesh lusts against the spirit, so that
without assistance we cannot do the Good that we would. Gal. 5.17.) there is an
external impediment, Satan assaulting with all possible quench-coales, that
he may cast a damp upon the soul.

Therefore we need to be quickened by a continual influence; (...). Odys. 3.
and this God is pleased to give to his servants; Jeremy found this working of
the spirit to quicken and stir up his graces which began to flagge, impatience
and passion began to stifle his zeal and readiness in his ministry, but God
came in to help him, and blowed up the spark, so that (says he) It was in
mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay. Jer. 20.9. When this is denied, there is much
deadness and dullness, and slumber in the soul, that a man shall see it is
not with him as in former days, when the Lord was more graciously present, and
assistant to him.

enabling to act. It is not enough that God has given habitual grace, By
enabling.
or that we be excited, and come to the bud and blossom of holy desires, holy
dispositions, and holy resolutions, but we need still the help of his power,
that these blossoms fail not, but that we may bring forth the fruit of
action; as in a tree there is a seminall virtue of bearing, yet except it be
helped by the influence of the heavens, it cannot bring forth fruit. It is God
that gives not only to will, but to do, Phil. 2.13. There is a power of God
which works in those that believe, Ephesians. 1.19. Col. 1.18. and according to the
working of this power, is a Christians fruitfulness: when God is pleased to
put forth his hand to take hold of him, to draw him, and enable him, he runs
with joy and speed in the ways of God; his affections are enflamed, his heart
is prepared, and he is apt to do good, and receive good, and walks with
delight with God; but when God shuts in his wonted mercy, then he walks
heavisy, and now his soul is full of complaints, I would, but cannot: there
are desires, and good inclinations, but they come not to perfection; the soul
conceives, and travelleth with purposes, and says, I will look to my ways
that I offend not, I will pray more, and mourn more, and do more, but it
wants strength to bring forth: therefore the godly cry for help, which they
need not, if they had a sufficiency in themselves Quid stultius quam orare ut
facias quod in potestate habeas? Aug. de not. and great. c. 18.
.

Assistance is to regulate, and order a man in doing good. This is necessary,
for often there is much readiness, and life, and aptness to do good, but yet
much failing in the manner of it: the same spirit therefore that directs to
what we should do, To regulate and direct in working.
teaches how to do it. How often are the godly in that case, that they would
feign humble their souls, and afflict them themselves, yet know not how to do
it? How often bent to other duties, yet know not how to do them in a
spiritual manner Remanet quaedam ignorantiae obscuritas in intellectu secundu^
qua^ (ut etia^ dicitur Romans 8.) Quid oremus sicut oportet nescimus; propter
varios enim rerum eventus, and quia no sipsos non perfect cognoscimus, non
possumus ad plenum scire quid nobis expediat, ideo necesse est ut a Deo
dirigamur and protegamur, qui omnia novit, et omnia potest. Aqui. sum. 1.2ae.
q. 109. a. 9.
? What the Apostle says of one duty is true of all, We know not how to pray
as we ought, Romans 8.26. Therefore the spirit helps our infirmities, and by a
gracious conduct, leads us, that we walk aright; as the Master guides the
hand of a young writer to write according to his copy; and as the father in
leading his child, draws him, because he is unwilling; helps him, because he
is weak; guides him, because he is apt to lose his way, so God is said not
only to draw, Cant. 1.4. Ioh. 6.44. and to help, Romans 8.26. but to order, and
direct his people, Psalm. 37.23. Psalm. 119.133. 2 These. 3.5. A Ship may be
rigged, and have a fitness to sail, yet it wants a wind to move it, and a
Pilot to guide it.

3. Assistance is to corroborate, and fortify in some eminent difficulty: As
suppose a man mightily assaulted by some strong lust, armed with occasion, 3.
To corroborate in difficulties
opportunity, and Satan's strong power, in such a case God is wont to underprop
and shore up the soul with strong aid: also how should a bruised reed stand
against such a blast Cum via dura fuit; jam tum mihi currere visus, -- plus
homine est. Vas fragile mentis nostrae, quo gratiae thesaurus continetur,
gravioribus te^tationibus saepe concussum, tandem frangeretur, nisi auxilits
divinis fulc iretur. Greg. de Valent. t. 2. disp. 8. q. 1. pun. 6. Dei est eum
qui stat statuere ut per severanter, stet, and eum qui cadit restituere.
Council. Trid. sess. 6 can. 13. and 22. ibid. vide etiam plura. ibid. and apud
Aqun sum. 1. 2ae. q. 109. a. 10.
? As a father when he sees his child like to be devoured by some ravenous
creature, makes supply of the childs weakness by his own strength. The
Apostle Saint Paul was in some great temptation, Satan had shot some arrow at
him, but God suffered him not to fall, but told him, His grace should be
sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12. At another time Satan took up other weapons,
assaulting him with the terrors of troubles, and of death, he brought in an
Emperor against him, whose power and majesty he thought might have daunted
him, but God was a pillar of strength to him, that he was not moved: All men
left him, but God did not leave him, The Lord stood by me, and strengthened me,
1 Timothy 4.17. In Afflictions also this assistance is wont to be afforded, and in
hard seasons. The same Apostle also found God here; he was put to many an hard
shift for his living; he passed through nakedness, and hunger, and thirst, and
want, which was able to have broken the heart of a man, but says the Apostle,
I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.
Thus God is wont to stand by his servants in hard brunts; but when he comes not
with supplies and aid; they fail and faint; temptations overcome them,
distresses overwhelme them, difficulties daunt them. Thus we see what that
arbitrary influence of the spirit is: but there is another thing to be
observed, that Desertion is a suspension of the arbitrary influence which we
were wont to enjoy. For note, there is a twofold influence, or assistance.

1 Extraordinary. 2 Ordinary.
The extraordinary is, Assisting grace, I extraordinary.
when in some extraordinary case, God comes in with more abundant help, leading
the soul in triumph over all assaults, mightily corroborating; not only
valiantly to withstand them, but also gloriously to conquer them. This as it
comes upon extraordinary occasion, so it cease usually with it: and the
ceasing of it is not Desertion.

ordinary assistance, is that which usually a man has in the course of his
life; Ordinary.
when this is abated and withdrawn, then a man is deferted. When a man is not
what he was wont, not so cheerful, ready, constant in doing good, when he
does not, nor can do as he was wont, as time has been, when he lived more
with God, but now his heart is fallen from that heavenly communion with him; he
could formerly mourn bitterly in the remembrance of his finnes, but now the
heart is frozen, and cannot relent; he could have prayed with much affection,
and holy boldness, but now the heart is cooled, weakened, straightened,
indisposed, etc. When it fares thus with a man, he is Deserted.

But here I will add a few Advertisements to guide the judgment in this point
of Gods withdrawing his assistance. Note, 1. it is never wholly denied.


1. God never denies it wholly to a faithful soul: though some degrees of
divine help be denied; so that the soul languish in a sort, and sink into a
state of deadness and dullness; yet there is life, and that both habitual and
actual. Gods clock never stands, there is no such deliquium gratiae, no such
swoun of the new man in which all acts do cease. It may be so ill with a
Christian, that he may fall from his first love in the acts of it, in a great
measure. Apoc. 2.4, 5. He may be much impaired, that there may leeme to be but
the remains of what was before, and these remains also may be ready to dye,
Apoc. 3.1, 2. But God will not quite depart, he will keep the root, and the
seed of God shall remain in him, 1 Ioh. 3.9. Yea and the husband man is ever
in some measure dressing, and pruning, and watering the branches of his vine,
John 15.2. Esaias 27.3. So that though they may bear less fruit sometimes, yet
at all times they bear some; a Christian may do less, but still he does
something; for though he may lose some help from God, yet not all.

If he cannot believe with that fullness of assurance, and joy as before, yet
he can pray; or if he cannot pray as he has done, yet he can sigh, and groan,
and mourn. As a spring under ground, if it be stopped in one place, breaks up
in another; so the Spirit of Grace, if it be stopped in some parts, yet it
shows it self in others. Though the sun yield not an equal comfort to the
plants, yet a constant comfort; it retires sometimes in part, never wholly; yea
God often withholds his quickening virtue from some one grace, for the
perfecting and quickening of another: he sometimes leaves faith in a poor
estate, so that it may be much darkened and clouded with unbelief and
Atheism; to raise up fear, to awaken to watchfulness; to enrich with
spiritual poverty, that the soul may mourn more seriously, and seek more
earnestly after God: sometimes he takes off his hand that held down some
present lust, and suffers it to show it self in monstrous shape and rage, to
pull down pride, and advance humility, and put the soul more to seek to be
strong in God.

It is not every degree of suspension of assisting grace, that lays a man in
this forlorn estate, Desertion is only when the abateme^t of life is eminent.
as one forsaken of God; but Desertion is an eminent abatement of it: so that
there is an eminent decay of affection and fruitfulness, and an eminent,
increase of darkness and lust. As a child cannot be said to be forsaken of his
father, when he abateth somewhat of the height and fullness of his
maintenance, but when he keeps from him things necessary, suffering him to
wander up and down, to go ragged and torn, pinched and wasted with hunger
and cold, and not relieving, though the son sue and entreat him to pity him;
Then you may say God has deserted you, when he leaves you under the pressures
of unbelief, and the power of corruption, and yet though you cry and call,
supplies are restrained, and you are suffered to walk in the valley of the
shadow of death.

by an indisposednesse, and deadness partial, When the deadness is
universal.
but universal. Not all suspension of grace makes this mournful state; for as
I have showed, sometimes God hides himself from one part for the quickening of
another, and may be most abundantly present, where he seems in great measure
departed, as I shall show hereafter. But when a man is overgrowne with
deadness, which spreads over the whole man, that a man is now less in
affection, less in action, yea unmeet, unwilling, unapt to all good, and the
means of good, being abated in all his former life and luster, then he is
deserted; there maybe indisposednes to foam duties, from sundry causes, but
when a man is less in all, then he is in this woeful state.

Not every interruption of communion with God, When the deadness abides on the
heart.
not every present distemper and indisposednesse, argues God to have
withdrawn himself: There may be cold blasts, stormy weather, troubled air,
dark clouds in the spring, yea in the summer season. A man cannot conclude
from some present chillness, or benummednesse of spirit, or from some storms
of impetuous lusts, that he is deserted. The deadness of a deserted soul is
not a transient, but an abiding deadness; not a slumber, but a sleep; not a
fit, but a state of spiritual benummedness. As a mother is not said to forsake
her child, that goes away and returns quickly; so Desertion is not a present
short abatement of Gods quickening presence, but a continued cessation for some
space of time: it may be long.

CHAP. V. That a man may be Deserted, and not know it, with the Causes and
Evils of it.
I Have done with the State of a Deserted soul, the next thing is the
Symptoms and Consequences of it, which will give some help to a man to know
whether he be in this state or not. And it is needful to declare the signs of
it, for often men are in this lamentable case and know it not; as in another
sense it is said of Sampson, when he awaked out of that sleep in which he lost
his hair, that he wist not that the Lord was departed from him. Judge. 16.20.
So it is true of many, God is departed from them, and they miss him not till
they awake out of their sleep Et vigil elapsas quaerit avarus opes.
.

Quest. But is it possible that, that man should be so besotted, that falling
from a blessed course of sweet communion with God, A man may be deserted and
not know it.
into so grievous an estrangednesse from him he should not perceive it? can a
man fall from such a height into such a depth, and not know it?

Ans. Yea, certainly; and there are diverse causes of it; as 1, there may be a
great flush of spirit, and much activity from false principles, so that a man
may seem to be the same, and to enjoy God as he did, when if it be observed,
he has lost much, and the greatest part of his life stands upon other
pillars, as vigor of nature, strength of parts, inforcement of conscience,
respects to men, false joys, fanatic dreams, superstitious rules, etc. these
winds often fill the sails, these waights move the wheels, even there where
there is little of God.

2. Gods departure is graduall, as he comes not all at once, but by degrees,
so he departs not suddenly, but gradually, as the Sun rises by degrees, and
sets by degrees, and so night creepes often upon men before they are aware: So
God by degrees estrangeth himself, and leaves the soul to wither by degrees;
as in a body languishing in a consumption, there is not such an apprehension of
the going out of life, and the coming in of death, as in him that receives a
sudden mortal hurt; and as he who wastes in his estate by little and little
is not so sensible of his decay, as he that loses all at once: So if a man
should fall from a heavenly converse with God, and from a flourishing
spiritual state, into a livelesse and barren condition on a sudden, he would
be more affected with it, but now his fall is graduall, therefore less seen;
a hill is sometimes drawn out into such a length, that the descent of it does
scarce appear. In Gods way a man may descend daily, yet because his decay is
as it were broken into so many small parts, he hardly sees it: old age, and
gray hairs come slowly and slily, they come by stealth, one gray hair
creeping after another, and here and there upon them, they know it not. Hos.
7.9. A decrepit weak state steals upon men, their souls being like dreyning
cisternes which empty themselves by drops, and so emptiness overtakes them
before they see it: while they think they are rich, they become poor. Apo. 3.17.

Men mistake and are many ways deceived in judging.
because they rest too much upon other things that do deceive them; some
things without them cause them to mistake, as 1, a pride and conceitednesse
raised by comparing themselves with others worse than themselves; 2, the
testimony and applause which others give them, especially if by many, by the
godly, by the wise; praise blinds them, and holds them in a sweet dream of an
imaginary excellency; 3, transient and fleeting gales, God now and then
breaking in with potent workings, and that rather to exercise of gifts for his
office and for others sakes, that they may be built up, They consider not
themselves.
when themselves indeed wither.

consider not, nor examine their estates, they lay down their watch, and hold
not continual sessions for Judgment of themselves, therefore changes befall
them, and they know it not; when men cast not up their estates, they may grow
poor and not see it. Conscience is the souls watchman, yea her Judge; ^ow if
there be a vacation, and the Judge fits not, a man may be spoiled of much of
his estate, and not be righted: except we judge our selves frequently, we
cannot know our selves fully, but may lose and not see it. But it is needful to
know whether we be Deserted or not.


You see then that one may be Deserted and not know it; but it much concerns a
man to be vigilant, that he may discern Gods accesses to him, and recesses
from him: For,

thankful; it is not the presence, Else though God be enjoyed, yet we shall be
unthankful.
but the evidence and sense of mercies that rayseth thankfulness: he that
receives not, and he that knows not that he receives, is alike unthankful:
when a man lies long out of the balance of Judgment, he knows not whether
he be better or worse: God may be present in many gracious counsels, checks,
incitements, impulsions, and yet have little thanks for his precious mercies,
except they be observed. If a Prince come in favor to visit thee, and stand
knocking, and be not known, thou can not acknowledge that high favor with
thankfulness; And though Christ stand at the door and knock, that thou may
open that he may come in and sup with thee, and thou with him, if thou know not
this day of salvation, and this season of grace, it cannot affect thee. What a
sin is this? God is with thee by secret workings of his Spirit, he is with
thee in thy way, and in the means of grace, and thou observest not? But it is
with thee as with Jacob in another case, Though we enjoy not God, we shall be
secure.
who sleeping, knew not what had befalne him, but when he awaked, then he
said, God was in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis 28.16.

lie still and not enquire after him (...). Ar. Rhet. l. 1. c. 5.
. He that is sick, and knows it not, seeks not for cure. The whole, that
is, such as think they are well, need not the Physician, but the sick: such as
feel their sickness and pain, Matthew. 9.12. They that are rich in their own
opinion, seek not for supply, but say, They want nothing, Apoc. 3.17. He will
neither beg nor work for bread that is full. He that thinks all is well, and
seems to be something, when he is nothing, Gal. 6.3. is at rest, as one that
needs not. It is said, that the Pharisees need norepentance, Luke 15.7. that is,
they know no need, because they see not their sin. No man seeks that he
thinks he has, therefore look well to thy self, lest thou be deceived: A
man may go on with an opinion of a good estate, and be mistaken. As the hungry
man dreameth, and behold he eats, but when he awaketh his soul is empty: and
as the thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but when he awaketh,
behold he is faint, Esaias 29.8. so you may be in a beggarly condition, while you
conceit you are rich. Except you search your selves, and till you awake out of
your dream and behold your misery, you will not seek for remedy. What brings
the beast to the river, but thirst and heat? That man will not seek for the
Well of life, that feels no want. Necessity is the mother of industry, and
indigence breeds diligence.

It is a contempt of God not to observe what interest you have in him, Not to
seek to know this is to contemn God.
and what communion with him. If a friend, much more if a King come to thy
house, and thou take no notice of his coming in or going out, will he not take
it ill, and count it a great neglect of him? Is it not a sign his company is
not valued, whose presence is not accepted, and whose absence is not regarded?
Things that thou prizest thou keep with care, possessest with joy, and
losest with grief. A small matter may be lost, and not missed; but if a jewel
be lost, it is soot missed.

Consider, if an husband had occasion of departure for a season, and the wife
should not be loath to part with him Indicium amoris est non delectatio illa
quae pulchri praesentia percipitus, sed morsus and dolor qui eo avulsosentitur.
Plut. de profect. Virt.
, nor grieved to want him; would not all say she loves him not? When you make a
feast, you sit not down till the chief guest come, and when he comes, you
meet him with all fit respect and kind entertainment: If then you sit down to
make merry with the creatures when God is not come in to sup with you, Apoc.
3.20. or when you entertain your pleasures, and delights, and profits, and
other worldly contentments, and give but slender heed and respect to God, so
that his presence or absence is not much to you, it is a sign he is not your
chief, but you despise him: therefore be careful to observe diligently how
God is with you, that you may not lose him, and not see it; for this is to
contemn him. Add this, that Gods withholding himself is a sign of his
displeasure Substractio gratiae est maxima poena. Altis. in sent. l. 2. tract.
30. q. 2.
, and it is a great provocation to slight it.

CHAP. VI. Rules to judge when one is Deserted. The first is the consideration
of his graces. First, their activity is abated.
SInce men may be Deserted, and not know it, and since it so much concerns all
to know how it fares with them in this case, I will propound some rules for
their help in judgment of themselves in this point.

These rules are three considerations, or the view of three things.

1 Their graces. 2 Corruptions. 3 Means of grace.
First rule. First rule; Consideration of graces, in which when one is
deserted, will be decay in respect of
Consider your graces which you have received; for when there is a variation of
divine influence, there will be a change in the new man: as you may read in
the very face and countenance of the earth, what her receipts are from the
heavens; whether the heat and rain be liberally or sparingly afforded: so when
the Sun of righteousness shuts in himself, it will soon appear in the
change of your spirits.

In times of desertion there will be a change in your spirits in respect of 1
Activity. 2 Light and sight. 1 Activity, which appears by 1. Unfruitfulnesse.
3 Affection.


That decay of spiritual activity appears and shows it self in 2. things.

1 Unfruitfulness in good. 2 Indisposednesse to good.
less done, there are fewer fruits: you are not so frequent, Less done.
and so abundant: duties are curted, and clipped; God has not his services in
that number and measure as before: you do not so much good by counsels,
persuasions, reprehensions, and such other offices of Christian love, but are
become more useless and fruitless.

In this abatement of action, there are three things considerable.

1. It is voluntary. There is an abatement sometimes (for a season) out of
necessity, as in case of bodily infirmity, or other inevitable occasions; but
this is not sinful, where the affection and desire to duties is not quenched,
but held up in strength; But when men do voluntarily lay down their strength
of holy endeavors in the ways of God, and move more slowly and negligently,
either much omitting, or slightly performing the duties of godliness, it is a
sign that it is not with them as it has been, Apoc. 2.4, 5.

such acts of grace, as are internal, and most proper to a godly man,
Especially in internal and most vital actions.
as mourning for sin, rejoicing in God, self judging, heavenly improvement
of the promises, and providence of God, desire of Christ's appearing, etc. There
may possibly be an holding up of duties external, as hearing, prayer, etc. but
if these inward actions and motions of the new man cease, it is a certain
argument that a man is upon the losing hand. External duties may be upheld by
the power of conscience, and other causes, but those inward acts cannot spring
but from an inward root. Here Grace inherens is the womb, and grace assistant
is the mid wife, the one gives disposition, the other action; so that when a
man is less in these, he has less of God.

In personal and secret duties.
there will be less done in personal and secret duties, than in more public
duties which are with and before others: pride and other civil respects may
enkindle a false fire in a frozen heart; the breath of applause may fill the
sails, and move the ship, which otherwise would lie still, or move another way:
A Pharisaicall spirit will be much quickened with praise and glory, and a
servile spirit will be much provoked by fears; men are content to do more
then they would sometimes through hope of the favor of men, sometimes through
fear of disfavour. But such are moved not by the spirit that is from above,
but by the spirit that is in the world: therefore judge your selves by secret
acts, follow your selves into your closets and retiring places, and observe
your diligence, endeavor, and spirit in your hidden ways, and secret duties,
for what you are in them, that you are indeed: as then you may best take your
height, when you remove all advantages, for if you stand upon any thing, you
will seem higher then you are; so you may best see the temper of your spirits,
when all external enforcements are absent; when you are your selves, without
the ingrediencies of respects to men, to intermingle with your spirits.

and an abatement of fruitfulness, so you may discern an indisposednesse, By
indisposednes.
and unmeetnesse to duties.

willingness; you may do good, Less willingness.
but it is rather as a task Nil nisi jussus agit. Ovid.
, than a delight, and you are not carried to it so much out of liking and
contentment, as by a compulsory judgment, which lays a necessity on you,
that you do it as a debt and due, which the law exacts upon pain of
imprisonment, but not as a free will offering, and Eucharisticall sacrifice.
When the heart is filled with God, its delight is with him, and he yields
obedience in love, and counts his work wages: an evil heart is hardly drawn
to good, it quarrels with the rule, and is loath to be bound. David, when he
was in distemper, and left in the rage of his corruption, was not willing to be
limited by the law of God; but when he was himself, then he loved it, Psalm.
119.129. Gold and silver was not so precious, he chose it, v. 137. he took it
as his portion, verse. 57. I said, oh Lord, this is my portion, I will keep thy
words Calvin. in loc.
.

When a man enjoys God, his walking with God, is his life; he is much
affected with converse with him, partly through love and sutablenesse to God,
in respect of which, he is the Center to which he tends, and in which he rests,
partly through respect to the recompense which he has in hope, and partly for
the sense of sweetness which he has in his converse, God meeting his servants
with satisfying comforts, sweet embracements, and blessed coruscations, and
beams of mercy and loving kindness, so that they say in their hearts with
David, It is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 37.28.

Yea, love mightily commands and enclineth the hearts to duties; but when a
man is in greater distance from God, then the pleasant ways of holiness,
which were to the soul as a delightful Paradife, are become as the way of a
desert, a way of thorns and briars, a wearisome and unpleasant path.

zeal and fervencie which you had, will be much weakened: Less zeal and
fervency.
when God is with a man by powerful and plentiful supplies of the spirit, he
musters up all the powers of his soul, and calls in all his abilities to wait
on God, and to do him service. So David, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy name, Psalm. 103.1. Observe with what
contention and strength you were wont to do what you did; for if now you put
less to it, and go on in a way of spiritual laziness and sloth, it is sure
there is a diminution of heavenly influence: this seems to be the case of the
Church in the greatest part of it, which caused the Prophet to complain, There
is none that calls upon thy name, or stirs up himself to take hold of
thee, Esaias 64.7.

CHAP. VII. When a man is deserted, his light is darkened.
THe second change which you may discern in your selves, The second change in
one deserted, is in his light.
is in your light and sight: the eye of the soul, that gate of spiritual life
and death, suffers, and this being weakened, a man is like Sampson, when his
eyes were put out Plerumque oculus contemplationis amittitur, and post per
carnis desideria hujus mundi laboribus animus subjugatur. Testatur Sampson etc.
Greg. l. 7. mor. c. 13. apud Alvar. de auxil. great. disput. 46. number. 2.
, brought into great misery and bondage.

A four fold evil when God hides himself.

1 Obscurity. 2 Inefficacie. 3 Vacuity. 4 Incredulity.
Obscurity. Obscurity.
God shines not into the soul with such abundant light as before Illuminatio
intermittitur, intenditur, remittitur, and quis qui spiritum Christi sensit,
negarit aliquando contingere, ut in majori, aliquando in minori luce versetur.
Camer. amic. collat. p. 55.
, but withdrawes himself from the intellectual part, and this causes a
withering and dying in the whole man: for as our light is, so is our life,
Psalm. 119.144. Here is the root of the maine difference betwixt Christians true
and false, strong and weak, one sees things as another sees not: A wicked
man that is learned, though he seem to have light, yet is in darkness; for
his light is not the same light, with the light of the Saints; and the Saints,
though they see by a true light, yet because it is weaker in some than others,
therefore there is such difference in themselves, and in their lives: yea, in
the same man there is great difference, according as his light varieth Vis.
Gulielm. Paris. de retribut. Sanct. Twofold light.
. It Is light makes men to be what they are. This light in the Saints is two
fold; as the Moon has a light in herself, and a light from the Sun; so the
godly have a light fixed and set up in them by the spirit, as dwelling in them;
and a light which flows from the Spirit of light, as from an external cause,
as he pleases, and when he pleases to confer it: and as the Moon is very
obscure, if the streams of the Suns light be cut off from her; so their
habitual light is dim and dusky, if the communicated light from heaven
cease. The godly, as they are made light, and are taught of God by receiving
opened understandings, so are still in learning, the Spirit revealing more and
more the mysteries of godliness.

By the way I will in a few words explain a little this enlightening work of
the Spirit. The spirit enlightens


There are four things in it.

1 Removing impediments from the eye. 2 Manifestation of the object. 3 An
application of the eye to the object, 4 Holding it to the object.
Removing of impediments of sight. There may be light without in the air, By
removing impediments of sight.
yet a house may be dark within, because the light may be kept out by shuts:
And the Sun may shine brightly, and make all things clearly conspicuous, yet
the eye, through the impediment of some humor, or filme oppressing it, may see
but darkly; if either external light be dammed or cut off in the medium, or
internal light be hindered in the organ, there can be no clear sight: now as
he that draws aside the shuts from before the windows, is said to make the
house light, and he that removes the humor or filme from the eye, to give
sight; so it is in this case which we have in hand: When the Saints are first
translated out of the state and kingdom of darkness, into a state of light,
They receive a mind to know God, 1 John 5.20. and they that were blind
receive a seeing eye. But many filmes of lusts, and mists of sinful
distempers, are wont to darken their light, therefore God is graciously pleased
to help their infirmities, and by his power to cure their distempers, as by a
precious eye salve. Apoc. 3.18.

Manifestation of the object: Manifestation of the object.
Revelatio est vel ex part potentiae, per infusionem luminis; vel ex part
objecti, and haec est, 1 externa per verbum. 2 Interna per spiritum immediate
agente^ in intellectum, eique intellectualiter loquentis. Baron. apolog. con.
Turneb. tract. 9. punct. 6.. 6.
showing himself unto the soul. For as the best eye cannot see except things
show forth themselves; so except he present himself, and Jesus Christ, and the
things of his kingdom, we cannot know them.

There are three ways or media of spiritual sight; The creatures, Word,
Sacraments.


Now does not experience show, that you see more of God in these at one time,
then at another? and one maine cause of this difference and inequality in
apprehending God, is the different manifestation of himself. The same sermon
is as a clear vision unto one, unto another as a riddle, God shining to one in
his ordinance, and not unto another: unto some The Gospel is hid, and the light
of it does not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. but unto others in the preaching
of the same Gospel, God that commands light to shine out of darkness, shines
in their hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ, verse. 6. yea, and as he manifests himself by an
habitual light, so by an actual, by which his people see all things more
clearly at one time than at another; it is sometimes day with them, and
sometimes night.

application of the eye to the object. Application of the eye to it.
The spirit, as in other parts of the new man, so in this, gives both habitual
principles, and inward dispositions, and also draws those dispositions into
act; both a seeing eye, and the seeing of the eye; both the power and the act,
are from the spirit. As in the body the eye has a fitness in it self to see,
but yet the faculty or power, and the act of seeing is from the soul, for the
soul actuates every part: all our conceptions and apprehensions of spiritual
things, are formally the acts of the renewed mind, but originally they are
from the spirit, which stirs up and strengthens the mind to work, and directs
it in working.

Holding the eye to the object: that it may not slip and wander from it;
Holding the eye upon it.
naturally our thoughts are very vain and scattered, and never more unsettled,
then when they are pitched on that which is good: and this giddiness and
instablenesse of our minds, is a great impediment to our full comprehension
and understanding of spiritual things, as I shall have occasion more to
declare anon. Now the spirit comes with assistance to the tottering and
straying spirit of his people, and holds their eye, and stays their thoughts
upon their objects, that the soul may drink down knowledge more fully;
transient views let in but little light.

Thus you see what this influence of the spirit is upon the mind of the godly,
and by this you may better conceive, how darkness and dimnesse befalls the
Saints in the time of desertion: there must needs be an abatement of
brightness of understanding, where the mind is left clogged with fogs and
mists of lusts; lusts do darken the mind, as mud does the water, and as dust
does the air; and as glass, the fouler it is the less light it has in it:
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; not only hereafter; but
here in the world, Matthew. 5.8. The secret of God is with them that fear him,
Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32. A good understanding have all they that do his
commandments. Psalm. 111.10. But when the heart is infected with pernicious
lusts, they corrupt the mind, seducing, deceiving, and diverting also from all
serious study of, and enquiry into things spiritual.

In like manner, when God does not present himself, and things spiritual, how
can it be, but a man should be in much darkness? nothing can reveal God but
himself; as the Sun is not seen but by her own light; and when God hides
himself, all things are hid; he sees less in sin, in grace, in Christ, in
the Gospel, in all things, that sees less of God; as when the Sun is clouded,
all things are proportionably clouded and obscured.

Again, if God actuate not, and stir not up the mind to enquire after him;
and to behold him, it will be but as the eye of the body in the time of sleep,
which sees nothing till it be awakened.

And lastly, except God fasten and fix the mind upon himself, and other
spiritual objects, it will be wandering, and he that goes from the Sun,
goes into darkness. This is the first of those evils forenamed, which befalls
the mind in a time of desertion, it is darkened, though it have light still,
yet not so much, though it see as much as it did extensively, yet not
intensively, as a weak eye may see as many things as a better eye, yet it
sees not so fully and clearly; you may know all things that you have known,
but yet not i^ that clear and spiritual manner; yet note, that habitual
light is not impaired but those beams of light which God is wont to cast into
the soul, are lessened. And when it is thus with you, that you have declined
in your acquaintance with God, and in your apprehension of the sinfulness of
sin, the beauty of holiness, the excellency of Christ, the preciousnesse of
the covenant, you have cause to sit down and weep, for you have not so much
of God in you as you have had.

CHAP. VIII. The light and notions of a deserted man have not their former
efficacy, to affect, impell, repel, and humble the heart.
THe second evil that befalls the mind, is inefficacie. The second evil that
befalls the mind, is inefficacie. Prove. 10.27. vide Drus. qu. Hebr. l. r. q. 11.
The understanding by its light, should be as the compass in the ship, to
guide and order men; and as the sails and wings, to set all in Motion; and as
the anchor, to hold up in all stresses; but when God leaves a man to himself,
how weak is this light, and unable to discharge its office? it has not those
effectual operations that it had upon the soul.

Not affecting.
as in former days; time was when the apprehension of Gods love did work
mightily, melting to repentance, quickening to obedience, encouraging to
confidence, filling the heart with gladness and glorying, and the mouth with
praises and songs of rejoicing; but now the thoughts of divine love do not so
raise the heart; So time was, when the sight of sin was a wound to the soul,
casting shame into the face, and causing grief in the heart; but now you can
behold your sins, and cannot say as in the days of old, Mine eye has
wounded my heart, Lament. 3.51. This weakness and inefficacie of knowledge is
a sign you are in an ill case.

Not impelling to good.
and abundant influences of his spirit, there he rules and holds his subjects
in a strict obedience; the scepter by which he rules, is the Word, but not the
word as it is written with Ink, and lies in the letter, but as it is engraven
in the heart, and as it is in the throne, seated in the understanding, yea, and
as it is swayed by that invisible hand which worheth mightily in those that
believe, Ephesians. 1.19. When God holds back the working of this power,
spiritual truths lie bound hand and foot, and put not forth themselves in
their former regal power, which they did exercise as Gods Vicegerents and
Vicerours to command and govern, but the heart enjoyes a woeful liberty and
tolleration, in a barren and unfruitful conversation; the Majesty and mercy of
the great and gracious God, does not constrain (...), significantius forsan
constrictos tenet nos, ut luc. 19.43. (...). Hen. Steph
, as it does in those who enjoy God, 2 Gor. 5.14. But as if the heart had none
to fear, and nothing to hope for, or none to judge it, it is dull, careless
and heedlesse; in former days, the mind which is Gods statute book, and the
monitor in a man, was often suggesting counsels and persuasions, crying as that
voice, Esaias 30.21. This is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right
hand, and to the left; that is, in all your ways; but now it is silent, and
become like those idol shepherds, that had eyes, and saw not, and tongues, but
spoke not: it was as a law, having an obligatory and binding power, Romans 7.23.
so that there was no peace but in holy walking; but now that light is become
weak, and the whole man is out of order.

so restrained as he was, Not restraining from evil.
this is one office of an enlightened mind, to be as a bridle to corruptions
and a check to impetuous lusts; there is a great power in the natural man's
conscience, when God awakens it, and sets it on, to limit the boundless
spirits of men unregenerate, as we see in ^^ laam, who though he had a good
mind to pleasure Balack in hope of profit, yet durst not, the light within him
durbed him, and held him so strongly back, that a house full of silver and gold
could not draw him; but when God, for the hardness of men's hearts cease to
quicken this light, it becomes weak, and men are let loose to all evil, as
those, Romans 1.26. because they imprisoned the truth which would have ruled in
them, therefore God gave them up to a reprobate mind (...). i. mentem sine
judicio, Beza: at hoc minus malum est, and saepe natural, men's ergo reproba
est judicium perversum, distortum, pravum, quo insanda juditabant licita. Cor.
a Lapid. Est. Paraeus. etc. Vid. Camer. defens. finem versus.
.

So in the godly there is a renewed conscience, an understanding enlightened
with saving light, which while God by continual pulsations and motions keeps
waking, becomes a strong bank to preserve the soul from the overflowing rage
of sin; but when God cease to work in it, then the heart is left like a
ship in a storm, when her cables break or fail. David in his grievous foil
which he suffered, knew that adultery was a sin, yet God not adding his
influence to this light, it became too weak to raise up resolutions
sufficient, and to chain up that monster in his soul, 2 Samuel 11. And Asah had
light enough to convince him: what a sin it was to rob Gods treasury, to make
a present to send to the King of Syria, that he might curry favor with him;
yet he adventures upon this sacrilege; his knowledge could not hold his hands
from doing evil, no not from imprisoning the prophet, who did his duty, 2 Chronicles. 16. so that if you be less restrained by your knowledge, it is a sign
that the power of God is not so much put forth in you as heretofore.

so humbled: the practical understanding being renewed, Not humbling.
is the Count Palatine Curopalates. vid. Seld. honoris tit.
, next to God in the palace of the soul; the power of judgment is in its
hands; it has power to send out writs to summon men to its bar, and to
examine causes, and to pass sentence; and when God is with it, it will afflict
and chastise the soul for sin, So it is said, that David's heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24. but when conscience grows careless, and men judge not themselves,
when they condemn not, and afflict not themselves for sin, but the sword
lies still in the scabbard, and execution is not done, but crimes are winked
at; the offender is justified or spared; it is a sign of a sleep fallen upon
them, and that God has withdrawn himself; or if you be judged by the light,
yet are not humble, if you can shift and ward off the blows of conscience, so
that it cannot wound you; the efficacy of it is weakened, and God is departed:
David was in this case, his conscience was too dallying and indulgent, it did
not arrest him, nor seize upon him with her wonted Majesty, because God
suffered him to he for a time, as he permitted him to fall; but when the spirit
came in the ministry, of Nathan, then conscience was armed with a stronger
power; and laid hands on him, bound him in chains, and laid him up in prison;
and now David humbles himself, confesses his sin, weeps, and sighs, and
mourns night and day, and could have no quiet till he had his pardon, and was
reconciled to his God, Psalm. 32.

CHAP. IX. When a man is deserted, the mind is more vain, and abated in
frequency complacencie consistencie in holy thoughts.
THe third evil that befalls the mind is vacuity and emptiness; Third evil
in the mind, vacuity and emptiness
when God withdrawes himself, it becomes like an empty house without
inhabitant, when the cloud of divine presence fills his tabernacle, and the
foul receives, oracles from his mouth, then a man has sweet converse with
him, and walks with him Pedibus duntaxat terram tangentibus, (...). Chr. hom.
3. de incompr. Dei not.
, is a man with his friend, as it is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. and Enoch, Genesis
5.20. God is his center, and he is much in pursuit of him. My soul thirsts
after thee, and I will remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches; my soul follows hard after thee, Psalm. 63. he was much in the
thoughts of God; God was with him De Ignatio fabulatur, nomen Jesu cordi ejus
insculptum invcniri.
, and he with God; when he went to sleep, yea, when he awakened, his heart was
toward him, When I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.18. yea, I am
continually with thee; and what was the cause of it? Thine hand upholdeth me,
Psalm. 73.23. an awakened heart has God ever in sight, I have set the Lord
always before me, Psalm. 16.8.

As water striveth to ascend as high as the head-spring from whence it comes;
so a heavenly Christian, as he springs from above, is ever streaming thither;
but there are times when the mind becomes vain, and very empty of God, and
full of vanity; either being like a watch that stands still, or like a
Conduit-cock that runs at waste; either sleeping, and not acting, or pouring
out, and spending it self upon things that profit not.

In this state, the soul has lost much of a threefold excellency which it had.

1 Complacency in holy thoughts. 2 Frequency in holy thoughts. 3 Consistency in
holy thoughts.
Complacencie: time was, when the thoughts of Gods glory and mercy, and works,
and word, and of Christ, and other spiritual things, Less complacencie in
thoughts of God.
were as honey, feeding and delighting the soul; meditations were great
refreshments and recreations; they were wont to fill the heart with sweet
content and comfort, adding much to all spiritual life, both of grace and
peace; How precious are thy thoughts to me? Psalm. 139.17. Juvat
immensospatiantem vivere coelo.
David reckoned his recourse to, and converse with God, among his chief
treasures: And indeed, what is better to man in a right temper, then from the
Nebo of a spiritual meditation, to behold Canaan? and by heavenly mindedness,
to walk with Christ, and Angels, and Saints in heaven, to have that in a kind
of presence by this prospective, which is yet so distant? This I say
peradventure, was your happiness, but now you are changed, and fallen from
this glory, your souls creep on the dust, and savor not the sweetness of
the things above; they hunger not so much after that bread of eternal life,
but feed upon vanities and worldly things; you are not so delighted in slipping
out of the world, and retyring your selves that you might be with God, nay
happily, it is become a burden Nulla res tam facilis est quin difficilis sit si
invitus facias. Sen. ep. 12.
to fix your thoughts on that which was your food and life before, your mind
is become heavy, the earth has got into your hearts, and weighed them down,
so that you find it hard and tedious to pully and wind them up to such
spiritual and settled meditations, in which formerly you have had delight: if
it be thus, it is a sign that God has much withdrawn himself from you.

Frequency, Less frequency.
it may be it has been the daily course of thy soul to visit heaven, soaring
on the wings of an heavenly mind, and taking her flight to God and Christ, as
the Eagles that fly to the dead body, Mat. 24.18. thou wast wont to find in
every place a passage to thy God, and were often improving that quickness of
thy mind which is able to step from the deepest dungeon to the highest heavens
in a moment. The mind is so quick of foot, that it is swifter than the Sun,
and can move further in a moment than the Sun does in a day, and thou were wont
to send this winged messenger, and it returned unto thee like Noah's Dove with
Olive branches of peace and comfort in its mouth. Indeed a Christian drives two
trades in the world, one is seen, the other is secret, and in this he is busy
when he seems to be vacant, and is least alone, when most alone; when he is
mured up within his Chamber, or walking in a solitary way, he is conversing
with such companions, as the world is not acquainted with, he is speaking with
God, and hearing God speaking to him words of wisdom, making him wiser than
the Ancient, words of reproof piercing like a sword, yet not to hurt, but
heal, and words of comfort stronger than death, and sweeter than life; yea
when he seems to be in the deepes of affliction, he is mounted above all
sorrows, and his soul is above the clouds; when he seems to be affrighted
with terrors, he is drinking in the waters of life, In the multitude of my
thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul. Psa. 94.19. Consider this,
have thou been thus filled with God, so conversant in heavenly thoughts, that
thou wast never long from heaven, but often looking up to the God of thy life?
and how is it now with thee? art thou become a stranger to these ways in which
God and thy soul had formerly so many blessed meetings? art thou grown
mindlesse and forgetful of him? it may be drawing near in some heartlesse
approach to him in the morning, but then living without him throughout the day:
many guests come in, but God is shut out; there is room for profits, for
pleasures, yea for sinful thoughts and evil suggestions, but none for God; if
it be thus, thy case is more miserable, and thou art Deserted: for if God were
so present by his Spirit as he was, He would be thy remembrancer, and bring
such things still to thy mind as before. Joh. 14.26. he would be jogging and
provoking to heavenly mindedness.

Consistency, when our delights are not with God, Less consistency.
as the remembrance of him is not so pleasing, so not so frequent, and not so
consistent, I say there will not be that stablenesse of an heavenly mind, that
has been; thoughts now are but passant and fleeting, not fixed and abiding,
yea though conscience spur the dull mind to this heavenly work, yet like an
unwilling servant, it stays not at it, but is soon gone.

CHAP. X. Great incredulity in a Deserted soul, with the Causes of it.
THe fourth evil that befalls the mind in time of desertion is incredulity;
Fourth evil in the mind, incredulity.
when God withdrawes himself, the woeful fruits of unbelief spring up;
doubtings, disputes, objections, strange reasonings about spiritual truths, in
so much that the soul is greatly perplexed and snared in the diversity,
crosnesse, subtilty, ambiguity of her own reasonings; now it questioneth the
authority and verity of the Scriptures; doubting whether it be the word of God
or no, or whether it be not the invention of men; yea, it is full of suspicions
and doubts of divine providence, whether all things be ordered by an hand of
infinite power and wisdom; yea, the foundation and first stone is often shaken
in such a time, the soul calling this in question, Whether there be a God or
no, who is able to reckon the strange thoughts and reasonings of the soul,
when it walks in darkness? And who can utter the dreadful effects of such an
evil? What mazes of confusion, what floods of fears, what thickets and
labyrinths of sore perplexities ^s a man led into by this unbelief? yea, what
deadness and barrenness ^reake in upon him? how exposed to ^iolent assaults
of Satan, having not ^he use of the shield of faith? This un^eliefe and
Atheism is a rock which ^he Saints (the most part of them) do ^trike upon at
one time or other; but ^t's a dreadful evil, like a torrent, it ^eares down
in a great measure, the ^rops and pillars of Christian hope, ^by, patience,
obedience; yea, it is of that destroying nature, where it comes with strength,
as it does in many of the Saints, that it annihilates, in a manner, all
spiritual things in their eyes, so that they cannot see God, Christ, promise,
heaven, or any thing; or if they see them, it is with so much obscurity and
uncertainty, that the life which these things were wont to yield, is much
impaired. And as it is pernicious, so it is hard to cure; a man would never,
without the conduct of a divine hand, find the way to get out of these
perplexities. Unbelief has a great strength in all, and were it not checked,
it would more appear.

Quest. Cause of unbelief prevailing in desertion.
What is the cause that unbelief does so quickly and strongly, upon Gods
withdrawing of himself, put forth it self in the godly?

Answ. inevidence of the object of faith: Inevidence of the object of faith.
it is evidence in any thing that settles and swayes judgment; and when things
lie hid in darkness, and carry no convincing and satisfying evidence of
reason, the mind will not receive them with a full assent; yea, (...)
proportions her credit which she gives to the strength of reason, which she
discernes for it; so that in some things she fully embraces them, and has an
acquiescencie and rest in her assent, being fully answered in point of reason;
in other things she goes not further then to an opinion, which is an imperfect
assent, founded on arguments only probable; in other things she goes not so
far, but stands doubting, and in suspense, being equally charged with reason
both ways; having arguments why she should believe this or that, and arguments
why she should not; by which encounter of contrary reasonings, she is like the
river, which by the meeting of two contrary streams, becomes a still water; or
like the scales in the balance, which having equal weights in them, stand in
equipoyse.

This we find in men in matters of religion and godliness, that all believe
not alike, because there is not the like evidence of spiritual truths to all;
some believe fully, others believe, but not with a settled assent; others doubt;
the former are like the scales, whereby the weight in one prevailing, there is
a settling; the second, like the scales wavering, and turning sometimes this
way, and sometimes that way; the third, like the scales standing, but still it
is the evidence in the object, which begets faith, yea, commands it.

Now the inevidence of the object of faith, by which unbelief stands fast, is
in respect of 1 The object it self. 2 Subject of faith.


object is in it self, sometimes hidden and strange to reason, Object hidden.
and therefore hard to be believed: Such things are all those supernatural
truths, as the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, the resurrection of the
body, the incarnation of the Son of God, redemption by the satisfaction of
Christ, justification by faith, etc. These truths, and the like, are above
reason, such the mind of it self cannot believe; what though they be
revealed, and are so made conspicuous, in a sort, by the word, yet (if there be
nothing but the testimony and authority of the word) except the power of the
spirit set in, there will be no faith.

inevidence is sometimes in respect of the subject, and that is, Subject dark.
when things are clearly brought to the understanding, but through it is
weakness it is not able to see the reason of them; the object is clear, but
the mind is dark, as though the Sun shine, and make all things evident in
themselves; yet if the eye be blind, it sees not; things are hid, but this
veil is not on the things, but on the eye; or suppose a man come with a fair
and full testimonial of his worth, yet if he to whom it is brought cannot read
it, he will not believe him, or accept him: Now God has revealed himself by
the creation, Romans 1.19, 20. all the creatures are as so many witnesses to
reason it self, that there is a God which made all; but reason is deaf, and
hears not That sound that is gone through the world, Psalm. 19. or hears it so
weakly, that it cannot settle and quiet it self in this truth, that God is,
and that he made the worlds, so that our faith even in these things, is not
only from the light of nature, but also and especially from the light of the
spirit; and according as this light is afforded more or less, so does our
faith vary in it is operation, by the weakness and blindness that remains
upon the understanding, though it be renewed, the mind is disabled to answer
these various and snarling objections, which are conceived in this fruitful
womb: how many reasonings and strange disputes, does the carnal mind, when
it is left to it self, forge against the truth, which do so cloud and puzzle
the soul, that it is often strangely foiled? As those Gentiles being left of
God, became vain in their imaginations, Romans 1.21. So the Saints themselves,
when God shuts in the light of his spirit, are full of dangerous reasonings
and entangling thoughts; the Psalmist beholding the manner of Gods dealing with
the wicked, and with the godly, that they prospered, and these were asslicted;
from hence argues so strangely, that he had almost been soiled, but that God
did guide him with his counsels, and upheld him by his right hand. Psalm. 73.

So Moses, though God had told him what he would do for the provision of his
people, consulting with reason, had this answer from it, Can God prepare a
table in the wilderness, Number. 11. I need not insist upon instances of this
nature; the mind is very active and quick in working, and is able to lose it
self in doubts and perplexing reasonings, but it is not so able without divine
assistance to untie her knots, and to free her self.

Satan, whose work it is to molest the Saints; Satan's working.
he is full of all knowledge, so that he knows how to weave the most
subtilenets to toil the soul; and he has a way into a man by the fantasy,
where he is able both to keep the thoughts working upon some strong
imagination, and ensnaring reasoning, and to suggest new: hence it comes about,
that a man is so mightily and uncessantly pursued with doubts and strong
workings of unbelief, that there is scarce an article of his faith so rooted
in him, but by these blustering and tempestuous winds, it is at one time or
other much shaken. These then are the causes of the new and strong working of
incredulity and Atheism, which as it seemed by former force and power of
supernatural light to have been buried, does in a time of desertion rise up
again, to the great affrightment and disturbance of the heart.

CHAP. XI. Of the change and alteration of affections in case of desertion,
where is spoken of love, hope, hatred, etc. with their sad abatements.
THe third change which a man deserted may find in himself, Third change in
one deserted, is in his affections.
in respect of his graces, is in the affections; these are the pulses of the
soul, by which judgment may be made of the state and temper of the soul; the
affections are but several acts and motions of the will, according to the
quality, distance, and absence of objects presented to it. And the will is the
principal subject of holiness; herein the graces are most situated and
planted; this is the throne wherein they reign and rule, so that the
affections do much discover the state of a man; grace has its birth in the
understanding, but her seat, in respect of the greater part, in the will; it is
seminally in the mind, actually and formally in the will especially; therefore
as I said, the will is much to be observed in its tempers and inclinations, and
motions, which are the affections of the soul, as we call them.

Now these affections I refer, that I may instance in particulars, to two
heads, according to the principal objects of them, which are 1 God, and things
spiritual. 2 Sin, and things carnal.


As the heavens are moved upon her two poles, so the affections are conversant
about these two objects. First of the affections which look upward and have
God and Christ, and heavenly things, for their object: These affections are all
comprised in love Aquin. 1.2ae. q. 28. a. 6.
, as among the disliking affections, hatred does vertually contain the rest, as
grief, fear, anger, etc. so in the liking affections, love does comprehend the
rest of that kind, as desire, delight, joy, hope, etc. these being but the
children of love, or several acts of love. Now the acts of love toward God,
and things above, are principally three, 1 Desire. 2 Hope. 3 Delight.


By desire and hope, love extends it self toward God as absent: by delight
she enjoyes him as present: Desire is love in motion; Delight, is love in rest;
Hope is Love, having motion in her rest, and rest in her motion: and in
expectation, there is neither perfect rest, nor perfect motion.

Desire. There will be a great change in this, Desires abated, so that
when God denies his wonted influence: for what is desire, but the souls
following of God; and there is a decay in this, proportionable to the abatement
of Gods drawing; for so far only as God draws, we follow, Cant. 1.4. Ioh.
6.44.

The abatement of desires, will show it self in two things.

There will be less prayer and endeavor to enjoy God. Prayer is the
presenting of our desires to God, there is less prayer and endeavor.
and he that is full of desires, is full of prayers; the soul that longs after
God, breathes out many sighs, and prayers, and tears, unto the Throne of
Grace, and is ever reaching after him Non requiescit amor in quacunque
supersiciali adeptione amati, sed quaerit amatum perfect habere, quasi ad
intima illius perveniens, etc. Aqu. 1.2ae. q. 28. a. 2.
, that it may apprehend him, Phil. 3. If God be present, it hangs upon him,
with humble entreaties not to depart from him; if absent, he flies after him
with mournful complaints and cries, that he would return to him; he cannot be
answered or quieted, if he find not the losses and ruins of his spirit to be
repaired. But where the heart is still and silent in her evils, over run with
darkness, deadness, earthlynesse, and other like doleful evils, and yet puts
not up her prayers, or if prayers, yet not cries, being either no suter, or at
least no beggar; but quietly contents her self in her way; here desires after
God are very low.

The like may be said of all endeavors: desires are active; if you are become
more slack and slight in the use of ordinances, in which you were wont to
find the Lord, doubtless you have fallen from your first love, with that
backsliding Ephesus, Apoc. 2.4. and it is time to consider whence you are
fallen, and to repent, lest God come against you with terrors to awake you.

God less intended in all endeavors: when God is the end of a man in hearing,
God less intended.
praying, etc. it is a sign that he desires him in truth, and the more he is
intended, the more he is desired; God may be the object of his action that
loves him not, but he is the end only of such as love him. Observe this, a man
may do as much as he has done, yet there may be a decay of his desire,
appearing in this, that God is not his end.

Quest. When God is our end, may be known by
How may I know when God is my end?

Ans. The end may be considered, in respect of its place, power.


place of the end is in the intention and affection, here it sits as in her
throne, Considering the place of the end.
and uses her authority and power; the soul intends and minds that which is
her end, as the Archer has his mark in eye to which he shoots: Judge then
your selves what you intend? is God in your eye? so far as you intend him you
desire him, and no more.

end in her power, Its power.
the ultimate end has the greatest power in a man of all things; this power is
four fold, to draw, rule, hold, quiet.


It draws to it, having as it were a magneticall virtue to attract Amor meus
pondus meum, eo feror quocunque seror. Aug.
, To draw.
when it gets into the understanding, it sets the will and affections, and all
the powers of men on action, so they that make riches their end are strongly
inclined and moved to them, willingly and diligently laboring, patiently
enduring, and constantly endeavoring to attain them, and where riches are the
term to which the heart tends, it is the principle of motion (...). Arist.
eth. l. 8. c. 9.
, and the reason of all endeavor; so that if it be asked, what a covetous man
seeks, and for what he studies, plots, sweats, toils, moyles, the answer, in
all is, riches: Do you find God thus drawing? when you pray, receive, hear,
consider what moves you, what sets you on work; For not the motion, but the
mover, not the endeavor, but the ground of it discovers the end; two men may
walk in one way, yet their end may be different, one may walk for his
health, the other for his profit: so in the same duties of godliness, the end
of one may be pride, of another peace of conscience only, but the best end is
God. Note this, that there is a threefold discharge of duty; hypocritical,
when a man intends not what he does, but something else, some worldly
advantage; Conscientious, when good is done as a duty and task; Spiritual,
when good is done, for this end that we may please and enjoy God.

end rules; as it is the ground, so also it is the rule of action, To regulate.
as it draws to it with power, so with order, it draws to it in the due and
direct way: that is, it puts upon 1 Inquisition of fit means. 2 Due use of them.


inquisition about the fittest means: Causing inquisition of fit means.
hence comes those many prayers to God which David put up to be directed, lead,
instructed, taught in the way that he should walk, Psalm. 119. hence came his
study in pondering on the law, the light of his feet, and lantern of his paths;
hence the people being stirred by John's ministry, to seek eternal life, and
to enquire after God, came to him and consulted with him, What shall we do? So
did the Publicans and Soldiers, Luke 3.10.15. hence also came that cry of the
Jews and the Jailer newly awakened from their sleep of death, Men and
Brethren what shall we do? Acts 2.37. Chap. 16.30.

the due use of means when they are found out, Due use of means.
and this is necessary; For as a man may come short of his end, by wrong
means; so also by not using or misusing of right means. Note here therefore
two operations of the end, about the means; 1. it puts upon the use of them,
so that if God be a man's end, the minding and affecting this, will urge and
press to the use of such means, as God has appointed and discovered, yea of
one as well as another, he that either uses none, or not all, intends not God
as he ought: where a man desires God, and makes him his end, he finds in
himself, a disposition to the use of all means proportionable to the desire
of his end, which he fully Finis appetitio non habet limits definitos. Arist.
pol. 1.6.
seeks. 2 It puts upon the due use of them, that is, so to use all the
ordinances, as that in them he may come to God; the promise of Gods approach to
man in grace and mercy, is not made simply to the actions of godliness, but to
the right performance of them, as not he that prays, but he that prays
with fervency, faith, sincerity, shall obtain: not the hearer, but the wise,
hungry, humble, obedient hearer, shall find the word effectual: therefore that
spirit that directs the heart to pitch on, and pursue after the right end, does
also lead the heart in the way to it, working such dispositions as may fit it
to a wise and effectual use of all means; he therefore that loses in the
means, loses in the end, for the end is in the means.

The end holds the heart with it; To retain the heart.
as it has an attractive power, so it has a retentive power, and its bonds
are so strong, that nothing can dissolve them, and draw away the heart; the
last end is a man's chief good, and therefore where it is so apprehended and
minded, nothing can divide betwixt it and the soul; for if any thing should,
it must be either good or evil; good cannot, for the soul will not leave a
greater good for a less; and there is no evil so great as the loss of the
chief good. Therefore if you be gone from God, it is a sign you make not God
your end, as you have done.

quiets the heart so far as it is attained; To quiet the heart.
every thing rests in its proper place, its appetite is satiated in its end,
and a man that makes God his end, cannot be quiet in his absence, but is ever
restless in his motion, and labor after him, till he find him; yea, nothing
can content him, till he finds such a presence as he needs; though God give
riches, and health, and friends and all the sweetest accommodations of this
life, yet as the child that wants the nurses breast is not quieted with bables,
no not bracelets of pearls, o^ chains of gold, but it must have the breast;
so he still pursues God, an^ is not satisfied, till he get his hard hear^
softened, his dull heart quickened, his dark heart enlightened, and God
returning again into the tabernacle of his soul, to fill it with the glory
and power of his presence: and so far as he gains in this, he is at peace:
if God open the well of life, and cause the streams thereof to flow in upon
him, i^ he come in with power to destroy his lusts; to quicken, awaken, and
establish the soul, he counts it a greater happiness than to possess a
crown, coun^ ^t a greater happiness then to possess a crown, or heap of
pearls, or mines of gold.

hope: In Desertion hope is weakened.
this is an act of the will, extending it self toward that which it loves, as
future; it is of great use to a Christian; it is an anchor to uphold in
troubles, and a goad to excite to endeavor; yet such ^s our folly, that though
all Christians have a saving hope, yet few have a living hope, that is to say,
such a hope is lives in them, and gives life unto them; but most rest in a
poor, faint, ^eeble hope, seldom improving this grace, except in the day of
fears, sorrows, troubles, and of death.

But surely if hope be abated, a man ^s abated in his communion with the God of
hope. And the decays of ^ope are in some of these three things, (...) in all:
in the Certainty of hope. in the Acts of hope. in the Efficacy of hope.


certainty. Certain hopes ^re not only man's portion, In its certainty.
though there be a certainty in the object, yet not always in the subject.
Hope in the Saints respects the good hoped for, in a threefold degree of
futurity. Some hope for heaven, as possible only; this is the lowest pitch of
hope.

Some hope for heaven as probable, though they have hope of attaining, yet not
without fear of missing: some hope for heaven as certain^^ and infallible.

The hope of possibility is a weak hope; the hope of probability is a
fluctuatin hope; the hope of certainty is a setl^^ hope; that which the Apostle
calls the Plerophorie, or full assurance of hope Heb 6.11. Now as in other
parts, s^ in this the Saints are subject to declension; but where it so fares,
that a man hope is clouded and enfeebled, so that from a triumphant and joyful
expectation and waiting for of heavenly glory he is fallen into an habitual
anxietie and dubiousnesse of mind; it argues that he enjoys not God as he
has done.

In the acts


Note, Hope has two acts, 1 Desire. 2 Expectation.


The one is the reaching forth of the will, to the thing promised; the other
has two things which constitute it.

1 The fixing of the soul upon the thing desired. 2 The resting of the soul
in the futurity of it.
Concerning these, I will propound three things for your trial.

Not so complete.
where there is not that compleatnesse in them that has been; as desire of
heaven, without minding it; I or some slight desire and scattering thoughts of
it, without a patient and joyful waiting for it.

frequencie of these acts that has been; Not so frequent.
as when you do not so often long and look for heaven, not so often mind it,
and feed your hearts in the expectation of it.

fullness in these acts, which has been; Not so intense.
as when your heart does not so eagerly desire it, but has lost her former
breathings and pantings after it, not So looking for, and hasting to it, 2 Pet.
3.12.

And when it does not dwell above, but has lost her habitation which she had
in heaven, and has pitched up tents unto her self in the world; and when it
does not comfort it self in the remembrance of the promise, and solace it
self in the thoughts of its future blessedness, it is certain here is a
decay in the acts of hope.

efficacy of hope; In its efficacy not working.
note that a lively hope is an efficacious hope; and as there are many precious
effects of it; so I will instance in four.

Prizing of the promise: Appretiation of the promise.
faith co^mends the promise unto hope, it reveals the worth and truth of it,
and then hope takes it and hugs it, so that it reckons it as its treasure, and
feeds upon it as its Manna, which God has given to refresh the soul in this
desert: when you forget your consolation, and let the promises lie as a thing
of no account, when you afford them not room, yea the highest room in your
hearts; when you build not your peace on this pillar, and suck not your joys
from these breasts, surely all is not well, your hopes are diminished.

Moderation of the affection to the world. Hope does elevate the heart;
Moderation toward the world.
Where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also, Matthew. 6. If you be
grown more proud in abundance, more covetous after what you have not, more
disco^tented with what you have, your hearts are again entangled in the love
of the world, and fallen from the heights of heavenly hope.

Quickening endeavor. Hope makes a man willing, constant, cheerful, diligent,
Abundant diligence.
abundant in endeavors, therefore if you strive less, you hope less.

Making able to suffer. This steeled the Saints with courage and patience in
persecution; yea, Constant patience.
this made them to rejoice, yea, glory in tribulation for Christ, Romans 5.3.
Increase of fears of the cross, and of impatience in suffe^ing, argues a
decrease of the efficacy and vigor of hope.

delight; this is a sweet contentment of heart in God, and in the things of
God; In Desertion delight in God lessened.
a complacencie, or taking pleasure in God, and according to the degree of
love, is o^^ delight in God: the same love that quickens desire, and hope after
God as absent, shows it self in delighting in him as present. It is true,
God is in a sense absent from us while we are in the world, 2 Cor. 5.6. that
is, we have not fully attained, Phil. 3.12. but yet he is also present: he is
present 1 to faith, for faith has a prophetical eye, to see that as present
which is absent, and a magneticall hand to draw unto it self that which is
afar off: and he is ^ present to sense; for we taste and feel his power and
goodness, and so far as the soul that loves him enjoys him, it joyeth in
him; Appearing,
therefore if your delight be less, your love is less.

Quest. By forgetfulness of God.


Answ. 1. If you be more forgetful of God; for that which we esteem we mind.
Excessive delight in vanities.


delight more in the worlds vanities. Heavenly delights, and sensual
pleasures, are contrary each to other. There is a lawful delight in the world,
consistent with delight in God; yea, for whom is delight in the world, but for
the heirs of heaven? he that is in his sins stung with the venom of his
guilt, and racked with the fears, and clamours, and terrors of an unquiet
conscience, can have no true delight in the world; What sweetness is a man's
dainties to him, that fears he has no portion in the bread of life? What
comfort in his great riches, that looks to have heaps of eternal woes? What
peace in his fair dwelling, who expects hereafter to live in the lowest hell?
What good do those pleasures which are sowred with hellish horrors, and
dreadful expectations of unsufferable pains for ever? No, no, he only has
true pleasure, who has God for his God; yet even they are subject to a carnal
use of lawful comforts; which is, when our delights are immoderate, not used
in that way, and to that end, that we may be more fitted to walk with God,
etc. and when our delights are such, the more they are, the less is our
delight in God; a full delight in God, deads the heart to earthly and carnal
delights: as in the pipes of water, when the water has broke a vent to it
self upward, it cease to run forward.

Unwillingness to walk with God: Unwillingnesse to walk with God.
which lies in five things.

Hardly drawn to God. A stone need not to be driven downward, because that
motion is suitable to it, Hardly drawn to him.
and it affects the center: the Eagles fly willingly to their prey; an hungry
man need not either persuasion or compulsion to take his meat; if you did
delight in God as before, what means your hanging back from him? and how is
it that the counsels and thoughts of your hearts, the pressing persuasions of
the Word, the strong motions of the spirit, the shining examples of the godly,
the wise advise of faithful friends, the sweet enducements of precious
promises, the fad menacies of fearful evils, yea, the heavy strokes of an
angry God; yea, the melting mercyes of a tender father, yea the bleeding wounds
of a crucisied redeemer; I say, how is it that none of these do more prevail
with thee to a more ready walking with thy God? this backwardness is hateful
(...).
.

Vnchearfulnesse in his presence, Unchearefull in his presence.
people, and service, a man may soon see when a servant works willingly in
his masters service; David when he had his delight in God, delighted in all the
ways of God, Psalm. 119.16, 24, 35, 47, 70, 77, 174. it may be to be with God,
has in times past been to thee better than thine appointed food: but now thou
come to duties, as to meals when thou have no stomach, what then more clear
than this, that thy delight is less in God.

Uneaven and inconstaant.
when a man is in and out, and constant in nothing but unconstancy, it is a
sign he is not well pleased with his way; the soul rests in that which she
fully likes, all changes are from dislike, for if a man had what he would have
in any thing, he would not desire to leave it; all uneavennesse in our walking
with God, argues a distaste of the ways of God, and of God himself; and it
is great weakness to be drawn so from our selves, and to be so tottering Been
compositae mentis esseexistimo, secum consistere, secum morari. Sen.
.

Easily drawn from God.
or horse, or any thing, a small price will not buy it out of his hands;
therefore judge your selves, when Satan comes and bids you such a price, offers
such a pleasure, or such an advantage, to draw you from that which happily
heretofore the whole world could not have won you from, and you easily and
ordinarily are by this taken off from your holy course, it is a sign your
hearts are not so delighted in God as they were. Loath to rise to the highest
pitch of holiness.


have some hopes still, but you can rest with the sad admixtures of sears; some
mortifying grace, but you seek not for the fulness of it; some quickening grace,
but you strive not for the abundance of it; you have some communion with God,
but you strive not to be much in it; a man has never enough of that which
delights him much.

Now briefly of the other maine Object, about which our affections are
conversant while we carry this flesh, is sin and carnal things: there will be
a change in these in the time of desertion: In a word, that I may dispatch,
this I will instance in two affections: 1. hatred, 2. grief.


These two go together, and they are ever of an equal height, hatred respects
the nature of sin, grief the proximity of it; though we had no sin, we should
have hatred of it; but if it were not near us, or in us, we could not have
grief for it.

displicency against sin, in the nature of it, In Desertion hatred of sin
abated.
this hatred is founded in love; and as love is either terminated on a man's
self, or on God, such is the hatred of sin, a man may have the former and yet
be without God, that is, he may hate sin as repugnant either to his nature, so
meek men hate contention, or to their peace; so men illightened hate it for the
evil that it brings, as shame, sorrow, fears, pains, death, hell; But they that
thus hate it, love it, their hatred is but respective, but their love direct
and real, though they hate the fruit, they love the tree, though they dislike
the effect of sin, yet they like the sin it self.

But true hatred, is a displicency against sin it self (...). Arist. Rhet l.
2. c. 4. Signs of it. 1. Occasions of sin less distasted and feared.
. And since this is of God, the more we have of it, the more we have of God;
consider then if there be not an abating of this: is not thy heart entered into
a kind of league and amity with thy former lusts?

Quest. How shall I know this?

Ans. The occasions of sin will be less feared and distasted, the occasions of
sin are Harbengers and spokesmen of sin, and where these find better
entertainment, their sin is not so much disaffected: Princes do show their
loving respects to each other by kind entreating of their Ambassadors: Judge
thy self if thou have been formerly fearful, jealous, watchful, but now art
grown heedlesse, bold, ventrous; yea, not only less fearing occasions of sin,
but also more delighting in them, it is a sure sign that the temper of thy
spirit is corrupted, thou art grown worse.

The law less loved.
and prohibitions, and our natures will more easily embrace the one than the
other, we many times are content to do much; if the law require this, or that,
we yield and consent to it, but to be limited and barred is most distastefull,
when men love their sins, though they like not the law prohibiting those sins:
And look into your selves, for so strangely do the regenerate sometimes
degenerate, that sometimes it is a displeasing thing that there should be any
law to cross and thwart their desires and lusts, yea to be angry with them
that hold this law unto them; so good Asah was overtaken, 2 Chronicles. 16. the Seer
struck at his sin with this sword of the spirit, and Asah stands up in defense
of his sin, and smites the Seer; oh how far may the heart go out from God?
what a thing is this, that a renewed man should so far decline, as to love
that which God hates; and so to love it as to reject God, to harbor it, and to
say in his heart, oh that there were no bonds, that I might be free, oh that I
had my will, then would I repeal that law, and return to sin: Less prayer
against sin.
yet this is sometimes found, but it is a sign of a man much estranged from
the life of God.

Est intentio odii no cere, nec cessat in laesione peccati sed in exterminio.
Gul. Paris. de Rhet. Divin. c. 23. Vere poenitens est Iuratus in mortem
peccatorum. ib.
; See how the Apostle cries out as a man tired with the chains of a grievous
bondage, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Romans 7. Yea, and when he felt his sin stirring, he prays and
prays, and prays again to heaven for help, 2 Cor. 12. There is a praying
against sin, while yet the heart is toward it, but it is fearful mockery of
that Majesty to whom we pray: it may be a man's case, that the power of
conscience may. enforce and extort prayer for subduing of sin, and yet the
power of sin may be such that it may hold the heart in the love of it: But if
you slack in the sincerity and fervency of your prayers for mortifying grace,
you have abated in hatred of sin.

In the next place comes grief for sin: a grief rising and springing from the
bowels of love to God; this is a special grace, which as it is from God, so
it is honored with the promise of Gods presence: For thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high
and holy place with him also that is of a contrite, and an humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
Isay 57.15. As when the streams are shallower, it has less of the fountain,
so the less godly sorrow, the less of God: (...). Proverb. graec.
when a man is not so frequent in humbling his soul, nor so full of grief,
when sins wounds are not so grievous as they have been, he has no cause to
(...) down and lament his case; for God is departed in a great measure from
him.

CHAP. XII. The second rule to judge of Desertion is taken from the increase of
sin, where how the increase of sin may be known.
THe second rule to guide in the judgment of this matter whether a may be
deserted or not, is the consideration of his sins; where sin is increased,
there is less of God; sin is contrary to godliness, and the nature of all
contraries, is, that the intention and increase of the one, is the remission
and decrease of the other; as in the air, when there is most darkness, then
there is leas^ light; when the spirit of holiness is present in his powerful
working, then the power of sin is weakened; but when he withdrawes his
influence, then sin breaks out; as when the Sun sets, then the beasts that
lay before lurking in their dens, come forth with roarings and howlings for
their prey; and as when the King is gone out of his kingdom, then the
traiterous rebels, who before concealed themselves, rise up in arms to work
their wills.

And it must needs be that upon Gods departure and his ceasing the acts and
operations of his power in the soul, When God departs, sin increases.
that sin must revive, and return upon a man with a renewed strength, and
prevail much. For,

1. First, Satan is vigilant, For 1. Satan takes the opportunity.
and takes his time to do all the mischief that he can, when God leaves a man,
he seeks to make a re-entry, as thieves break open houses, and pill and spoil
in the absence of the master. And indeed when God thus leaves the soul, there
is not a mere Desertion only, but a tradition also of a man into the hands of
Satan; God permitting him to deal with the soul in a sort, as with Jobs
body, to lay his hand on them, to spoil them, to smite them with many soars,
and though he cannot slay them, yet he may much hurt them, so that they come
out of his hands as the man in the Gospel that fell among thieves, and was
robbed and wounded and left half dead. Luke 10.30.

Sin is potent.
Sin is a potent thing, it has indeed many things against it, but more for
it, and only God above it; so that if God cease to watch, and keep the heart
in his way, and to keep down this monster, it will be stirring.

Take a short view of the power o^ sin: It is compared to an husband which
overcomes by kindness, to a Lord which prevails by power, yea, it is compared
to the things of the greatest power, it is called a Conqueror, leading all in
captivity, a tyrant holding all in bondage, a King holding all in subjectio^,
and draw near and see the strength of it. Consider the City that she is mured
in, it is man, an active creature; and as fire is more fierce in gunpowder,
that in wood, and rebellion stronger in a general than in a peasant, so sin is
stronger for the subject of it; hence it come that the devils exceed man in
wickedness, because their natures are more active, and more potent; sin also
is in the whole man, therefore as fire that has hold in every part of an
house, burns exceeding fiercely, if men cease to quench it; so sin rages much
when God cease to slake it by pouring in his Spirit, which is compared to
water, Ioh. 3.3. Ezech. 36.25. as sin is compared to fire. James 3.5, 6.

Again, behold the forts of sin, which is carnal thoughts and reasonings:
which are called strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. in which it both strengthens its
own power, and defends it self against all adverse power.

Then behold her weapons, every faculty, ability, endowment, riches, wisdom,
strength, honor, friends, and the members of the body, which are weapons of
unrighteousness. Romans 6.13. (...). Gre. Naz. orat. 1.
.

Then behold her allies, and aides, many things come in to contribute strength,
I say many things without a man, as Satan by counsel, suggestions,
persuasions, diversions, discouragements, and strong operations: And all the
objects of sin, yea every creature, and the examples and counsels of men,
yea, and the acts of sin it self, all these make the power of sin greater:
therefore considering these things, who can wonder that there should be a
renewing of the power and working of sin, when God denies his gracious
presence in the soul? But about the renewed power of sin, consider,
But concerning this renewed power of sin, take these considerations.

Sin must be distinguished.
and to the whole law in a sense, because holiness in the nature of it is
contrary to sin, and the law condemns all sin as a transgression against it;
but some sins are more directly contrary to all holiness, as total apostasy,
positive hatred of God, etc. these, 1 John 3.6.9.
such as abide in Christ are kept from; but other sins which are particular
defects, though in their kind grievous, they may possibly fall into, etc. But
let me add this caution, 1. that they are seldom found in such, if heinous
evils. 2. That it concerns men to watch, because such ways are ways of
death; and the proper effect of great sins is wasting of the conscience, and
incensing of much wrath.

2. The power which sin gains is but a limited, not an absolute power, Christ
is not willing to lose his subjects, though he may suffer them to be vexed, yet
not conquered; sin may rage, but not rule, or as I said, its power is limited.

1. It is not full: sin may have much power, but Christ still keeps the
throne, though he permit it to do much, yet he keeps the Scepter in his hand;
yea, though he let sin loose in a degree, yet he holds the reins in his hand
to curb it at his pleasure, and though it find a part yielding in a man, yet it
ever finds a part resisting, Gal. 5.17. he that has fully and resolutely given
up himself to Christ as a King, can never admit of another Sovereign, it is
not only contrary to his duty, but to his nature, and that anointing, by which
he is set above the world, and above Satan and above himself, and under none
but Christ: This anointing is the Spirit of Christ, which is a Royal Spirit,
and makes us Kings like himself, both in Nobleness of spirit, which abhorres
bondage to base lusts, and in victorious power by which he overcomes all, yea
our strength is the blood, mercy, power, and truth of Christ, who has
undertaken to rule his people with the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110. and to
beat down their enemies with his Iron rod, Psalm. 2. and he has said, Sin
shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law but under
grace. Romans 6.14. Destituitur peccatu^ potentia, da^nandi et dominandi. Epis.
Saris. de justitia operum. c. 5. vid. etiam Abbot. Epis. Saris. animad. in
Thoms. diatrib. c. 21.
. God will throw out sin by pouring out upon his servants a spirit of
repentance Fortior est spiritus in nobis, quia semper facit ut de malis actibus
resipiscamus, at caro praestare non potest ut resipiscamus de bonis. Twis.
vindic. l. 3. errat. 8.. 12.
of faith, of prayer, and power, yea, and lust by winning loses, and her
present renewed strength proves the occasion of her future and greater
weakness: Pyrrhus Romanos vicit, at mullos suorum in praelio perdidit et eis
proinde dixit, (...). Plut. Apoph. Vt vere possunt dicere, (...). id. ibid.
For when the heart is awakened, and sees the ruins which lust have made, now
it stirs up it self, and girds its sword and buckles its armor about it,
and the Spirit of the Lord comes upon it, that it subdues her enemies, and
drives out those pests from her territories, and takes up a resolution of
perpetual enmity, and war against them, never to admit leagues, or to show
favor, but to be avenged on them, not one shall escape. Thus as the Sun sets
in a cloud, and seems buried in darkness, but rises again in glory; and as
the earth seems vanquished, and to lose her crown and life by the fierce
invasion of the cold armies of winter, yet at last regaines her strength, when
the Sun breaks forth, and untyes her bonds, that her imprisoned power and life
may come forth again; and now, where are those blustering storms, those
battering hayles, those heaps of snow, those nipping winds? So, the soul
renewed, though it may be far gone, yet shall revive again, and sins greater
rise, shall prove her greater fall, and at last shall perfectly be destroyed.

These being premised; I say that the increase of corruption is a sign of
Desertion: Cautions in concluding desertion by renewing of sin.
But yet with Caution.

1 Caution, take not all renewed motions and stirrings of lust, for the renewed
power of it, Actio violenta non est violentia patientis sed inferentis. Guli.
Par. de tentat. and resist. p. 284. col. 2.
for sin may stir much where it is much weakened, tentations may be stronger,
and so that grace which we have received may be less able to prevent all
risings and workings of inherent lusts: God may seem to leave us, when he does
but try and exercise us by suffering incursions of sin, and by permitting us to
be assaulted with Satan's depths, and stratagems, and power, as hereafter I
shall declare.



Indeed where sin and lust is grown stronger, there a man has cause to
conclude against himself, that so far as his sins have gained in him, he
has lost of God.

Quest. How may it be known when sin has thus revived, and is become stronger?

Ans. It will be necessary to consider four things. When sin is grown
stronger, it may be known by
The root, The branches, The soil, The fruit.


1. The root of sin: First, the root which is,
the life of the plant is in the root, and there is something which has the
resemblance of a root to sin in the soul, by the means whereof sin lives: 1.
Affection, Affection and the mind.
2. Understanding.


The affection and love of sin is the life of it: then sin dies, when we hate
it; then it lives, when we love it: hence flow all resolutions to sin, and all
voluntary acts of sin, and all yielding to tentations and occasions of sin:
love is an affection, begetting union and action; a man is desirous to be and
do that which he loves; judge then theincrease of the power of sin, by the
increase of love to sin.

There are four degrees of love to sin. Four degrees of love to sin.


Cum non sit dicendus velle, qui quod potuit non confecit, non vult proculdubio
resistere, qui non facit quod potest ut resistat. Aug. apud Parisiens.
, which is when though a man be not come to a resolution to fulfill his lust,
Non-resolution against it.
yet he is not at all, or but slightly resolved against it; his hatred against
it is not sogreat as has been; therefore his watch is neglected, his sin
connived at, the course of mortification slacked; though he open not the door
to entertain sin, yet he leaves it unlocked and unbarred, that if occasion
present it self, sin may not be excluded Planevult qui plene non est nolens,
qui deliberat, descivit.
.

Allowed desire.
so love begets desire; when you find a leaning, and hankering, and lusting
unto sin with allowance, it is a sign of love, and this is a woeful temper
of spirit Malorum ultimum est malasua amare; ubi turpia non solum delectant,
sed etiam placent. Sen. ep. 39.
.

Resolution.
then against reason, religion, vows, threats, promises, heaven, hell, to
maintain a resolution of evil in the heart? this begets a desperate
prosecution of sin, and argues a great measure of Atheism, and contempt of
God, and is ever joined in persons enlightened with a resisting of the Holy
Ghost, in the counsels of his Word, and the checks and dictates of conscience.

Delightful a ^ing.
and taking pleasure in unrighteousness; as here the acts of sin are very
sinful, because the more an evil act is wilful, the more it is sinful; so
the power of sin is very great, because the more it is in delight, the more
in the will; and the more it has of the will, the stronger it is.

The second thing which is a part of the root, The other root is the mind,
Which feeds sin.
and the maine part is the understanding; as it is in the root of the tree, one
part conveyes sap to another, and then that coveyeth sap into the tree; so here
affection feeds action, and the mind feeds affection; the mind gives strength
to sin,

By good opinion of it.
that carnal mind is wholly for the strengthening of sin, and the more this
ministers that which gives life to sin, the stronger it is: as in the Church,
so in every particular man there is a false prophet and a beast; the beast of
sensuality and brutish lusts, and the false prophet of carnal wisdom, working
miracles before the beast, raising up many representations of a bewitching
nature, by which lust is quickened and strengthened; now while Christ rules with
power in the soul, the beast is bound, and the false prophet is silenced; but
when he departs, then they are loosed, and walk up and down, with power and
deceit woring in the heart.

By working for it.
when the corrupt mind works unto sin, sin is grown.

Quest. How does it work unto sin?

Answ. By diversion.
being voluntarily inconsiderate.

Excusare non excutere. Sen.
: Protection
either making it no sin, or small sin, being willingly careless to search
and enquire into the utter sinfulness, and exceeding danger of sin.

Attraction
presenting sin to the heart, as fire to powder; by persuasion suggesting the
sweetness, advantage, necessity, smalnesse, secrecy, and singularity of the
sin; or the possibility, facility, and efficacy of repentance, to remove the
guilt of it; or such like shifts or stratagems, does the corrupt mind use by
these persuasions and suggestions, as by cords drawing, and by gins entrapping
the heart in sin: now when the operations and efficacy of the mind in this
kind are increased, then sin is strengthened in the root.

The increase of sin appears in the branches.
as it is a sign the tree grows when it spreads; in this spreading of sin
observe;

When it spreads into gross sins.
such as the Apostle calls the manifest fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. and the
defilements of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20. thou have cause to reckon, that thy
sin has regained much strength.

Into many sins.
and various lusts, when swarms of evils, and many sinful distempers are put
forth, as pride, and envy, and passion, and earthlinesse, and unbeleefe, and
impatience, and the like: it is a sign a disease has much prevailed in the
body, when it has brought it into a general weakness; so when distemper and
sickness has overspread the soul, so that it is every way disabled to an
holy walking, and overrun with various and manifold corruptions, it is evident
that sin has gained.

Sins bewailed.
which you have confessed and bewailed; if there were not a strong stream of
sinfulness in your soul, such a dam of resolutions and vows as is made with
tears and heaviness in repentance, could not be so borne down.

The increase of sin appears in the fruits.
which are 1 Inclination. which are 2 Action.


Inclination.
; disposition begets action, and action corroborates the disposition; sin
fostered, and favored, and acted, grows stronger in the habit, and still
does more dispose the heart to it; as a stick that has been in the fire, is
more apt to take fire again; so if thy heart be more bent and engaged to
sin, if more easily drawn and overcome to sin, sin is grown in thee.

Action.
the more sins blossom in the disposition to it, and bear in the execution of
it, the stronger they are; spiritual weakness and declension, appears more
by the acts of sin, then the inclination to it; for many have ability to
withstand the external act of some sins, the lustings whereto they cannot
withstand: inward lustings, whether they proceed from grace or sin, are both in
the regenerate, and these lustings are as the commands of a master; now as two
men, whereof one has been, the other is his master, may command a servant
contrary things, but he obeys his command to whom he is most subject; so when
the flesh and the spirit lust one against the other, it is the doing of the
will of the flesh that shows the power of sin, when a man is led and walks in
the power of the spirit, though he cannot but lust, yet he cannot so well
fulfill the lusts of the flesh: the victory of sin lies not so much in the
rising lusting o^ the heart, as in the fulfilling of it, Romans 6.16. a tree when
it is cut down, will sometime sprout, but it bears no fruit, there is not
strength to bring the bud to maturity, therefore if you be overcome to commit
sin, it is a sign that the renewed part is on the footstool, and lust in
the throne; that is weakened, and this strenghthened: for as in wrastlers both
strive, yet the victory is not in the tugging and contending on either part,
but in the casting, he that gets the fall proves the weakest.

And in the acting of sin, Power of sin appears in acting.
the power of sin appears.

When tentation weak.
which will not stir a man, because the child is weak; and a master that
has his servant in much subjection, will do more with a word or a beck, then
another with much compulsion: it was the Centurions power that caused his
servants to be easily commanded, I say unto one come and he comes, and to
another go and he goes, and to another do this, and he does it, Matthew. 8.9.
and he believed that herein was the greatness of Christ's power, That if he
would but speak the word only, his servant would be healed. verse. 8. So when
small occasions of sin and small advantages, and weak provocations can
prevail, it is a sign of the power of sin.

Acts frequent.
ordinarily there are not many sparks without much fire; and it is a sign the
tree is very vigorous and full of life, that is full of fruit; when you are
often overtaken, and frequently foiled, it is a sign you are much under the
power of sin, for all things as they are in operation, so they are in being; a
full stream argues an abundant fountain, and many children a fruitful womb.

When the sins are such as were of old vanquished.
and long vanquished; for if they had had the strength in thee formerly, why
did they not work and prevail as now. It is evident that here is an awakening
and reviving of lust, where that from which thou were delivered, does now again
bring thee into such bondage.

When with less reluctance.
Now sins power is enlarged, for what greater power can be in any Sovereign,
then to have his subjects yielding obedience, willingly, and without
reluctance? it may be the time has been, when the motions of sin have been
grievous, and thou have fought manfully by prayers, vows, meditations,
watchfulness, etc. and if thou have fallen, thou have fallen fighting, with
thy weapon in thy hand; yea, when thy sin has had the upper hand, yet thou
have fought, being foiled; and though overborn, yet would thou not yield:
but now thy sin comes upon thee as a Conqueror into a vanquished city, where
the gate is opened for him, and no man holds up a sword against him; if it be
so with thee, thy sin has grown upon thee.

4 Consider the soil that feeds thy sin, Increase of sin appears by the
soil of it, the objects.
and that is the objects of sin, which are as the earth to the tree, or as the
fuel to the fire, as the oil to the lamp: if there were no riches in the
world, there would be less covetousness; if no honor, less ambition, etc.
When the objects of sin do more prevail, sin has the greater strength: the
offer of the whole world, by the God of this world, was unto Christ but as
music in a dead man's ears; it was but weak, because in him was nothing
found, John 14.30. and all earthly hopes and advantages prevailed not with the
Martyrs, because they were crucified unto the world, and the world unto them.
If you offer to a dog grass, or to a sheep flesh, you avail not, because
there is not a principle in them, not an appetite carried to such things; sin
may lie asleep till he come to occasions of sin, as a swine may keep clean,
if she keep in the fair meadow, and come not to the foul lanes: lime, when
it meets with water, shows its latent heat: it was the sight of the golden
wedge, and the Babylonish garment, that quickened Achans covetousness; look to
your selves, for sinful objects could not work upon you, if you your selves
had not corrupt affections and lusts to be wrought upon; if you pile never so
much wood in a chimney, there will be no burning, except there be fire: it was
the strength of David's wantonness, that he was so ensnared with the sight of
Bathsheba; and the strength of thy sin will appear by the operations of it,
upon the presence of suitable objects.

CHAP. XIII. The third rule to judge in this case, is from consideration of the
means of grace.
THe third rule is the consideration of the means of grace. In these, God is
wont to meet his people, and to show himself unto them. Now by two things you
may judge whether God has withdrawn himself. Consider.


What frame of heart you have to the ordinances
when God intends a blessing, he usually prepares the heart to receive it; he
keeps the method of the covenant, and therefore works in his people the
dispositions to which he has promised a gracious presence in his ordinances;
one principal quality is a poor and hungring heart; for his promise is to
power out waters upon the chopped earth, and to fill them that hunger: so far
then as he upholds in thee an humble and thirsting spirit, he is graciously
present with thee: speak, oh you poor in heart, and you that seek him with
hungring affections; does not the Lord meet you with comforts, and with
influences of life? how often do you go from his house with your hearts laden
with his hid treasures, and burning with an heavenly fire falling from his
presence upon you? oh the streams of spiritual graces which water the
valleys, while the mountains are left parched and dried! if you be grown
proud and livelesse, if your thirstings after the ordinances are abated, you
shall find God proportionably hiding himself, and locking up his mercies from
you; you being dead in your selves, all things are dead unto you.

Whatgood in the use of them.
it may be time has been, when thou were wont to find God feeding thee with
milk, and the honey of the Gospel, and causing his glory to pass before thee
in his house; but now those days are gone, the word does not warm thee,
cheer thee, humble thee, quicken thee as in former days; but thou come for
Mannah to feed thy starving soul, and find none; thou come in deadness,
and go away without life; thou come with diseases and sores of spirit,
and art not healed; the Gospel is hid unto thee; that ministry that is a
shining and burning light to others, is to thee without power; others are
melted, molded, cheared, elevated and strengthened, and bless the Lord,
meeting him with gladness and praise, who meets them with life and peace;
but thou find none of this: yea, the word that did sink into thy soul, as
the dew that falls upon the tender herb, is now of none effect, it causes not
thy heart to mourn, rejoice, yield, fear, love as in times past: the golden
(...), quod Rhodiis fertur contigisse.
showers are restrained, and thou art left as the mountains of Gilboa.

Thou come to the Lords table, but he bids thee not welcome, as he does his
children, his friends; he gives thee not so much as to taste, or but to taste
of his cup, which others drink of in thy sight, to their inestimable comfort;
nor to eat of his childrens bread: tell me then, has not God withdrawn and
estranged himself? if a father will not bid his son when he comes into his
house, so much as to drink, or afford him a kind look, will he not say, My
father is offended, and does estrange himself?

Time has been, when the company of the Saints was dear in thy esteem, and
a sweet conveyance of grace into thine heart, but now thy delight is not with
them, nor art thou quickened by them, but conversest with them as the dead with
the living.

Thus if the blessing of the ordinances be not upon thee, as before, know that
God is not with thee as before.

Object. But may not a man conclude amiss, supposing God has left him,
because he finds no good by the ordinances, may it not be a man's own fault, or
may he not think he has no profit when he has?

Ans. Yea, but the answer to this follows in the place of seeming desertions:
only for the present I will propound one thing, which will clear the case,
whether you enjoy a comfortable communion with God in his ordinances; For there
are flashes of fleeting affections, and transient and fading impressions which
fall upon the hearts of men, but they are not such as come from Gods special
presence: know therefore, that if Gods saving presence in his ordinances, does
distill the dew of spiritual blessings upon thee, it makes thee grow, they
are food indeed, and do incorporate themselves into the soul and so become an
effectual nutriment: the stony ground received the seed with joy; and many of
John's hearers did rejoice in the light for a season, but they were not changed
by it, there was not a power in it, to bring them unto God, such flashes are
fading things: but they that receive the word, as an engraffed word, find a
mighty power in it turning the stock daily into its own nature, the Gospel
comes to them not in word only, but in power also, and in the holy ghost, 1
These. 1.5. Where God is in his ordinances there is power. 1 These. 2.13.

CHAP. XIV. Causes of Desertion: they are for 1 instruction, that nature and
grace may be better known; 2 the one in its sinfulness and weakness, the
other in its freeness and necessity.
HItherto of the state of the Deserted Christian, with the Symptoms and
Signs: now I come to the third thing, the causes of Gods withdrawing, which
are especially two.

1. Instruction. 2. Correction.
God by withdrawing the aid of his Spirit does teach us the knowledge of our
natures, Desertions are instructions.
his grace.


In general, of the quality of our nature
which point of knowledge as it is most needful, so most difficult: the eye of
the mind being like the eye of the body, which can see all things but it
self; But because the knowledge of a man's self so much conduces to his end.
therefore God sundry ways leads his people to it, and among all glasses, there
is none that gives a clearer view of the temper, frame, and state, of humane
nature, than our life before conversion, and in desertion: for then a man is
most truly himself: and as the truest picture is then drawn when the body is
without her covering and ornaments, because often the blemishes of the body,
are hid in its adorning, and the body shines with a beauty borrowed from an
external dress: so in Desertion when a man is left most in his colors and
shape, he may best see what he is.

In particular.


Of sinfulness.
bridling in and keeping down the violence of corruption, a man cannot think
it has such a power in it, or that it is so great: When the master or keeper
is by the dog, or bear, his authority muzzles and chains them up, but upon a
fit occasion, if there be none to curb them, you shall see the utmost of a most
fierce and cruel disposition which before lay hid. And as in a garden, so long
as a gardener is in it, weeding it daily and diligently, it seems fair and
pleasant, nothing appearing but wholesome herbs, useful trees, good fruits,
fragrant flowers, and pleasant walks, but when the hand of the gardener
slacketh it self, then the cursed nature of the ground will appear, and it
brings forth of her own, and is overrun with weeds, and so turned from a
garden to a desert; so God leaves men that they may act themselves: so it is
said, God left Hezekiah to try him, that he might know all that was in his
heart. 2 Chro. 32.31.

A man would not think that he is so bad as he is, while he enjoys an
abundant aid of spiritual grace, as while the soul is in the body, that
putrefying quality, and the filthiness of it does not so much appear, but
when the foul has left it, then it becomes a rotten, unsavory carcass, and a
foul channel, while it is fed with the continued issues and streams of pure
water from a clear fountain, shows not its filth, but when the streams are
cut off, then the foulness of it discovers it self: If God do but take off
his hand, and cut off the influence of his spirit, and slip the collar of our
vile affections, oh what monsters start up, and what a cage of unclean birds,
what a den of beasts, what an habitation of devils do our hearts appear to
be? what a blackness of darkness covers the earth when the Sun is gone! yea
the air that now seems so lucid and clear, how filled with darkened storms, and
fogges is it when the Sun withdrawes it self? Herein is shame cast upon the
soul, and a man is made vile in his own eyes, when he sees his own Image
and complexion, and finds himself overgrowne with botches and sores rising
from abundance of filthy humors in his soul; he that in the day and Sunshine
of quickening grace thought he had been freed from his lusts shall wonder with
shame and astonishment to see in the night of Desertion what darkness will
appear, and what fell and fierce lusts will show themselves, like the Lions of
the evening, raging for their prey.

Of weakness.
It discovers a man's weakness and emptiness: Solutum et liberum Deo est suos
sibi aliquando permittere, dum sinit in iis extare humane infirmitatis
argumenta, utse noscant etsi sanctos esse, esse tamen homines. Camer. defens.
de great. et lib. arb. c. 9.
now a man shall discern by his deadness, in disposednesse, unmeetnesse to
all good; how great the insufficiency of nature is, and how little he has
attained in grace: a child that is carried in the arms seems tall, and when
it is led by the hand of the Nurse, and upheld, it seems to have more strength
than it has indeed, but being left unto it self, the great weakness and
feebleness of it appears. A Christian may have high thoughts of himself
while he is sustained in his way by a divine manutenency, and carried on with
plentiful gales of auxiliary grace: but if God be pleased that this wind that
blows where it lists, ( Ioh. 3.) turn from him, he shall see, that thought
himself a pillar in the house of God, that he is but a bruised reed, and he
that conceived himself rich, Desertion gives a fuller knowledge of grace.
is poor and miserable blind and naked. Apoc. 3.

Of its freeness.
and discerns what a loathsome Sepulcher, and receptacle of rottenness his
soul is, now he stands wondering, that ever he should obtain this mercy, that
the Spirit of eternal life should be given to him, he wonders to see God take
such a briar to plant in his own house, yea to graffe it into that true Vine,
his beloved Son, that the waters of life should run in such a channel so full
of filth, that so great a God should come under so base a roof, and such a
dunge on and den of devils should become the Temple of the Holy ghost. 1 Cor. 6.

Needfulnesse.
The necessity of grace Ideo quisque nostrum bonum opus sus cipere, agere,
implere, nunc scit, nunc nescit, nunc delectatur, nunc non delectatur, ut
noverit non suae facultatis, sed divini muneris esse, vel quod scit, vel quod
delectatur, etc. ideo sanctis suis alicujus operu justitiam non tribuit, vel
certam scient am vel victricem delectationem, ut cognoscant non a seipsis, sed
ab illo si esse lucem, qua, etc. Aug. de. peccat. merit. et remis. l. 2. c. 19.
and of a continual supply of aid; this is sure, a Christian lives in a
continual dependence, and has not a sufficiency in himself; all our stock
would be soon spent, if we had not continual supplies from heaven; our
fullness is not in our selves, but in our head: suppose a vessel (cracked and
apt to lose all it receives) set to the conduit cock, it has now a fullness
from the conduit, and while that runs it cannot be empty, but if the cock
should cease to run, the vessel would soon be emptyed: those that are in
Christ live, but it is Christ that lives in them, Gal. 2.20. our life is not
so much in our selves as in him; our life is said to be hid in him, yea, he is
called our life, Col. 3.3, 4. In the natural body the members have life in
themselves, yet we know the life of every member is not so much in it self, as
in the heart and head, and this appears, because if there be a failing of
spirits either vital or sensitive, all the body sinkes; and hereby we are
taught the necessity of the grace of God, because if that be withdrawn, we
wither as a blasted arm of a tree; oh how woefully does the goodly fabric
both of an enriched heart, and an heavenly conversation come tumbling down, if
God withdraw the props of supporting and assisting grace? Voluntas sine te quid
agit, nisi quo procul exulet a te, praecipites semper calls, and devia motu
ingressura suo nisi fessam tu bone and aegram suscipias, referas, foveas,
tuearis, honestes, etc. Prosper.
God by his spirit does lead and draw the heart to him, but when this bias is
taken off by which the heart was wheeled up the hill, it is carried with great
swiftness down, ward to sin and the world. David's fallings had taught him
this lesson, to see a need of a stronger support than his own (...). Chiysost.
hom. 12. ad Antioc.
, therefore prayed, Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip
not, Psalm. 17.5. yea, and he acknowledges God to be his strength, and stay,
and rock, and he that does establish his way, and carry him in it; I am
continually with thee (but whence was it?) thou have holden me by my right
hand, Psalm. 73.23. My soul follows hard after thee, (what enabled him?) thy
right hand upholdeth me, Psalm. 63.8. Thus then God for this end sometimes
suspends the workings of the spirit of power from us, that we may see a
necessity of grace, and know where the fountain is, and that all is of God,
that so we may depend upon him, and not rest in our selves, and ascribe all to
him, and nothing to our selves.

The second end of desertion is correction Dilectione non odio non studio
nocendi, sed desiderio sanandi, Aug. ep. 48. Poena emendatoria non
interfectoria t. 1. de lib. ar. l. 3. c. 25.
; desertion is out of love, and though it be grievous for the present, yet the
fruit is good, like the lopping or winter season, to the tree which makes for
its strength and growth.

I will instance in such special sins, which bring this heavy rod upon the
soul.

CHAP. XV. Desertions are for correction, Desertions corrections.
and are caused by pride, and carelessness, etc.
Of pride.
Which is a swelling and tumor in the spirit, or a lifting up in the heart, (2
Cor. 12.7.) through a supposed abundance of revelation in the mind, or of
other rich endowments of spiritual graces; it brought upon the Apostle that
goaring Thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he
should be exalted above measure. Pride is a dangerous evil, it breeds
contempt of others, which God abhors, it is a crossing of God in the end of
all his grace and mercy, which is to exalt his own glory, Ephesians. 1.6, 12.
Chap. 2.7, 8, 9. That no flesh should glory, but that he that gloryeth, should
glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. 2 Cor. 10.17. The more we esteem of
our selves, the more we take from Gods account and put to our own, which is a
robbing of God in that which he has said, He will give to none other, Isa
42.8. therefore God resists the proud, James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. and cuts him
short, and will not be friendly to him; The proud he looks at afar off.
Psalm. 138.6. as with disdain and displeasure; Making him low that exalts
himself, Prove. 29.23. the poor in heart are dear in his eyes; And the hungry
he fills with good things, but the rich he sends empty away, Luke 1.53. And no
wonder that a proud heart is a dead heart, and that upon an elevated spirit
there be barrenness as upon the mountains, for pride kills endeavor; rich
men take no pains, but the poor is diligent, and all increase and liveliness
of soul is the reward of industrious seeking; as pride abateth endeavors, so
it debaseth them, prayer, hearing, all duties are spoiled by the savor of this
noisome evil; oh ye proud in heart, your commodities are marred, and are not
vendible; all your works lie upon your hands, as breathed and worthless wares,
so as the merchant loses, when his goods are not current and marketable; so
you wax poor, you have no trade with heaven; that God that accepts the humble
that comes to him with the lading of prayers, tears, groans, cries, and takes
these, and likes them, and makes him rich returns; turns back the proud and
all their works.

Of carelessness.


Not accepting seasons of grace.
we open not; he often leaves us, and goes from us: so he came to the Church,
And knocked, open to me mysister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head
is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, but she was
careless, and regarded not the day of her visitation, and what follows? I
opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone; I
sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he answered me not,
Cant. 5.2, 6. Sometimes the spirit comes sweetly melting, and tempering the
heart to an holy softness, and godly sorrow, but is quenched by negligence;
therefore justly does that soul groan under the misery of a stupid heart,
lamenting with the Church; Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? Esaias
63.17. and taking up that cry with me so often here, I cannot repent, my heart
is frozen, I cannot mourn; sometimes he comes with strong convictions,
persuasions, and contections, to take the heart off from a way that is not
good, so that the heart begins to draw back it self; but because we lose this
opportunity, therefore out sins remain, and tyrannize in us, causing usto take
up David's complaint, Iniquities prevail against me, Psalm. 65.32. Sometimes he
comes exciting and raising thoughts and resolutions of heart, to a more
heavenly walking; but we hoise not up sails to these gales, we blow not up this
spark, therefore justly are we left to a spirit of dullness, neither have life
nor peace in the use of ordinances, and discharge of duties.

Neglect of means


When not so much used.
so the abating of the commons of the soul does weaken grace. The less plants
are watered, the worse they thrive: we are fed by that whereof we are bred;
(...). Arist. hist. anim. l. 8. c. 1.
The word begets us, 1 Pet. 1.23. and the word feeds us, 1 Pet. 2.2. There is a
nutritive virtue in every ordinance; they are means appointed of God, as pipes
for the conveyance of living waters, into these empty cisterns of our hearts;
if therefore, either out of wretchlesnesse, or pride, any do withdraw from
them, they withdraw from God; and if so, no wonder if God withdraw from them:
therefore consider this, if you have not fallen from your abundant use of the
ordinances, and if you enjoy God less than you have done, know it is, because
you seek him less than you have done.

When not so well used.
but the use of them in a spiritual manner does profit; a man may starve in
plenty; when you receive the Word and Sacraments, it you think that the very
act done is sufficient, you are deceived; for the food of the soul is not like
the food of the body, which being taken in only, though there be no more
thought of it, yet does nourish; nor like the poole of Bethesda, which required
but coming into it, when the Angel moved it: but we must bring hearts fitted
and prepared, seeking earnestly of God the effusion of his spirit, yea, we must
work the Word upon our hearts, knowing, that where the Ministers part ends,
there ours begins; when therefore we only hear, and labor not to work our
hearts to a conformity to the Word, we deceive our selves. Iam. 1.11 and God
requites our carelessness with spiritual impoverishment, shutting ^^ his
mercies, and locking up his treasures from us. As the blessing and good
providence of God makes him that is diligent to increase in riches, whereas be
becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, Prove. 10.4. so the same God
does plentifully recompense the diligence of the Saints in their spiritual
affairs, and this he would have all men believe in their first coming to him,
That he is a rewarder of them that seek him diligently, Heb. 11.6. But it is
just, that he that labors not should not eat, he that digs not for the pearl,
should not find it, but that the fruit of spiritual slothfulness should be a
decay in spiritual estate.

Neglect of duties.
To him that has shall be given, etc. Matthew. 25. that is, he that uses his
taknt with fidelity, and sedulity, shall increase in the same talent (I say in
the same Abbot in Tomps. Diatr.
, for else it holds not, that he that uses the talent in one kind, shall
thrive in another, for what a man sows, that shall he reap) but such as are
idle and negligent, shall grow worse and worse; duties of godliness are a
Christians trade, and he that is slack in them, shall be on the losing hand:
God will punish the unfaithful servant, and the wages of the idle shall be
rods and stripes. Now the failings in duties are these.

Not done.
this hinders spiritual growth Inaequabilitas in bono non modo est
impedimentum progressus, sed causa regressus, etc. Plut. de profectu virt.
; for not only contrary acts of vice, but cessation of acts of virtue, does
weaken the better part; we must not think that the livelines and vigorous
stirring of spirit gotten in our approach to God in any duty, will last always;
we live by prayer, and reading, and meditation, as we do in the flesh by food,
and sleep, and other natural refections: and as the body, though it be filled
to day, and spirits are much cheared, yet if there be not a constant use of
food, it will wax weak; so it is with our souls Quae sunt in motuad finem
perficiuntur per motu^ ad finem, quia per motum fincm assequuntur. Aquin.
, if they do not daily and constantly feed themselves in God, become feeble
and languid: yet it must be noted, that it is not mere omission, but the
voluntary omission of duties which hurts; when the heart hangs off, and
forsakes it, as a thing unpleasant, then it is in the way to lose it self, and
much of that sweet communion which it had; for when the heart withdrawes from
God, then God withdraws from it, Lev. 26.27, 28 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Ill done.
a Christian may as well lose by doing good evilly, as by doing what is evil;
and as well by misdoing of good, as not doing: remiss acts weaken habits, as
well as contrary acts Aliqui actus ab habi^u procedentes diminuunt habitum, si
negligenter fiant.
; laziness and idleness in spiritual endeavors, are sccret thieves, robbing
us of many heavenly influences from above: cold prayer is like a bow slack
bent, which will not deliver the arrow home to the mark: where God reaps most,
he sows most; if we sow to the spirit, we shall reap of the spirit; any duty
which is not spiritual and lively, is like a sacrifice without life, which God
will not accept Sapiens nummularius est Deus, nummum nec falsum, nec fractum
recipiet. Bern. de temp. 109.
; all is lost labor which is not done in the spirit; and as our actions are
formed by our spirits, so our spirits are much formed by our actions; he that
accustometh himself to do good superficially, will become superficial in
goodness; we should never come to God in vain, nor think the duty well done,
till we find God Nunquam abste, absque te recedo. Bern. ep. 116.
.

Especially private duties.
a man may do much in the view of others, with abundant flashes of affection,
yet have little of God; public actions are often, though materially
spiritual, yet formally fleshly, being produced by humane respects; the heart
filled with ambition, or such other advantage, which fills her sails for the
present, and bears her on; but that which has its rise from fleshly
principles, does not work to the advancement of spiritual grace: secret
duties are free from such mixtures and ingrediences, as do debase both the
action and the spirit, and to a well tempered soul are very precious. Consider
then what you are in secret, where no ear can hear, no eye can see, no hand
can reward, but Gods alone ^^ What are you in confession of personal failings,
in supplication of such supplies, in thankfulness for such mercies, as none
are privy to, but God and your selves? for if you be less active and serious
in your retired and closet duties, then in those that are more open and
public, it is evident, that something without you does make the difference;
and if worldly motives are the wheels upon which your hearts are moved, it is
no wonder if God meet you not with largesses of quickening grace.

Not watching.
the heart apt to stray Nihiest in nobia cord fugacius. Greg. past. cur. part.
3. c. 1.. 15.
, and there are many things to drive and draw you from the path of life; Hostem
foris non habebat, domi tamen reperit: de Solomone dictum. Can. de repub. heb.
l. r. 13. nunquam cessat, (...). ut Hannibal de Metello, apud Plut.
and though there were none without us to put us out of the way, yet there is a
sinfulness resident in us, and active; and when you go from God, you go from
life, for your life is in him, and from him; in nature, causes work strongest
in a propinquity, as the fire communicates more its heat to that which is near
it, then to that which is far distant from it: so the closer we keep to God
by a watchful and diligent carfulness, the more he powers into us of his
fullness. By nature we were afar off, and in that condition we were like
those in the remote Northern parts, which darkness and desolatenesse does
inhabit, because the Sun has little or no converse with them; we were then
without God, without Christ, and without hope in the world, Ephesians. 2.13. but by
grace we are made near, and so have fellowship and communion with God; but if
by heedlesnesse and folly we go out from him, we have cause to blame none but
our selves, that we are less happy in the enjoyment of him: yea, if God let
loose upon us corruptions from within, and tentations from without to beset us,
and much to spoil, pillage, waste, and weaken us.

CHAP. XVI. Of grieving the spirit, causing desertion.
GRieving the spirit Res delicata est spiritus Dei. Tert.
; this causes God to withdraw; yea, it works not only an eclipse of favor,
but dissavour; they vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be their
enemy, and be fought against them, Esaias 63.10. we must not conceive that there
is any passion in God, therefore that we may clear this matter, note, that the
spirit may be considered, as having a dwelling in us or others, so it is
subject to passion, that is, that which is of God, that renewed and heavenly
quality in the Saints may be molested, oppressed, vexed; so the Saints may
grieve themselves, and they may grieve others, doing that which brings
disquietnesse of spirit, and though this spirit be humane, yet in a sort it is
divine; and when the renewed part is grieved, we may say the spirit is grieved,
as that unpardonable sin, which is a malicious opposing of the known truths,
and heavenly graces in others, is called the sin against the Holy Ghost: How
the spirit is said to be grieved.
as it is in it self, and so it is impassible, but yet it is said to be
grieved.

Genesis 6. and it is said he cannot repent, Numb. 23.19. that is, the form of
repentance which is a change of mind, cannot be in him who is unchangeable,
but the effects of repentance are wrought by God, and these being signs of
repentance; when God does them, he is said to repent: as when a man undoeth
what he had done, it is a sign he repents; so when God was about to pull down
the fabric which he had raised, it is said that God repented that he had made
it: In like sort God is said to be grieved, when he does that which men grieved
by others use to do, that is, when he chides, rebukes withdrawes, etc.

2 Because the spirit may have cause of grief; that may be done which gives
just cause of grief, and which usually with men works grief; now it is not
every sin which is said to grieve, as every offense with man works a
displicencie, but only greater offenses, and evils, work grief.

Now the things by which the spirit is grieved, Spirit grieved by,
may be referred to two heads: 1 Dishonor. 2 Disobedience.


Dishonor
and by how much the greater it is, by so much the more dishonor grieves.
Malim de me dici nullum esse Plutarchum quam Plutarchum esse malum, et pejus
duco mala de Deo sentire quam Deum esse negare. De superstit.
We dishonor the Spirit: 1. Negatively, when we give not that esteem to his
graces, comforts, ordinances, promises, influences, that we owe, especially if
our defect be common, as a King would take himself dis honored, if his
proclamations, embasses, pardons, favors, should not be entertained with high
respect, especially by such as are not only subjects to his power, but the
objects of his special grace and favor; when the Sabbaths are not our
delight, the word our treasure, the promise our joy, Christ our life; then is
dishonor done to God, who made these ours by his Sons blood, and reveals,
offers, and seals them by his spirit.

2. Spirit dishonored, First directly,
Postively, so we may be guilty of dishonor two ways.

1. Directly, 2. Occasionally.
By low esteem of it.
when we accept them not gladly, keep them not diligently, being such precious
fruits, of so inestimable mercy; if a friend send to his friend, his counsels
of love, and the tokens of amity, and they be rejected, he counts himself
dishonored, much more in this case do we dishonor him who is so glorious and
so gracious.

Preferring other things before it.
as the wisdom of the fles^ before his counsels, and sinful contentments,
beggarly treasures, vanishing trifles before his comforts; what great
dishonor then that the things of the world should sit in the throne, and the
things of God in the footstool, that the slave, yea the enemy should have
more respect than the supreme Lord?

Charging our failings on him.
as if a subject should father his bastard upon the Prince; false opinions,
boasting that we are taught of God; rash and precipitant fierceness, calling
it the zeal of the spirit; licencious walking, styling it Christian liberty;
lumpish unchearfulnesse, titleing it godly sorrow; and presumptuous peace,
naming it the comfort of the spirit: what is this, but to father error,
madness, wickedness, and dull or sullen sadness upon the spirit, which is a
spirit of truth, a spirit of holiness, and a spirit of comsort? Putting
spiritual things to base employments


Lucernam sur accrndit ex ara sovis, etc. repent vocem sancta misit rebgio;
sceleste spiritu, culpam lues. in phaedr. fab. l. 4.68.
this is as if the sacred vessels in the temple should be put to common
employments, or as if we should use the royal robes of a King to act a play.
This was Simon Magus his sin, Acts 8. who would gladly have purchased those
rare gifts of the spirit, Themistocles graecum a pud persas interpretem
intersici jussit, iniquum ratus graecam linguam in iesum Barbarorum convertere.
Plu. in Them.
that he might seem some body, and enrich himself, and thus many even of the
godly do much offend, putting forth their parts too much to their own
advantage; now what is this but to serve thy self, of thy God, and to make
spiritual gifts the price of worldly vanities? and what dishonor is this?

When ashamed of him.
as when we dissemble and hide our graces, lest we should be scorned, when we
count it a dishonout to us to be judged and called spiritual, or persons
walking in the spirit: were it not a dishonor to a Prince that a subject and
servant should be ashamed of his master, his livery, and service? this is
greatly threatened; Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels. Mark
8.38.

The Spirit dishonored indirectly: when we occasion others todishonor him.
so also he may be dishonored by us when we do such things as occasion it: As
when by our faulty and unholy conversation we occasion men to think and speak
evilly of God; thus did they whom God taxes, Ezech. 36.20, 23. Romans 2.23, 24.
these things seldom go unpunished; if blasphemy be so heinous, then it must
needs be a great sin to cause it. Now when we walk so as that we do either
directly or occasionally work dishonor to the spirit, we grieve the spirit,
and so procure the effects of offense and grievance; Gods withdrawing himself
from us, and leaving us to the unhappy state of a withering and languishing
spirit.

CHAP. XVII. The second means of grieving the Spirit is disobedience and
resistance of the Spirit.
THe Spirit may be resisted in 1. Others. 2. Our selves.


The Spirit may be resisted in others, even by the godly. Spirit resisted,
first in others.


By envying their gifts and graces.
which shines forth in others, we set our selves with detractions,
discountenance, defamations, that by such or the like sinful courses, we may
cloud and darken them; we may and ought to emulate others, but not to envy any
(...). The mist. apud Plut. de cap. exhostib. util.
: The root of envy is pride, the fruit is opposition; and this is a grievous
sin, and a sin against the Spirit, tending to the nipping and weakening of
grace in others; in which way we work against the Spirit; for what he builds
we destroy, and what he plants we pluck up, and what he cherishes, we
withstand: But such envious spirits shall be brought low, for God gives grace
to the humble: but he resists the proud, James 4.6.

Rejecting their counsels.
especially the ministers: thus the Jews are said to resist the Holy ghost
Acts 7.51. because they rejected the Doctrine and counsel of the Holy ghost in
his servants; when the Prophets spoke to them, it is said the Spirit spoke, and
their disobedience is counted disobedience against the Spirit, Neh. 9.30. and
though this be a sin of high nature, yet so have the people of Israel been
transported through the heat of lust, that they have not only rejected the
counsel, but have quarrelled also with him that gave it; so Asah did: the
Prophet had reproved him for his fault in seeking to the King of Syria, and for
this, Asah was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a prison house, for he was
in a rage with him, because of this thing, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. When the Spirit
comes in his servants, to convince, correct, persuade; and we grieve those by
our slighting, refusing, and rejecting them, we grieve the Spirit. Luke 10.16.

The Spirit resisted in our selves.
1. By not doing good required. 2. By sinning against light. 3. By impenitency.


Pro. 8.35.
so the Israelites were much pressed to repent and to turn from their evil
ways to God, By hanging back when it draws strongly.
yet were rebellious, insuasible, as God complains of them: Hear oh my
people, and I will testify unto thee, oh Israel, if thou will hearken to me,
etc. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me;
but what followed? So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own Counsels. Psalm. 81.8, 11, 12. God dealt with them as the
Physician does with an unruly patient, whom if he will not be ordered he gives
up; here is a main cause why God has retired himself, Certissi^e noverimus
nullum fidelium, a Deo nondiscedentem relinqui. Prosp. l. 2. de vocat. gent. c.
12. Fulgent. de re hac fusius. I. 1. ad Mon Deus nisi deserentem se non deserit
-- non nos deserit fons si nos fontem non deseramus. Aug. in Joan. 32
you have quenched and resisted his spirit which by inward pulsations and
persuasions would have drawn you to a more holy walking, but you would not:
but have withheld the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.28. For this sin God
gave up the Gentiles to a reprobate mind, (...).
to a mind without judgment, which could not discern things aright, but they
called darkness light, and light darkness, their foolish hearts being full of
darkness, yea he gave them up to most vile affections. And consider what a
grievous sin it is to draw back from that holiness which God does secretly
draw thee to.

It is contempt,
who is thy God and guide, Of his Sovereignty.
and to whom thou have given up thy self, and who has power to judge and
condemn thee.

Of his goodness.
for to what does he call thee but to that which is thy good, thy peace, thy
crown, thy life? If thou had followed the Lord wholly, how would he have
filled thee with his goodness? he would have had thee nearer him, that he
might have blessed thee with greater riches of grace and peace; and see thou
not how he leaves others to walk in a woeful way of darkness and
licentiousness? yet of his grace he came to call, and to draw on thy soul to
more communion with himself: oh why did thou so ungratefully despise such
riches of mercy? how often has he sought thee? how long has he waited on
thee? and have thou contemned this abundant kindness?

It is wilful disobedience
It is a wilful disobedience; because thou wast not only enlightened, but with
frequent, long, and strong persuasions moved: and the more thy rebellion is
voluntary, the more it is sinful, and causes God to depart; he that sins
against him, sins against his own soul, Prove. 8.36.

It is enmity.
It is enmity against holiness, else it could not be resisted, resistance is
between contraries, and if thou walk contrary to God, what wonder if he walk
contrary to thee? Levit. 26.

By lustings against light.
When a man sins against light and strong arguments of disswasion Parcit Deus
eis qui mala faciunt potius ignoratione boni, quam appetitione mali Plut. de
his qui sero, etc.
: there are two degrees of sin.

1. desire, by both the spirit is resisted. 2. act, by both the spirit is
resisted.
Quest. Whether it be worse to will evil, than to do it.

Answ. We must distinguish of the will.

There is a will Incompleate, Complete.

An incomplete will is that which is not fully and maturely set upon its
object, and it has these two things in it, or one of them: 1. it is not
deliberate, but sudden, rash, precipitant; when a thing is not done out of
judgment and reason, it is not fully voluntary; thus that which is done out of
passion, as fear, anger, etc. is not a complete act of the will, because not
deliberate. 2. It is not determinate, so not so much a will as a velliety, which
is not a full tendency of the heart to a thing, but a weak, mixed, checked,
fluctuating inclinednesse to it, the will not going fully one way, but as it
has something to persuade, and something to dissuade, so it is divided, partly
willing, and partly nilling.

These things premised, I say:

1. That the greater sinfulness in any act is from the will; for 1 some acts
which are materially evil, are not formally evil without the will; as if a
man working with an axe kill a man, though killing be materially evil, yet if
the will had no influence into the fact, it is not murder, Deuteronomy. 19.5, 6. so
happily Lots drunkenness: 2 All acts which are formally evil, are made more
sinful, by how much the more the will is in them. Dionysius cum au diret duos
dese male dicentes, ebriosum et sobrium; bunc utineptum, illum vero ut
malevolum demisit. Plut.


2. That a determinate will to sin, though without the act is more sinful,
than an act of sin without a determinate will; because he that is fully
willing, sins as much as in him lies, Qui hominem non occidit. sed vulneravit
ut occidat, pro homicida est. Element. Jur. part 4.. 9.
and though the act be wanting, yet it is not from any reason against it, but
from some other cause, as it may be it is out of his power, or appears very
hurtful, bringing shame, pain, damage, danger, or the like; as he sins worse
that is purposed to deny Christ, though yet he have not done it, than Peter who
did deny him in act, but not with a full will; where sin has the full consent
it is an absolute Sovereign, but where it has the act, but not the consent,
it is but a tyrant, which prevails not so much by its own power, as by the
weakness of its adversary, and the concurrence of external help.

A sin wilful most sinful.
That a sinful act with the will is most sinful, because there is an actual
concurrence of the whole man to it, yea, and this argues a great sinfulness
in the subject, for lustings to sin are less evitable than acts, therefore not
only to conceive sin, but to bring it forth argues a greater power of sin:
there is more against acts of sin than against inclinations and desires; many
respects keep men from doing evil, that cannot prevent motions to evil, so
that sin rules much in such an one, as willingly commits it.

Now when the soul hankers after sin, in frequent, potent, and allowed
lustings unto it, the spirit is resisted, For the spirit is resisted in respect,
and so grieved; the spirit is resisted in three respects.

rule, the word, Of the rule
which is the law of the spiritual kingdom, which is a pure and perfect law,
not only ordering and judging the external acts and issues of the heart,
Grace.
but the motions and lustings also, requiring not only abstinence from sin,
but death unto it, Ephesians. 4.22. Gal. 5.24.

grace, Ineadem specie pecoati gravius peccatfidelis quam infidelis. A qui. in
Romans 8. lect. 1.
which is a principle disposing against sin, this is checked; and the light and
lustings of it, are overswayed through the rebellious disobedience of the heart.

Inward workings.
In respect of these inward operations and workings of the spirit, by which he
excites and quickens the new man to newness of life; Vniuscujusque Casus tanto
major is est criminis, quan opriusquam cadevet, majoris erat virtutis. Bern. de
inter. Dom. c. 50.
his counsels are repelled, his comforts rejected, his rebukes contemned, his
offers disvalued, all coards are broken, and the soul like a prevailing
stream bears down all.

2. Secondly, men resist the spirit by doing evil: this is a further degree,
when men not only lust unto sin, Spirit resisted by doing evil againstlight
Especially when,
but fall into it; here sin is perfected: these things grieve the Spirit,
Ephesians. 4.30. especially,

The acts are for kind grievous.
When the acts are for kind grie. vous, such as are the manifest deeds of the
flesh, Gal. 5.19. and those pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20. these are
worse; 1 because the godly have morestrength against such, then against sins
more spiritual: 2. They are most contrary to grace, To the shame of religion.
for they are contrary to nature.

shame of religion, open sins are provoking sins, because they feed and quicken
that malice that lies in the sons of Belial to reproaches against godliness,
and lay stumbling blocks in others ways, so crossing the Spirit in the great
work of turning men from sin, because men are hardened, and set further off
when they see such wickedness in them that are godly: This was their sin that
caused Gods worship to be despised. Mal. 1.9. This bath been by your means, and
will be regard your persons, says the Lord of hoasts?

Relapses.
When the sins are such as he has often fallen into, and often confessed and
bewailed; iterated sins are double sins, as it is in figures, the addition of
any one makes the number ten times more, this strikes deep, that having been
often in fault, and often freed; yet a man should sin again, this was that
which made Solomon's sin of a deeper dye, that he had found mercy: The Lord was
angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel,
which had appeared unto him twice. 1 Kings 11.9. So Ezra confesses the
grievousnesse of sin, being committed after pardon After all that is come upon
us, for our ev^ deeds, and for our great trespass; seeing that our God has
punished us less they our iniquities: and have given us such deliverance as
this, should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of these abominations, would thou not be angry with us till then had
consumed us, so that there should by no remnant nor escaping? Ezra 9.13.14.
Concerning the sin which the people of God committed before the Captivity, God
gives them especial charge. Thou shall not commit this lewdness of a thine
abominations. Ezech. 16.43. who then a man after mercy, begged, and graciously
renewed, he shall again transgress, this is high rebellion. So Mal. 2.13. etc.

When such as a man has suffered much for.
When a man has suffered mu^ for his sins, many rebukes from heaven checks
from conscience, frowns from men, stripes from God, yet willing returns to do
this evil; this was the great impiety in the wilderness, the though often
reproved, yet they sin in like kind again and again, They have tempted me
these ten times. Numb. 14.22. this was in Nebemiahs eye the great aggravation
of their sin, that after they had suffered so great miseries, They did evil
again before God. Neh. 9.28.

frequent, When often committed.
though in their kind less abominable then many; many smaller sins may amount
to as much as a great transgression, yea often lesser evils provoke most Quo
levius mandatum, co graevius peccatum.
, as we say to our friend, would you stick with me in so small a thing? so God
takes it ill, when in things which are more in our power, we transgress, for
it proceeds from much neglect of him; and it is more that he should be
neglected by his children, then that his encmies rebel.

occasion is less, When occasion small.
the sin is the greater: Adams turning from God for the forbidden fruit, so
small a matter, was very grievous; the less a man is tempted, the more
voluntary is his sin, and so more sinful.

leading sin, as 1. When it is a leading sin.
when by a governor, or minister, whose example does much, especially if such
a one sin in drawing others to sin, this God will punish, as in Aaron who was
not only an occasion, but a cause of the peoples Idolatry, by the Idols which
he made. Exodus 32.4. So Mal. 2.7, 8, 9.2. When it is the first transgression,
and breach of a law: so Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire, were judged
of God. Levit. 10. So Vzzah for touching the Arc. 1 Chronicles. 13.10. As in civil
States the first breach of a law is often punished with exemplary punishment:
it is a dangerous thing in a common wealth to be the first man in a rebellion,
and to break the ice to others.

Thus you see how the Spirit may be resisted and grieved many ways, and for
such causes, as the outward man is often left unto great calamities, so the
inward man is afflicted with great miseries, through Gods departing from it:
when the soul joins it selfto other lovers, then comes a kind of divorce and
God says of a man as he did of Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to Idols, l^^ him
alone. Hos. 4.17. Let him god on in his way, let his soul wither, let his
lusts prevail upon him, let nothing do him good.

3. Men resist the Spirit, Thirdly, the Spirit is resisted by voluntary
impenitency.
when they bear up themselves with fearelesnesse, boldness, shamelessness,
and impenitency in their way, ospecially when they are strongly called and
urged to repentance: as the authority of a Prince is two ways resisted.

1. When men willingly transgress. 2. When they bear up themselves impudently
and stubhornly in their transgression. So God is not only opposed and affronted
by disobedience, but also by impenitence: and indeed there is more provocation
in a fault when not bewailed, then in a fault when it is committed; to a good
disposition, he that is penitent is in a sort innocent, humble confession is a
kind of satis faction, but stoutnesse and stiffeneckednesse increases rage:
For impenitence is,

1. A co^tinuatio^ of the offense, For it is 1. a co^tinuation of the offense.
he is still in the offense, his heart is with it, and in interpretation of
Justice, he does sin continually, that repents not; Repentance breaks off the
foul from it, but impenitence is a continuing it; disobedience in committing
sin, is like the falling into mire, and impenitence is like the lying in it.

2. 2. A justification of the offense
Impenitence is a Justification of the offend; for he that repents not,
acknowledges no offense: when a man apprehonds that he has done evilly, this
breeds shame, sorrow, which ever arises as high as the sight of the sinfulness
of sin; so he that is not ashamed, sees not the evil that he has done see it
in the Jews, No man repented him of his witkednesse, saying, what have I done?
Jer. 8.6. they being a stiffencoked people, were far from judging and
condemning themselves, yea they excused themselves and pleaded their cause as
if they had done nothing worthy of such ovils as the Prophets threatened; yea,
they argue the matter with God hand to hand. O ye Priests that despise my Name,
and ye say, wherein have we despised thy Name? Mal. 1.6. Ye offer polluted
bread upon mine Altar, and ye say, wherein have we polluted thear? v. 7. Ye
have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him?
Chap. 2.17. Return unto me, says the Lord of hoasts, and I will return unto
you; but ye said, Wherein shall we return? Chap. 3.7. Ye have robbed me; but ye
say, Wherein have we robbed thee? v. 8. Your words have been stout against me,
says the Lord, yet ye say, What have we spoken against thee? v. 13.

Thus an impenitent person justifies himself, and this provokes highly,
especially where the fault is, 1 Great. as it is here. 2 Clear. as it is here.


disloyalty, yea, Greater disloyalty then the act.
greater than an act of offense, for a man may offend out of fear, hope,
rashness, ignorance, etc. but he that is wilfully impenitent has a disloyal
spirit toward his God.

1. Here is little love, Impenitents are disloyal, having 1 Little love. 2
Little fear.
for love would meltand draw the heart back to God.

2. Little fear, for this would make a man serious in consideration, humble in
confession, and fervent in supplication that his sin may be pardoned, and
favor restored.

CHAP. XVIII. Persuasive considerations to move men to study the preservation
of communion with God.
NOw having treated of the causes of the sad loss of Gods quickening presence,
I come to consider of the cure and because as some are actually in this
miserable state, and all are potentially in it, that is, though they are not in
this manner deserted, yet they may be: I will accordingly prescribe rules, 1
Preservative for all. 2 Restaurative, for such as are in this state.


In the former I will propound something, 1 For persuasion. 2 For direction.
Labor to maintain communion with God: for,



That which I persuade is, that men would labor to maintain a constant
communion with God, consider

You may lose much.
You may lose much of God, as I have declared: the best may be in this case,
therefore be not secure; (...); Greg. Naz.
though thou saylest now with a full gale, thou may be becalmed, thy mountain
is not so strong but it may be shaken, Animi motus and mores suum habent orbem,
raroque consistunt. Cun. de republ. Hebr. lib. 1.
dangers should make men wise, especially so great as this; though the promise
assures thee of life, yet thou art not out of danger of sickness, thou caryest
a backsliding heart in thy bosom, and there are seducing spirits (many
Legions) which seek to cloud the day of thy spiritual prosperity: therefore
watch, that you enter not into temptation. Mat. 26.41. But work out your
salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.

You may lose that quickly which will hardly be recovered; More then will
easily be recovered.
a Ship is easily born down the stream, but it is hardly fetched up again; the
Philosophers tell us that the way from the habit to the privation, is easier
than the way from the privation to the habit; as a man may easier make a seeing
eye blind, then a blind eye to see; a man may soon put an instrument out of
tune, but not so soon put it in again; a man may lose more strength in a days
sickness, Corpora tarde augescunt, at cito extingunntur, citius templum a
Romany destructum, quam a Iudaeis structum. Savan.
then he can recover in many days of health: Therefore when thou art mounted
aloft by plentiful supplies of grace, as upon Eagles wings, take heed of
falling, for it is easier not to fall, then to rise; if thou provoke thy God to
retire, it may cost thee many prayers and tears to get him to return, when thy
lusts begin to stir, and to be armed with a new strength; these monsters will
cost you labor and sweat to muzzle them, and subdue them: it is easier to keep
out an enemy, then to expel him; a man may better keep an estate then get it:
how did the Church seek Christ before she found him again? Cant. 5.

It will be grievous.
The loss will be grievous, it is most miserable to have been happy: Miserum
est fuisse beatum. (...). Theophyl. ep. 37. (...), etc. Eurip. in Hec. acriores
sunt morsus libortatis intermissae. Cic. in Offic.
when you have found the sweetness of Gods presence, it will be a bitter thing
to lose it.

Its possible to keep it.
It is possible to be kept, it is a comfort that care will keep it.

Object. But few do maintain a constant communion with God, but do at one time
or other fall behind hand.

Answ. 1. This does not argue it impossible, but difficult.

2. The more difficult, the greater care is required, and a wise man stirs
the more when a case is difficult.

Object. But God does sometimes of his own pleasure shorten and diminish the
influences of his Spirit, Animus fortis crescit inipsa reru^ difficultate.
Bern. ep. 256.
even because he will, and that for ends best known to himself.

Answ. 1. If it be not for your default, it is not lost by you, though in such
a cafe it be lost to you, because you have it not, yet you have not lost it,
and so it is without sin to you; as it is in bodily health, if it depart, but
not by our default, by want of due care of it, we sin not, it is our present
affliction, not our fault.

2. Whom God has so left, he has not left in that manner as he does others, as
we may see in examples. 1. He denies not a general assistance, but a
spetiall; that is, he withdrawes not all those workings of his power, by want
of which an universal weakness and dcadnesse overspreads his servants, but in
some particular case only, as in Peter; Christ did not leave him to a general
declension, but to a particular slip. 2. He did sooner return to Peter, and
caused Peter to return to himself. 3. He communicates more to them afterward:
so Peter gained by his loss.

3. We are not so much to mind what God does in the way of his free pleasure
and absolute sovereignty, as what he does in ordinary; nor so much what he will
do, as what he will that we shall do: nor so much what the Issue of our work
shall be, as what our rule is. This out of doubt we shall find by an holy
walking, even more of God, if not at this time in this thing, in this kind or
in this measure, yet in another, for our labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58. It is possible and frequent to find little strength in
some case, and much in another: it may be thy lusts may be working, but thy
heart melting, fearing, mourning, warring, praying, and abounding in much
spiritual life: it may be in afflictions thou may have more sorrow and
unquietness of heart, being not so abundantly filled with spiritual comfort;
but this may be recompensed in much meekness, humbleness, hungring after God,
dependence upon him, etc. God will not be wanting to thee that failest not thy
self, if thy love be constant to him, much more is his to thee: we say love
descends stronglier then it ascends, the father loves the child better than
the child loves the father; Gods love begets ours: therefore it is not only a
preventing love, before ours, but an excelling love, above ours.

It is an excellent thing: in respect of 1 the means. 1 Christ.
Consider the excellency of enjoyment of God.

1. In the means of it, 1 the Son of God dyed to obtain it, his blood was
poured out, that there might be a way for man to have Communion with God: we
are made near and have access to God, and favors from God, at no less price
then the blood of the only begotten Son of God.

2. The Spirit himself is employed to pour in the treasures of divine grace. 2
The Spirit.


3. All the Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, yea, 3. All ordinances.
the Word and Sacraments are the instruments of conveyance of this high favor.

In respect of the effects. 1. Comfort and happy concord.
for the effecting of which, such high persons, and excellent means are
employed.

2. In the effects. 1. It brings great peace and solace, because it sets the
soul in an harmonious state Omne bonum concordiae cognatum est. Spond. in hom.
Ilia. 2
.

1. A man carried on in a heavenly course, by a divine hand, has concord
betwixt Conscience and himself.

Betwixt conscience and himself.
as it is a tutor for instruction, so is a task master for exaction; as it
shows what we owe, so it demands it: now when a man has his rent ready for
his Lords Baily, he is not molested. Conscience will murmr and grumble if a
man come short, Men's conscia verbere caedit occultum quatiente animo tortore
flagellum. Juven. de improb. Sat. 13.
but holy walking keeps peace.

Concord betwixt the affection and condition; that is, when a man enjoys God,
Betwixt the affection and condition.
he has what he would have: now if a man have what he loves, he is satisfied:
as if you give a poor man riches, his heart is eased. Whom does the godly man
love and desire in the world more then God? Psalm. 73.25. he is his light, life,
strength, Joy, all in all to him. Col. 3.11.

Betwixt inclination and action.
Concord betwixt inclination and action; when a man has a principle that
disposes him to holiness, and yet is hindered or perverted, this is a
sickness and pain to the soul; as if you stop water in its course, it is
full of unquietness: therefore when by divine assistance the soul is loosed
of her bonds, and freed from impediments of running her desired course, it is
peace.

hope and reason: Betwixt hope and reason.
if a man's ways be not exact, reason will give check to hope, and fear and
anxiety will break in, and it cannot be peace; but where reason concludes for
hope, apprehending not only the excellency of the end, and the possibility, but
the probability and the certainty; if hope expect, and the understanding
dispute against it, going about to overthrow its title, it cannot but breed
trouble: supplies from heaven will prevent this: for these supplies keep the
soul in her way, and the way leads to the promise, and the promise strengthens
hope, and in this way reason will join with it, the understanding will see all
clear, and so the heart will be quiet.

Betwixt the ordinances and the heart.
Betwixt the ordinances and our hearts; this concord lies not only in this,
that a man shall more prize them, but also that he shall receive more by them.
For,

1. The heart does more sympathize, with the^, it is more receptive, Gods
presence in the soul does capacitate it, it makes it more meet for the
Gospel; and as wood that is dry will take fire more then wood that is wet,
because it is nearer the nature of fire, so the heart draws more life, and
partakes of the power of ordinances, by how much the more it has a
preparedness through grace.

2. Where God is present in the soul, he is present in the ordinances; as all
the servants are ready to serve him whom the master honors: God has a more
full command of all then any Sovereign, and if he will that the means of
grace shall bring in much of heaven, it will be done: and where a man is thus
feasted with the fat things of Gods house, it is a great solace to him, partly
because the things themselves are excellent, and partly because they are
testimonies of Gods special favor and grace.

6 Concord betwixt duty and ability: it is a great discomfort, when a man sees
his way and cannot walk in it, or when there is that disproportion of strength
to his work, that he does it not without much contention, difficulty,
weariness; but when a man is able, then he is merry at his work, his labor is
no pain; having the help of a God of power, He runs and is not weary, and
walks and faints not. Esaias 40.31. That is done with alacrity which is done with
facility.

Concord with the Saints: With the Saints.
holiness is their proper quality, and therefore the more holiness the
greater agreement, there will be a sweet consenting, and concentring with them;
your motion on and theirs, your hearts and theirs your end and theirs will
harmonize so sweetly, that you shall have their counsel, countenance, company,
comfort and it is a great solace to have communion with them, who are so near
^ God, and so full of God.

It brings glory. Effect, glory. 1. A glorying spirit
1. A glorying spirit that is, it works joy and triumph i^ God, when the
soul is carried in a holy course, the presence of God is so dear and the
contentment and sweetness o^ his way so precious, that he not only blesses
his God, but he also blesses himself in his God, he sees that Gods with him,
and this is a sign of his favor For wherein shall it be known here, that and
thy people have found grace in the sight? is it not in that thou go with us
Exodus 33.16. And so a nobleness o^ spirit is begotten in him, through which he
is set above the world, so the through his God, whom he finds better than a
thousand worlds, he tramper upon the world Moreus Galeacius said, He that
counts all the gold and silver in the world worth one ^^ Communion with Jesus
Christ, is worthy to be accursed.
. Romans 8.31. And neither enticed with hopes, nor detered with fears, but like
a conquering Champion breaks through the armies, and hoasts of the world; what
need he fear the assaults of creatures, that has with him the power of the
Creator? and how is he armed against all trouble, That has the spirit of glory
and of God resting upon him? 1 Pet. 4.14.

It is an honor to a man to be full of grace, and full of life; It is an
honor to have God dwelling in us.
if reason which is but humane, do exalt a man so much above the beast, then
how much more does grace, which is divine, exalt the Saints above men? yea, if
those ornaments of the reasonable creature, which are gotten by humane
endeavor and are common to all, be such a crown of glory, what honor is it
to have the Spirit of God, making the godly the tabernacle of his rest, and
filling them with the glory of his presence, and the blessed operations of his
grace? To be trees even green and flourishing, filled with fruits of grace, to
receive daily from heaven that which excels the Crowns of Kings, to have
Christ under thy roof, supping with thee? Apoc. 3.20. To sit down daily, not
only with Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, but with Christ himself, to be led into
his wine-celler, to have the mighty God walking with thee, what glory is all
this to thee, which is the highest honor of the Angels?

an honor to have God co-working with thee, Honor to have God working with us.
his hand with thine: a man would think it an honor to be with Princes in
employment: while thou enjoyest inward quicknings and assistance, as heaven
joins it self with thee, so thy work appears to be a noble employment, and a
service acceptable: As the sacrifice of Abel, Genesis 4. had this testimony of
Gods acceptance, fire came from heaven upon it; as also afterward in the Law:
Levit. 9.24. So when God enkindles the soul with his Spirit, for spiritual
Sacrifices, it is a sign that they are accepted of him. The Apostle by this
proves his Ministry to be of God, and according to God because God did work in
him, and gave him sufficiency to those great things. 2 Cor. 3.

necessity of divine assistance; It is necessary to have the assisting presence
of God.
we are not like a Ship rigged and fitted, and sent out to Sea, and so left to
shift for it self, but God is our continual Pilot, and that power which
wrought at first unto the working of Conversion, Ephesians. 1. works still, Col.
1.18. unto fructification, augmentation, and perseverance; what need we have of
the help of this power may appear, if we consider: 1 That the most excellent
Saints have failed, The best have failed without it.
when they have been left to themselves. 2 That our task is great. Our task
great.
3 That our strength is small.


debility of grace received; Our strength little. 1 Grace low.
It is but little which we have attained, and grace being so imperfect, there
remains in us a proportionable impotency to good. enmity to good.


measure and mixture of a contrary principle; There is a contrary principle.
the flesh so rooted, so potent, so overspread, so active, so chayning and
pressing down, Heb. 12.1. that the Apostle not only says, we cannot do what we
would, Gal. 5.17. but also that himself cannot, his sin like a tyrant leading
him captive whither he would not. Romans 7.

exigences in our way, Exigences many.
great fears, straights, extremities, which without the help of the Spirit, we
could not pass through.

Satan's mighty and subtle tentatious; Satan mighty.
all these, inherent corruptions, difficult occurrents, Satan's workings meeting
with small measures of grace, must needs prevail unto grievous consequences
without the support of the hand of the Almighty. But at sometimes especially
divine assistance is most necessary.


And though we stand always in need of a divine presence; yet at sometimes
especially.

we are put upon some special service, In some great service.
as Abraham, who was to leave all and to go he knew not whither. Genesis 12. how
would reason and affection have barred and blocked up his passage, if he had
not been mighty through God; so in that other business of sacrificing his son.
Genesis 22. Ezra when he was to take a long journey by a way that he knew not,
asked of God a right way and safe protection from the hazzards that he might
meet. Ezra 8.21, 22. and when our path is not a beaten way, or when it is a
difficult way, and we are put upon new and special service, then is a time to
crave the aid of God.

some eminent weakness, When there is some eminent decay
and decay grown upon the spirit, by a customary carelessness, and long
negligence in the way of holiness; in such a case a man is like one in whom
nature is so oppressed and over-mastered by the strength of a disease, Vide
Them. sum. 1.2. q. 109. a. 7. Greg. de Valent. t. 2 disp. 8. q. 1. punct. 8.
that without the help of the Physician he cannot recover: this David found in
his declined estate, which made him pray that God would set him right, restore
and establish him, When some Just has recovered.
Create in me a clean heart oh God, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm.
51.10.

some lust has Peccato in consuetudinem verso, nisi ineffabili divinae gratiae
miraculo non resistitur. Bern. apud Guilielm. Paris. de tentat. and resist.
recovered strength: when the Jebusites have made inroads upon Israel, and
Babel has prevailed upon Sion; then we need the help of the Spirit to charm
down these spirits, to hush these winds, to deliver the poor captive out of
chains; if lusts prevail to lead captive, they will easily hold fast in
captivity, and except redemption come from heaven, how should a feeble soul
quit it self out of the jaws of Lions; yea, out of the hands of the powers of
darkness?

In fierce assaults, In fierce assaults.
and strong tentations Vis. Parisiens. de tentat. and resist.
; when Satan lays siege to the soul, shooting his fiery darts, and using
stratagems of policy, joining his endeavors with our corruptions, as wind
with tide; then we have cause to pray as David, Hold up my goings in thy paths,
that my footsteps slip not. Psalm. 17.5. The Apostle also found he had need of
help from heaven when he was assaulted; and therefore he prayed thrice, that
the thing that he feared might depart from him. 2 Cor. 12. Christ has taught
us to pray daily, Lead us not into tentation In Mat. 26.41. Debuit juxta vos
dieere non quidem surgite and orate, sed surgite and resistite, inquit Hieron.
contr. Pelag. lib. 2. Iubet orare ne intentationem ducantur, i. e. ne ab ea
vicantur. Aug. lib. de corr. and great. cap. 6.
, for it is dangerous; and then tentations are most dangerous, when 1. most
suitable, when Satan joins with our disposition or constitution. 2 continual.
3 when opportunity and power is greatest.

In great afflictions, wants, pains, In great afflictions.
dangers, persecutions, it is hard to endure fights of afflictions, to suffer
great and sore evils, especially when they are multiplied and continued,
whether our sufferings be corrections from God, or persecutions from men, we
need then a greater strength then our own, for we see in both how the greatest
champions have been foiled, when God has for a time retreated, and left the^
to try it out in their own strength: Job, the mirror of patience was overtaken
with much impatience; and Peter that man of courage Quosque neges unquam posse
jacere cadunt. Ovid. am. lib. 1.
, was over-mastered with cowardice; the one so far, as to quarrel with his
God, the other so far, as to deny his master; and these things are written for
us Vtruina majorum sit cautela minorum. Greg. Moral. David amieus Dei, and
Solomon amabilis ejus aucti sunt. Vt and ruinae nobis ad cautionem, exempla
praeberent. Hieron. t. 1. ep. 9. Ad hoc peccata illorum hominum scripta sunt,
ut Apostolica illa sententia ubique tremenda sit, qui videtur stare, videat ne
cadat. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 23.
.

the means of grace are cut off from us; In want of means.
these are the food of the soul; and when these fail, it would be with the
soul as with fire, which by withdrawing the fuel would be extinguished; or as
with the body, which by want of nutriment would be famished. A garden, if when
the heavens drop not in sweet showers, it be not watered by the Gardener,
withers; this is our comfort, that though when the means of spiritual life
are afforded, we must expect all supplies in that way, yet we are not set in
such an absolute dependence upon them, but that through God, when they are
wanting we may be sustained: Light in the present ordinary course of nature
comes from the Sun and Stars; yet God gave light at first to the world, when
yet they were not created, Genesis 1. So when the Sun and Moon (the means of
knowledge) shall not give light, The Lord shall be to thee an everlasting
Light, and thy God thy glory. Esaias 60.19. but if God should not feed us
himself, when with Eliah we are in the wilderness, how should we subsist?

inward comforts are suspended, When comfort is suspended.
and the streams of living water flow not from the well of life, when storms
and tempests arise, and the waters of Marah overflow; then if God do not
uphold, the soul sinkes in the deeps, as David. Psalm. 69.1, 2. Heman. Psalm. 88.
Job 1.6. In times when the sweet gust and taste of those things which did
refresh the heart are cut off: if God put forth himself in a way of help, the
thirst and labor of the heart, will be much after God. Psalm. 63.8. but if God
withdraw his hand, either the heart lies sleeping and feeding upon inferior
things, like the Prodigal, who when he had not bread, fed upon chafe and
draffe; or else it faints in discouragement, hangs the wing, and lies in
fruitless and mournful dejectment, either fearing to draw near so great a
God, or thinking it in vain to stir. It is hard to live by faith, when all
sense fails, and to retain a living hope, when fears break in like a flood.

All these things considered, does it not much concern us to endeavor to keep
the good hand of God with us in all our ways? Let this suffice for persuasion.

CHAP. XIX. Directions how to retain a divine quickening presence with us.
THe next thing is, directions how we retain the happiness of divine
assistance;

1 When you have it, Direct. Acknowledge it.
acknowledge it.

thankfulness: prize it, for it is a precious mercy, it is a multiplied
favor: With thankfulness.
how much have you in this one thing? All the comfort and sweetness of duties,
the quietness and liberty from lusts, the fruit and efficacy of ordinances
depends upon this; if God hold back this one mercy, all these are gone:
consider what a difference is in your selves and ways, when you are carried in
the gracious arms of God your helper, and when you are left to walk in your
own strength. Oh how great is Gods goodness to you! he calls upon others for
the same things, and Conscience stands as Pharaohs taskmasters, requiring the
tale of bricks, but not allowing straw, it impels and presses, but gives no
enlargement of heart, and buffets and wounds them for neglect; as the hard
Creditor that taking the poor debtor by the throat, says, Pay me that thou
owe me, but yields him no power to do it: thus God might deal with you also,
for he owes not assistance to us, but we owe obedience to him; remember we had
power, and it is just to demand what we cannot do, because the weakness that
is in us is of our selves; we have impoverished our selves: Therefore when in
much mercy he puts forth his hand into the work with thee, be very thankful.
If the work be not done, he is no loser; if done, and well done, he is no
gainer. Job 22.2. Chap. 35.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 16.2. But the gain is all to thee,
all the good that comes by it is to thy self.

And this also take into thy thoughts, it is a sign of great loving-kindnesse;
consider the infinite distance betwixt thee and the great God; would a King sit
down to work for, and with a mean man in his trade, to help to maintain him?
one thing more I add, that you have cause to be thankful, because by this God
testifies his acceptance of thee and of thy way, or else his hand would be
far from thee: get therefore and keep thy heart in a thankful plight: this
is one way to continue it.

With faithfulness.
With faithfulness: take heed of taking from God to set up thy self, Iovi
custoditemplum, seque in sinu Dei sacravit Domitianus, quod ipsum in se ditione
Vitelliana conser vasset. Sueton. in Domitiano. Huc omne principium, huc reser
exitum. Horat. l. 3. od. 6.
put not that to thy account which belongs to him; take heed of sacrificing to
thy strength, or parts, acknowledge that all the excellency of all thy actions
is of him. God is very jealous of his honor, Agasi cles extorris est sactus,
quod tripodem quem ipse ludis obtinuerat, non dedicasset Deo. Herod. l. 1.
and (as I have said) oftentimes leaves his people to feel their own
weakness, because they honored not his strength: If the faculties of thy
soul bring in willingly and plentifully, offerings unto God, say as David,
when so much store with much freeness was brought in by the people to build
the Temple. Now our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name, for who
am I and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after
this sort? For all things are of thee, and of thine own we have given thee; O
Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for
thy name, comes of thine hand, and is all thine, 1 Chro. 29, 14.16. So the
Apostle, when in that distress before Nero, he was so courageous, did not
ascribe it to his own strength, but acknowledged that it was the Lord. The
Lord stood by me and strengthened me, 2 Timothy 4.17. It was his way to strip
himself, and to cast the honor of all his ministry, and actions upon God, By
the Grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. Si quid enim recti gerimus,
Domine, auxiliante te gerimus: tu corda moves, etc. Prosper.
and you see with how full a gale of Divine grace he was carried in all his
way. Learn therefore in all things, wherein the excellency and life of grace
shines forth, to know, that as the stars shine not by their own light alone,
but by a light which they have from the Sun: so thy luster and vigor in thy
way is not of thy self, but from him who is thy life; that thou may not
draw down that to the feeding of thy pride, which should be to the glory of
God. Si aquam hauris puteum corona: Fontinalia festus erat Dies Romae, quo in
foutes coronas projiciebant, puteosque coronabant. Varro. l. 5. de lingu. lat.
(...).
what ever thou do, when ever thou art carried through any service, still say
as the Apostle, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. I may say in a
spiritual sense, as Solomon in a natural, Honor the Lord with thy substance,
and the first fruits of all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with
plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. Prove. 3.9, 10. As by the
first fruits they acknowledged, that all was his, and that it was not their
tillage and labor, but the influence of his blessing, which caused the fields
to be clad with grass, and stored with corn; so do thou acknowledge that it
is not any thing in thee, but all of God, that thou bring forth the fruits
of righteousness, and then his promise is to be with thee, and to make thee to
abound still, and to bring forth more fruit, Psalm. 73.23, 24.

2. Use his help, when he comes with excitements and enlargements of heart,
Direct. Use it when you have it.
turn not back the inspiration of the Almighty: quenching the spirit is often
the cause why God shuts in his Spirit. I have spoken of this before, but I will
add somewhat more here in discovery show men sin against the Spirit. Know
therefore that thou may grieve the Spirit, Grieve not the Spirit.
not only by doing evil voluntarily against knowledge; but also by omitting
good. remissness in good.


By omitting of a known duty, By omission of duty.
when God shows you what is good, and stands ready to help you, if you walk
not in your way, you provoke him to leave you; and because this is ^n evil so
incident unto men, through does and worldly affections and distractions, I will
briefly declare, 1. the sinfulness, of it. 2. For 1. It is sinful. It is a
denying of Gods due.
the foolishness, of it.


First, It is a denying of God his due, a withholding from him that which ^ due
to him, as you are his creatures, sovants, children, a people in covenant he
comes not to you as that cruel sovant, to his fellow servant, Matthew. 18.28,
29. but he entreats and graciously moves for his own, he forgave you all your
former debts, and now though ^^ might demand the whole, yet he is content to
take it, as you can pay it; and will you now deny him? the flesh cal^ and you
yield, the world command and you obey, yet you are not debtor^^ these, but to
the Spirit, Romans 8.12. God comes with one hand to give, as w^^ the other to
take; and he gives more to you, then he demands of you ^^ gives you leave to
ask him what s^^ you will, Matthew. 21.22. and is not b^^ ward to hear, He does
not turn ba^^ your prayer, Psalm. 66.19, 20. he n^^ have said upon your praying
to him Solomon of Adoniah; God do so to ^^ and more also, if Adoniah have not
sp^^ this word against his own life, 1. King. 2.18. And if he should shut out
your prayer, what a sad case would you be in? therefore be not of a withdrawing
heart, to deny God: Consider further, when you do neglect and refuse to do
your duty; you deny his Sovereignty, and in effect you say as Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord that I should obey his voice? Exodus 4.3. and as those rebels, this
man shall not have dominion over us. Luke 19.14. And your denying of God in
this kind, Your denial worse than the denial of of others.
is worse than when the vicked and such as are forsaken of him do deny him; for

stand not so ^ngaged unto God, God has not paid so dear for them, You are
more engaged.
he has not done that good for them that he has done for you, they have not
so given up themselves to him as you have done, yet then they do not what they
know, he visits their sin upon their heads. God took the Kingly throne from
that great King Nebuchadnezzar for his sin, and so God dealt with his son
Belshazzar, the reason you may see, Dan. 5.22. Thou, O Belshazzar his son
have not humbled thy self, though thou knew all this.

You deny God in a sinall matter.
You stand with God for a small matter, having given up your selves to God; if
a man sue to a woman, hetaketh it not so ill, that she will not bestow her
self upon him, as being his w^ that she denies him some particula duty.

You have found muchgood in the way.
They never knew that of God, not of his way as you have done, they think it is
a hard way, and that God is an hard master, but you have found much good. 1. A
gracious assistance, God meeting you in the way with a gracious hand of help:
2. A sweet recompense, the work has been your wages, it has brought meat in
the mouth; There may be special and great finfulnesse in omission.
therefore it is very sinful for you to withdraw from the way.

Secondly, there be other particular aggravations of thesinfulnesse of this,
respecting the duty, In respect of the duty.
neglect.


duty, omiss^^ becomes more sinful. When the duty is of, great importance.


1. When the duty is of great importance, when much hangs upon it; a 1. the
duties of public places, Magistracy, or Ministry, for if such be neglected
much evil follows; 2, the duties that have greatest influence into the life
of a Christian, as meditation, searching the heart, repentance, etc. If these
be not done, God loses his due many other ways, because the spirit and life
of other duties depends upon these; all duties are necessary, but some are of
more importance; there are (...), these things must be especially minded,
Matthew. 23.23. Luke 11.42.

When the duty is much enforced, When much enforced.
by former resolutions, by present impulsions.

When muchgood has come by it.
When you have found much good in it.

When it is most facile in respect of ability and opportunity; in such cases
the disobedience of the heart is greater, When most facile.
and so the sin also is greater.

the neglect: the sin^ulnesse is increased; In respect of the neglect.


it is extended, when volintarily a man lives in neglect of that he knows.
When extended.


not lamented, the heart being not only stubborn, Not lamented.
but secure, senseless, impenitent, in these cases this sin becomes exceeding
sinful, and very provoking.

2. Secondly, as it is sinful, so it is foolish.
As you have seen the sinfulness, so cast your eye upon the foolishness of
denying God what he calls for.

Against true reason.
In every voluntary action, you have a reason that moves you, Voluntas est
appetitus rationalis, (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 10.
especially when two ways are set before you: now then consider what it is
that moves thee to withdraw thy self from that unto which thou art excited of
God; what is it, the shunning of any evil? think then if the good which is in
Gods way, be not greater then all evil, and if the less of God, be not a
greater evil, thin all the evil thou shunnest: or what, is it the difficulty
of the duty? think the; have thou not found the way smooth? does not God offer
his hand with the to the work? what is the work to the wages? or what is it
to gratify thy se^ with some present advantage? think then if any thing can be
good with out God, and if there be not a greater good in his way, and if thou
may not have that very thing in Gods way, which thou seek out of it: Thus
you will find that without reason you deny God.

It is a leaving that way which wisdom and goodness direct to.
God has devised the best way for your good; his wisdom and goodness have
conspired to prepare that way which might be best for you, therefore to follow
your own counsels, and affections before his counsel is folly, see all that
God has done, look into this visible world, who could have by wisdom framed
and ordered every thing in that order, and beauty as all things nowstand by his
hand? yet this is the great foolishness of the world, men think, they can
order things better for themselves then God has done, and this very principle
is the maine root of all the strayings of men; But suppose a ship at sea in
the winds, among many rocks, whether were it better, that the By lot, who is
skillful should steer her, or the passenger who knows not his way? Consider
that good and evil are hardly known, they many times are veiled with such
visages that there need wisdom to discern, and it is always safest to follow
the greatest light, your wisdom is but borrowed, it is but a drop from that
Ocean of wisdom which is a him who is wisdom, and it was given you for this
end that you might be ordered by his wisdom, to the true and to the greatest
good; as the eye in the body was given you not to be a sole and sufficient
guide to the body, but that by it you might be capable of the light of the
Sun without which the eye cannot see, therefore it is folly to be led by
your own spirits, and not by Gods.

You cross your hopes.
You cross your hopes and prayers, for it is in vain to ask or expect any
good, but in the way of good: This is to do as those, (...). Diog. apud Laert.
l. 6. Beat^ quippe vult esse etiamsi non sit vivendo ut passit esse. Quid est
ba^ voluntate mendacius? Aug. de Civitat. Dei l. 14. c. 4. apud Camd. collat.
Amic.
God that undertakes to save you, has showed you the way; now if you refuse
the way, you refuse your own good, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me by thy
court sells, and so bring me to thy glory.

what you must do, You must do it at last.
when God speaks he will not be denied; if you stand out now, he will have it
out another way, he will have it out in repentance, and mourning, and though
now thy heart be not bowed to do thy duty, he will make thee repent thy folly,
before he will put up such disobedience.

Secondly, you sin against the Spirit, Secondly, sin not against the Spirit by
doing less then you should.
when you do less then is clearly due, when you do not as Caleb who followed
the Lord wholly. Numb. 14.24. Josh. 14.14. When like ill debtors you pay
something, but not the whole: Think not that it is enough for you to be doing
good, for you may as well sin in doing good, as in doing evil; Less is done.
and indeed a good man sins more in good then in evil: Now note that the
deficiency of a man in doing good is from a twofold spring.

1. Insufficiency of strength. 1 From insufficiency.
2. Malignity and sinfulness of heart.
In the former you are like a sick man that cannot do what he would, 2
Malignity. These differ.
in the other like an idle man that will not do what he can: The difference in
these two is.

1 That when a man comes short out of weakness, there is a present
willingness, his heart yields all, he consent^ fully to the demand of God, and
grieve that he cannot do what he would. Romans 7.

imputed unto sin: God will not charge the defect upon such as are his, because
they are not under the Law, but under Grace. Romans 6.

But voluntary neglects he will require at your hands: It is certain all the
other Churches were found defective, and did not all they should as well as
Ephesus; but this was that which brought Ephesus under the rod, because she did
not what she could, but was voluntarily deficient. Sinful defect.
Apoc. 2.4.

And a man may be defective two ways.

By doing less for quality then h^ should, Doing less for quality.
not putting so much into his duty as belongs to it, or not bestowing the cost
that he might; but being slight formal, heartlesse, etc. this is like unto
their sin in Mal. 1.14. having in the flock a male, they offered a corrupt
thing, this provoked God unto indignation, yea to execration against them, God
looks for what we can, Deuteronomy. 6.6. Eccles. 9.10. so David says he did, I have
prepared with all my might, etc. 1 Chronicles. 29.2. Common stuff will serve for an
ordinary house, but if it be for a palace for a King, then silver and gold and
great art is used Plut. de profect. vir.
.

doing less for quantity then we ought: Less for quantity.
God stands much upon quantity, because all our ability is from him, and to
curtaile his service is a dishonor to him, for it detracteth from his
greatness, and shows what little respect the heart bears him, when it puts
him off with half, short, lame, and curtailed duties; we are wont to frame our
actions and cariages toward men in a way proportionable to their quality, our
deportment unto a King is such as may declare a stamp and impression of his
Majesty in the heart; God is sensible of this disesteeme: see how he pleads
with them. Mal. 1.8. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And
if ye offer the lame and the sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
Governor, will he be pleased with thee or accept thy person, says the Lord of
hoasts? and ver. 14. Cursed be he that having a Male, etc. For I am a great
King says the Lord of hoasts, and my Name is dreadful among the heathen. And
again, if God should not be strict in the quantity of his service, religion in
time might come to nothing, it would be so lessened and nibbed, that in time
there would scarce be any memorial of a God, or any honor done unto him.

Here by the way let me take liberty to answer two Questions.

CHAP. XX. 1 Quest. Since all come short of what they know they should do, and
God imputes not that as sin to them that are believers; How may a man know when
his deficiency is imputed as a sin to him?
his defect is voluntary: he does but little, Signs of sinful defects.
and is not willing to do more, he knows he should do more, but his will is
against it; God expects this at least, When voluntary.
that though his people be unable to do all, yet they should be willing; he
will have all their hearts toward him: and this David gave in charge to his
son Solomon. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou
seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever. 1 Chronicles. 28 9.

do less then you have done: When less done then has been, though the cause
be the same.
the same necessity still urging, conscience still pressing, opportunity still
serving, this was the sin of that backsliding people. Apoc. 2.4. They fell
from their first works: Therefore Christ threatened to forsake them.

less then those that have like abilities, Less then others.
occasions, engagements, opportunities; but much more clearly you sin when
others that have more streights (...). de Asia dixit Agesilaus in Plut.
, more encumbrances, less abilities, less means, less advantages, shall
exceed you in fruitfulness, and all the ways of godliness and piety.

you live not by what you do, When you live not by what you do.
but lusts grow strong, and grace weak, and all is worse and worse; as in the
regiment of bodily health, when a man declines it is a sign he has not a due
care of his diet, or rest, or exercise, you must hold up life, the Church of
Ephesus doubtless was doing, but she was still a loser, her spirit and
strength decayed, as it is with him that is in his trade, but does not follow
it to purpose, and so goes back in his estate; according to the wise man's
speech: He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the
diligent makes rich. Prove. 10.4. By much sloth fullness the building decays,
and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth through. Eccles. 10.18.

God accepts not what you do, When God accepts not what you do.
when he is pleased with our ways, he shows his liking of them, sometimes by
a secret testimony, giving Joy, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you ward. 2 Cor. 1.12. Enoch had this testimony, that he pleased
God. Heb. 11.4.5. sometimes by rewarding, as he did Phineas, Numb. 24.11, 12,
13. sometimes by filling the heart with much spiritual life and vigor in the
work, but where God accepts not, there is a damp upon the spirit, the duty
goes forth like the Raven out of the Ark, but returns not as the dove with
an Olive branch in the mouth, a man is no way bettered by what he does.

Enquire into the reason why you do less then God calls for, When the cause of
defect is evil or insufficient.
and take a true account of thy self; ask thy heart what moves, and take a
full answer from it; for you may discern by the reason that it gives whether
all be well or no, no doubt but it will have somewhat to pretend, but weigh
all in the balance; if the reason be insufficient, you are sinfully deficient;
as if you find slothfulness, loathnesse to be at so much pains, which was
their fault, none stirs up himself to etc. Esaias 64.7. or if it be respects
to thy lusts, thy needless ease, superfluous gain, unnecessary employment,
unseasonable delight; these and such like, robbing God of his due, leave a
great guilt upon the soul.

How a man may know he does his duty, when the heart is still pressed to more
and more than is done.

Answ. 1 Answ. by Caution.
By way of Caution. Answ. By way of Proposition.
Caution, Be liberal.
be liberal; keep your hearts open and full for God; though other things
should be done, yet the heart may and ought to hang most after God: these paths
are more noble, more sweet, more suitable to a holy heart, a child should be
willing to do what his father bids him, though he send him as David into the
field to keep sheep, but he had rather be in his fathers presence: you should
always come to God with delight in him, and go away with desire after him; as
they say in meats, it is good to leave with an appetite, sanety is hurtful,
that friend is scarce welcome that is glad to be gone from us; it is a sign you
have little love to God, when you come with unwillingnesse, stay with
weariness, and go out with gladnisse, be ever bent toward him, account your
duties, and converse with him your pleasant seasons; let all other things be as
your labor, this as your meal; bever think you do enough, say as David, I
will yet praise him more and more. Psalm. 71.14. Rational, else you may be
oppressed.


Caution, be rational: Take heed of being bound with more laws then are
imposed by God, and of adding to the yoke which he puts upon you, there may be
much deceit in this, in having the heart engaged to more than God requires:
There are two things whild concurring with principles and dispo^tions that are
good and holy, Things oppressing
may ven the soul with a kind of spiritual oppression and extortion.

erroneous Conscience: Conscience erroneous.
as sometimes it erres by exacting less than ^ should, and giving
acquittances, when the debt is not fully discharged; so sometimes it erres by
going beyond its Commission, and exacting above the bond A weak servant sent to
gather up his masters debts may mistake his business by misjudging of the
sums, requiring an hundred pound where the bo^d is but for an hundred
crowns: The spirit of a man is so apt to err, that like water which is hardly
kept within its bounds, if it transgress not on the left hand by defect, it
often mistakes on the right had by excess. Thus superstitious spirits do more
then they need, and lie in the chains of their own making Metum appellant
Graeci (...). Plut. de superstit.
, subjection themselves to ordinances and ways which God made not.

Superstition is prodigal, and there is this quality in men, that in those
things which indeed are enjoined of GOD they are deficient, but in their own
inventions abundant; they are loath that God should carve for himself, but if
God will take it of their cu^ting, they will go far: So the Pharisees, who
in a way of religion, were most irreligious, neglected judgment and mercy,
Luke 11.42. but in traditions and rules of their own coining, they were very
free and liberal: ^apistry offends more by addition and multiplication in
religion, then by substraction.

And as the superstitious, so the melancholy and fearful spirit are often
ready to go beyond the line, and bring themselves into inhabitable and
unsufferable ways of religion; where the sun of piety in a mistaking and
yielding spirit, is so hot, that nothing can grow for it, nature is parched,
strength wasted, health impaired, estate neglected. I have known some that
have thought themselves ill employed in any thing but in the exercises of
religion; and when they have been in their business, or at meat, or in bed,
have been forced to lay by all and to go to prayer, or, etc.

Satan.
Satan puts men upon more; as he is sometimes an Angel of darkness
withholding men from good, or drawing to evil; so he is sometimes as an
angel of light exciting unto good: For, 1. It is his principle and constant
rule, as much as he can to sail with the wind, and to row with the tide, to
join himself to the tempers and spirits of men in their own way, and if he
find principles and dispositions not altogether so fit for his turn, i^ he
cannot change them, he will rather use them as he finds them, the^ cross
them: So he found in the Iewis a great zeal for the Law of Moses, and he makes
this use of it, to set them against the Gospel: Saul also was one that made
conscience (as it seems) of seeking God before he went to battle, and
hereupon Samuel not coming according to expectation, Satan puts him to offer
sacrifice himself, and did it with that impetuousnesse and importunity, that
though Saul knew it was not his office, yet the case standing as it did, He
forced himself and offered the burnt offering. 1 Samuel 13.12.

Satan has in this way a great end, he brings men by it into great straits;
what have the Jews lost by that misguided zeal, and religious disposition? and
by this he wearieth and tyreth out the spirits of men in their way, and breeds
in them a dislike and weariness in religion, riding the soul as it were out
of breath; so we have known many very forward and active for a time, but now
as wearied men they are laid down to rest, and their life is gone. By this also
he works ill effects on others, who by the rigorous courses of men religious,
look upon religion as a tyrant; who is able to sum up his treacheres? what a
plot was that which he had at Corinth. His device was to get advantage upon
them. 2 Cor. 2.11. and how? he sees a zeal in the Church against the
offender, and a mournful spirit in the poor man, and now he drives on the
Chariot, and works in the zealous spirit of the Church, that they may hold on
in a severe way against him, that so, He might be swallowed up of overmuch
sorrow. 2 Cor. 2.7.

Quest. How a man may know when he is pressed to good, that it is by Satan?

Answ. It is a sign Satan puts on to good.
The print of his foot will be found where he has been, and though he put
upon good, yet it is ever in an ill way, as for instance he may be discerned;

divides piety from mercy, When piety and mercy are separated.
and carries the soul on without care of the body; when God comes he comes
with much goodness, and as Jacob drove softly as the children and cattle were
able, Genesis 33.14. so he will not so put on the soul as to destroy the body,
grace and the law are for the perfection of nature, not destruction; the
religion that Satan devises is hard and cruel: how did the Priests of Baal
cut and lance themselves, even till the blood poured out? 1 Kings 18.28. The
Jews learned of God to sacrifice beasts, but of Satan to sacrifice their
children; They burned their sons and their daughters in the fire, which I
commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Jer. 7.31. rather then his
servants shall be oppressed, he will lose his right. I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. Mat. 12.7.

Yet we must not press this rule of mercy too far to an immoderate indulgence
unto nature, the soul must not be too much loser by the body, nor God for man,
nor must this be extended to the base favoring and sparing of our selves in
times of persecution; For he that so saves himself, shall lose himself. Luke
9.24. If you send your servant upon business of great concernment, and he fall
sick, and so do not what you expected, you excuse him; but if he say as the
sluggard, Prove. 20.4. the wind blew, and the air was stormy, and wet, and
cold, you will not take this well. So when you cannot do him service through
disproportion of your strength to your work, he will bear with you; but what
ever it costs you from men and devils; when you know his will, as you are able
you must obey.

divides betwixt piety and charity: When piety and charity separated.
as when the Jews devoted so much to pious uses, that they left nothing for
their friends, no not for their parents; but when their father, and father in
necessity asked relief, they said, It is a gift by whatsoever thou may be
profited by me. Mat. 15.5. that is to say, that which thou ask for thy
supply is given to another use, and I have nothing for thee. Again, when men
walk in such a way of religion, that they provide not for their families, which
is so far from Christianity, that the Apostle says, He is worse than an
Infidel that provideth not for his family. 1 Timothy 5.8.

Again, when servants bestow that time with God which belongs to man: God never
demands of you that which is not yours, he never requires you to rob your
masters to pay him.

without order and reason; When without order.
as when you are put upon one duty in the season of another: as when your
calling, refreshing, occasions truly and necessarily call you one way, and yet
conscience drives another; or when you are hearing, to be put upon reading;
Again, when you are put upon extraordinary duties without extraordinary
occasion; or when put upon such actions as belong not to your place; as Saul to
offer sacrifice, Vzziah to burn incense: Let this suffice for the first way of
answering the question.

The second way of answering is by Proposition. 2 Answ. to the main Quest by
proposition.


Proposition. There are bounds of duties of godliness: Godliness has bounds.
for the law is full of reason; now reason requires no action without limits,
if it bid a man eat, give, labor, etc. it together with the matter includes
the measure; if a master bid his servant go, and say not whither, and how far;
how can the servant obey, when he knows not his masters mind? if I would
have an house built, or a garment made; except I appoint the bounds and
measure, how can the artificer fit my desire?

Now there are bounds for extension of actions Now there are bounds for
limitation of actions
The bounds of extension show how far you are to go: First for extension.
And I will in general lay down three rules to find this out, how much you
must do?

Ability and opportunity: Ability and opportunity.
Where much is given much is required, and to whom men have given much, of him
they ask more. Luke 12.48. Where God sows much he will reap much; that may
be enough from one, which is too little from another; yea, that may be
abundance in one, which is scant in another; he that had but two talents did
well with praise, in gaining other two; but if he that had had five talents had
done no more, he had not had such praise Non perpendit Deus quantum, sed ex
quanto. Beda in Mar. c. 12.
: Where God gives much grace and large opportunities, such must do much; you
that have much knowledge, spiritual engagements, fullness of the world, much
time, know, that you should be more with God then others, holiness is your
trade, and your closets are your shops, and every day is a Sabbath to you, and
this is a great favor, that God has freed you from inferior drudgery, to
employ you in more noble things in the Court: which are happiest, they that are
in the Kitchen, or they that attend upon the Prince? if then you see others
that are poor and held to work hard for a mean living, more lively, more
frequent, more abundant in duties then your selves; know now you walk not by
rule.

2 Sufficiency for the good state of the soul; 2 Sufficiency for the good
state of the soul
as the body must have so much food, rest, exercise allowed to it as may uphold
it. You must do so much as may,

1 Keep the soul in life, 1. Life.
when you grow weak, dull, languid, you do not enough.

2 To keep the soul in health: 2. Peace.
the health of the body is the peace and concord of all things in it self;
such also is the health of the soul, you must put forth your selves so far as
to keep the soul from molestation. If less done then should be, a threefold
molestation follows.
A threefold molestation comes by doing less then that which God calls for.

restless accusation of heart: Conscience will not be quiet till God have his
due, Restless accusation
but it will dog you with uncessant vexative reproves; it is like David lived
not in a total neglect of repentance and humbling himself after his sin, but
till he came to the work in earnest he had no quiet. Psalm. 32.3.

strong pulling and drawing of heart; Distraction.
where the heart is set toward God, it cannot be quiet but in him, and where
the disposition and motion of a thing are at variance, this breeds disturbance;
when nature is not satisfied it is unquiet, how will the stomach pull when it
is not fed?

impetuousnesse of lusts: Impetuous corruptions.
the field of the sluggard will be overgrown with weeds; as when you keep the
body too short of her due, it breeds painful diseases: so lusts grow when you
do not enough; when you do least, Satan does most; your night is his day,
when you remit he intends his forces.

Occasions. Occasions are bounds.
You must proportion your labors according unto them, sometimes your ordinary
course is not enough; as in times of strong tentations, violent corruptions,
great afflictions, inward affrightments, public fears and calamities. As in
the natural state of man, sometimes it is necessary to allow more rest, and
more food; and in the civil state, if a man be grown poor he works the
harder, if a Kingdom be in danger it doubles her care, and endeavors of her
conversation. So Paul when the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him,
Prayed thrice. 2 Cor. 12. When Peter was in prison, Prayer without ceasing was
made for him. Acts 12.5. Bzra hearing of the great sin of the people, rent his
garments and mantle, plucked off the hair of his head, and of his beard, and
sat astonished till the evening sacrifice. Ezra 9.4. In such cases the body must
give way and all things else, only we must look to three things.

1 That we judge rightly of necessities.

2 That our time that we spend in duties be our own.

3. That we offer not too much violence to nature.

There are bounds for limitation.
There are bounds for limitation and it is needful to know and mind them, for
we may overdoe, and offend in excess.

Object. Can a man do too much In co non potest esse nimium, quod esse maximum
debet.
or is there any excess in that which is good?

Answ. 1. excess in religion, you must understand it rather in respect of
affection then action Interior actus charitatis habet rationem sinis, quiae
ultimum bonum hominis consistit in hoc, quod anima Deo inhaereat, exteriores
autem actus sunt sicut ad fidem, and ideo sunt commensurandi, and secundu^
charitate^, and secundum rationem. Aqu. 2.2. q. 27.3.6.
: though a man may exceed in the one, yet he cannot in the other; as you cannot
love God too much Verus amor nullu^ novit habere modum. Prop. eleg. 3. modus
diligendi Deu^ est sine modo diligere. Ber. de diligendo Deum
, or desire him too much, or hate sin too much or sorrow for it too much; if
it be objected that if the affections should be very far extended, it might
destroy nature, as we commonly see it in mourn full spirits, and David found
it so, Psalm. 13. Psalm. 32, etc. I say, that godly sorrow never did hurt, but
sometimes God drops in bitterness and mingles it with it, to the afflicting of
the soul; and as water that runs through mines has a tincture and touch of
them, so sorrow meets with much in us, by which accidentally it becomes
hurtful; but godly sorrow in it self, is as all other grace for the
perfection of nature, and so far from being an oppression of it, that unto me
it is not altogether improbable that it shall be in heaven; for if our memories
abide there to recollect the ways of this life, and our understanding, and
will, be fully taken up in the sight and fruition of God, then I propound this
to be considered, since a little sight and taste of God in the world do work
sorrow for sin, whether an abundant-sight and full taste will not also do it
in heaven, when a man shall remember (which I doubt not) his sins against so
good a God.

goodness of an action lies not only in the matter but in the measure, it
must have its just proportion, as in giving alms, he that would be truly
liberal must not only take care, what, but how much, for as it must be
proportioned to the necessity of the poor; so it must be also to his own
ability; there are limits in all duties, That there are such bounds appears,
by, 1. Multiplicity of duties.
take here three Considerations: 1. There are various duties, therefore I must
not be all in one, or in a few with neglect of the rest, nor in the worship of
God, I must not lay out all my self, so that man shall not have his due, for
God that has appointed a service immediately to himself, has also required a
service mediatly to be performed; that is to say, has consigned somewhat to
man, to be paid to him as a King, so requires honor and service to himself,
that he will have some also to be conferred upon his attendants; this is the
fault of those that are unreasonable in religion, affecting a Monastic and
retired life, upon pretense of bestowing all upon God: but religion consists of
duties to be performed, some to God, and some to man; and as the boat cannot
move rightly, when the Oars on one side only are plied; or as the Foul if
she use only one wing cannot fly up; so religion will not profit, which has
one hand wrapped up, that should be toward man in all offices of charity,
though the other be used toward God, (...) all offices of piety: For this the
Jews were blamed who were liberal in their kind toward God, Wherewith shall
I come before the Lord and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come
before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil, etc.
Micah 6.6, 7. Here are large offers unto God, but they neglected Judgment and
mercy to their brethren, therefore how does the Lord answer them? He has
showed thee oh wan what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee but to
do justly, and to himble thy self to walk with thy God, verse 8 and the
Apostle has the like. 1 Cor. 13.3.

Distinguish of actions, Diversity.
some are ^asionall, they are to continue only during the occasion, as
feasting in some time of great rejoyeing, fasting in some time of great
mourning; some are subser^ient, and introductory to others, as studying to
preaching, consideration to prayer, examination to the Sacrament: Now as a man
must not always abide in the porch, so he is not to thrust out the maine duty,
by continuing in the subsirvient duty, as many do excuse themselves from
preaching, upon pretense of still fitting themselves for the work, and so they
are like men that gather timber and stones all their days, but never build; in
these preparatory duties a man must have a care of his end Quae sunt ad finem,
babent modum ex co quod sunt fini proportionata. Aqu 2.2. q. 27. a. 6.
, and wisely order his way; and take this rule, when the heart is in some good
measure quickened, then you have the end of that duty, and so in the fullness of
your spirt must go forth to meet the Lord in faith and confidence of
acceptance.

3. You must take heed of unfitting your selves by one duty for another,
especially by the less, for the more principal, as to draw out your spirits
so far^ in beginning of the day in prayer, another duties of like alloy, as to
indispose and disable your selves for the work of the day.

In all duties of godliness you m^ be limited by calling, condition, ability,
occasion, opportunity: It is ve^ had to divide betwixt these things, ^d to give
piety her due, other things her due, and it is impossible punctual^to direct
every man in this, how far should go. But let these general rules be
considered. And observe this, that worldly respects, indulgence to nature, care
of employments, observance ^soccasions, respect to our affairs, most commonly
gain upon piety, as the Seas gain upon the land; these things are present,
and suitable to nature, therefore they draw to them with much strength, and
often get Benjamins portion, and ^re better served than the rest, they are ^yed
to our flesh and kindred, often ^ive better usage than better friends; ^ake
heed of this, the childrens bread is ^tiobe given to dogs; Nabal will be ^oah
to give his bread and his wine to David, nature will be apt to hold fast, and
to be niggardly to piety, therefore ^on must as wise Umpires moderate on ^oth
sides, and take heed the lean Kine at not up the fat; how many souls are ^ke
Anatomies and Skellitons, whose outward man in strength, pleasure, wealth, are
like the Kine of Bashan.

Proposition: There is a prudence directing as well in measure as matter and
manner.
Proposition: There is a prak^ in Christians directing them, as well measure,
as matter and manner of action and the same light usually sets bounds, that
shows the duty; Pr^de dwells with wisdom, Prove. 8.12. (...) that God in whom
these are united d^ not part them in his dispensation grace to man, He has
abounded town us in all wisdom and prudence, Ephesians. 1. The renovation of our
minds make know what the good and acceptable will God is, Romans 12.2. a good
understand^ have all they that do his Commandment Psalm. 111.10. and a good
man guider affairs with Judgment. Psalm. 112. Prudence is of universal use,
in so m^ that some Philosophers have tho^ there is no other virtue, but that
(...) is that which does all, and as the (...) passing by several Countries,
get (...) rall names, so this prudence in respect several objects, is called
tempera^ fortitude, justice, etc. But I should other say that other virtues are
exttive, and this directive, and so it is needful to the soul, as the eye in
the body, all the graces are as, several members; but how shall they move
right if the eye be wanting? God has not built any ship to lade it with such
treasure as is in his Saints, and sent it to Sea without this Pylot; all
creatures have their instincts to guide them to their ends, and the beast
knows not only what, but how much to eat, drink, rest; and he that has
given this to all other creatures, would not make this new creature the godly,
as a world without the Sun to give light unto it: Wisdom is the glory of a
man, and puts the beauty and crown upon every action; except a man work by
this rule, how crooked and unshapen will his actions be? though Zeal conceive,
Yet men err sometimes, bec.
yet if prudence form not the conception, the birth will prove a monster: It
may be said, how is it then that men err so much, Prudence is imperfect.
some doing too little, some too much, and that men know not well how to guide
themselves? I answer: There is a false gnide.
Their prudence is imperfect. self guide in every man. Satan perverting.
Satan perverts the soul by his counsels. great fault in men. Men faulty.
1. Inconsider^ not harkening to the counsels of vi^ dome, too violent, part by
a natural vigor and heat, (and (...) deed all that is not grace that seem
grace; when the temper of the spirit is not regular according to rule, it is
(...) right) partly out of excessive fear which are apt to hurry the soul as
the winds do the Ship.

3 Proposition, Third Proposition: It is safer to exceed then to come short
it is safer to extend you selves by over-abounding, then to c^ short; it
savours of a better spirit wh^ a man is free, though in excess, the when he is
slack and back ward; and is not so much evil by abounding so^ what to pinch the
flesh, as by abating suffer loss in the spirit; the things the concern the
body are not of such va^ as those that concern the soul, (...) so much the
more cause you have (...) there to lean to the right hand, because as there is
a greater worth in the w^ on the right hand, so there is usually disposition
inclining rather to the (...) hand. Few men offend in passing their bounds.
More men are found defective in giving alms, then excessive, and so where one
is in any way of piety carried with too full a gale, an hundred lie becalmed;
where one piece is more than weight, many are found too light.

4 Proposition, Fourth Proposition: A man must not make his disposition a rule
always. Which in three cases is hardly bounded.
That a man must not be ruled by his own disposition, but must seek arule to
walk by; for in some men the heart hangs with perpetual hungring, after
converse with God, that if there were nothing to limit them, they would scarce
do any thing else; and there are three things draw the heart still unto God:

Great comforts in meeting God in duty; Great comforts.
these make the soul to say as David; It is good for me to draw near to God.
Psalm. 73.28. When God opens himself and his treasures, and lets in his people
to his presence, and feasts them with spiritual and joyful sights, and tastes,
this makes them loath to leave, but they hang unto duties as the child to the
breast, and finding so sweet a conjunction of plenty and sweetness, are filled
with delight, and are ready to say to all things else, as Abraham to his
servant when he went up to the mount, Stay thou in the valley; the spouse vns
with her beloved, and found him as a apple tree among the trees of the forest
whose fruit was sweet unto her taste, he led her into his wine-cellar, and she
was ravished with his love, and greatly solaced in his sweet embraces, and now
see what care she takes to keep that which she joyed to have, and feared to
lose: I charge you oh ye daughters of lerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor wake
my beloved till he please. Cant. 2.7. But in such a case, it is a point of
obedience and self-denial for a man to leave his banquet; to do that which he
is called to; and we should so prefer God to all our comforts, as to be
content to come down with Moses from the Mount, when he has business for us
below.

Love to God: Great love.
this is of a living and large disposition, and apt to draw the heart much out;
he that loves come as a friend, he loves to come and converse with God, and
even then when his necessities are not urgent, yet his heart is drawing
heaven-wards, as the wife loves to be with her husband, etc.

Necessitousnesse of spirit; Great necessities.
when one is sensible of great wants, great corruptions, tentations, fears,
then he is apt to be over-solicitous and active, especially when such an
afflicted spirit, has either both of these two things.

An opinion that all good lies in duties: When men think that a hard heart
may be softened, a stiff heart bowed, a corrupt heart changed, and all good
attained by labor and sweat; men that know what it is to want, these will
work even their souls out of breath, and are so carried with desire of the
good, that they are not sensible of the labor: But remember all lies in
Christ, and therefore you must seek it from Christ by the means; if you make
duty and endeavor your refuge, you are deceived.

that God will not accept less; this is the case of many, they have been at
prayer, and that not only in sincerity, but with importunity, and with a full
tide of spirit, and yet they are afraid to betake themselves to their
employments, out of opinion that they have not done that which is sufficient,
but that their occasion and necessity calls for more still: but herein men have
under-thoughts of God, as if he were like the gods of the heathen that did not
hear, or as if he were hard to be entreated.

For a close of this business I will in a brief view present some things that
are considerable in way of satisfaction in such cases. Farther considerations
to clear the question.


occasions, and duties ordinary and extraordinary; Distinguish betwixt duties
ordinary and extraordinary.
for as when an extraordinary or great person comes, all stand by and give him
place, which we will not if an ordinary and common man come: so affairs and
things of the world and nature do stand for their own and will not be set
aside for ordinary duties, to wait at the closet door, as when an
extraordinary service is performed. Your time is divided betwixt heaven and
earth, therefore you must not only give to both, but with equality, each must
have his own.

There is a time to wait as well as to work; Know there is a time to wait as
well as to work.
when you have presented your suites with what strength you are able, now faith
must come in and lay hold upon the promise, and you ought to believe that God
hears; for you have his word. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and his ears are open to their prayers. Psalm. 34.15. Remember you come not to
God to obtain a promise and grant, but it is obtained in Christ; you must only
sue it out by prayer, and whatsoever you ask in Christ's name believing, you
shall receive it. Mat. 21.22. so David's practice, he begins often with prayer,
but ends with praise; it is want of faith that causes unquietness, though you
should not rest in your duties, yet you should rest in the promise; if God
hear not at first, yet he will hear at last, yea he hears when you think
he hears not. But you must give God time, that is all he requires, the thing
shall be yours, but the time is his, do with your prayers as with your seed,
be patient til God come, Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruit
of the earth, and has long patience for it until he receive the early and the
latter rain. Ja. 5.7. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming
of the Lord draws nigh. When you have preferred a petition to the King, you
do not fall presently to write another, but you wait a time convenient, and
then you move again; so do with God, the door is open, you may come again in
due time, but live by faith, and rest upon him as upon one that cannot fail
you; yea though you in weakness should have hard thoughts of him, though it
may keep you long from the accomplishment of your desire, yet not always: If
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2.13.

approvedly in the path of piety, Then a man walks well when he lives and
grows.
when his soul is held up in life, and when he grows up in Christ, when God
blesses his labors it is a sign he accepts them, and though you cannot
find a growth upward in joy, and peace, and triumph of spirit, yet see if you
grow not downward in humility, hungring, mourning, zeal; and see if all grace
be not more and more radicated and confirmed in you. I have been happily too
large in this digression, but I have done it for the satisfaction of such as
walk heavily, not knowing their bounds; I return now to the direction which was
to improve divine assistance when you have it, when God comes to fetch you to
him, if you put him off as the Church did, Cant. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. you may lose
him as she did; sometimes God comes as the Angel to Lot, and with a mighty
power draws on his people, and will not leave them; but at othertimes he so
moves them, that the working of his power does not effectually carry on the
soul, but leaves them at their choice; and now when the wind serves, if we
hoise not sail, we may be becalmed: therefore accept the season of grace, and
be doing: and I say to you as David to Solomon; Be strong and of good courage,
and do, fear not, nor be dismayed, for the Lord God even my God will be with
thee, he will not fail thee nor forsake thee until thou have finished all the
work for the service of the house of the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 28.10.

CHAP. XXI. Third means to retain a divine presence, is prayer, in which care
must be had of the rise carriage end of it.
THirdly, Direct. 3. Beg. assisting grace
take this direction, beg his assisting grace; prayer is the way to get it; in
the sight of thy deadness, look up to the God of life, and pray with David,
Make me to go in the path of thy Commandment, for therein do I delight,
incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness, turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way, quicken me after
thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth, hear my
voice according to thy loving kindness, O Lord quicken me according to thy
Judgment, consider how I love thy precepts, quicken me O Lord according to thy
loving kindness, Psalm. 119.35, 36, 37, 88, 149, 159. When you find your
spirit willing, yet weak, that you cannot walk in your way without help, then
go to God, and pray as David, Uphold me according to thy word that I may live,
hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually. Psalm. 119.116, 117.

In your prayer for help, I will propound three things considerable, for better
direction; In prayer look to the rise, which must be


the rise carriage end of your desire.

rise must be 1. Strong desire of walking with God.
a strong desire of walking with God: Then you are like to prevail when you
come in truth, help is often desired out of custom, and in this way many
prayers are lost, therefore get thy heart to love the way, and when thy heart
is with God, his hand will be with thee; this argument David used in seeking
help of God: Make me to go in the path of thy Commandment, for therein I do
delight, Psalm. 119.35. Let thine hand help me for I have chosen thy precepts,
ver. 173. With my whole heart have I sought thee, oh let me not wander from thy
Commandments. ver. 10. Take heed lest your hearts draw back when you seem to
crave his grace Quae ratio est ut susurremus despici a domino preces nostras,
cum praecepta ejus despiciantur a nobis? Quid dignius? Quid justius? Non
audivinus, non audimur; non respeximus, non respicimur. Salvian. de Provid.
lib. 3.
, that you may walk in his ways, for in such God has no pleasure.

rise must be necessity: Necessity.
be sensible of your own insufficiency Certum est animas auxilio divino opus
habere in hac vita, and in altera. Cham. t. 3 l. 26. c. 9.. 11. Vide Paris. de
virtut. cap. 11.
, taking heed of trusting to your own strength; I have showed the evil of it
before: Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
Prove. 3.5, 6. But be strong in the Lord, and the power of his might. Ephesians.
6.10. He that sees and considers the multiplicity and spiritualnesse of
duties, the variety and activenesse of corruptions, the swarms and violence of
tentations, etc. which lie in his way, will see he stands in need of a greater
strength then his own, that he may break through, walk on, and persevere unto
the end, and he will be forced to use such language, as you find, Psalm. 143.7,
8, 9, 10, 11. Hear me speedily O Lord, my spirit fails, hide not thy face
from me, least I be like unto them that go down into the pit, cause me to know
the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul unto thee, teach me to do
thy will, for thou art my God; thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land of
uprightness, quicken me oh Lord for thy Names sake, etc. and he will cryout as
he, We have no might against this great company that comes against us,
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
Necessity must make you beggars, you must see that you cannot live upon the
stock which you have received, God has not given you so much, as that you
should be able to subsist without him; ^^e more indigent and poor you are, ^^e
more welcome you are to God, the needy shall find favor, He fills the
hungry with good things: go then, and take up David's words, I am poor a^^
needy, make have unto me oh God, thou are my help and my deliverer, oh Lord
ma^^ no tarrying. Psalm. 70.5. and say as Moses, If thy presence go not with
us, corry us not hence: for wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy
peoples have found grace in thy sight? Is it ^^ in that thou go with us?
Exod^ 33.15, 16. Go with the Apostle and pray much, and you shall ha^ like
answer from heaven, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Corinthians. 1^ 8, 9.

Look to the carriage of your prayer.
The carriage and managing of your requests in this case must be^ right, with
confidence in the mig^^ and mercy of God: you have abundant cause of
cheerfulness in coming to him; for besides this, th^^ it is his glory to
hear, and that ^^ intercessor who has taught us (...) pray that we be not
led into temptation, but to be delivered from evil^ and prayed for us
himself, is with him, Christus inter nos petitor, cum patre dator, non utique
nos hortaretur ut peteremus, nisi dare vellet. Aug. Ser. ^9 de verb Dom.
Erubescat humana pigritia, plus vult ille dare quam nos accipere, ib.
and dear to him; consider this is Gods glory, that the life and strength of
his people depends upon him, he helped Jesus Christ our head, Esaias 42.6. and if
he should not help you, the work would not be perfected: and so all that
Christ has done would come to nothing. God has called you to this way, and
has appointed you by it to come to him, so that his end should fail if he
help not; for this cause you have but little in your selves, that you might
live daily upon his alms, God leaves in you necessity Donum habitualis gratiae
non ad hoc datur, ut per ipsum non indigeamus ulteruis divino auxilio etc.
etiam in statu gloriae quando gratia erit omnino perfecta, homo divino auxilio
indigebit, hic autem aliqualiter gratia imperfecta est, in qua^tum hominem non
totali, or sanat. Aquin. Sum. 12. q. 109. a. 9.
, that he may better show his mercy, he will uphold what his hand has built;
you have experience of his presence; if he had not been with you, you had not
now been with him; his promise is with you, Lo I am with you always, even to
the end of the world. Matthew. 28.20. It is a full promise, like a stream of
living waters running in the Church for ever; he says not I will be with you,
but I am with you, that we might be confident of his constant presence, and he
has laid up much treasure in this promise, and therefore bids us look well
into it; exciting by the word Lo, which he sets as a Beacon o^ a hill, or as a
special mark upon the head of this promise, as having much in it. Therefore
come unto God in much assurance, he hates suspicions and jealousies; Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time if need, Heb. 4.16. This may be your comfort,
that what you have not is your selves you have in God, and what you have in God
is yours by promise; go then and sue God upon his own bond, God will be
sought Poterat nobis etiam non orantibus dare sed oratione nostra nos voluit
admonere a quo accipiamus haec beneficia. Aug de bon. persev. c. 7.
, prayer is the key of the promise, Ezech. 36.36, 37. Though God be our friend,
he may pass by us if he be not called in, but when he is going from us prayer
takes hold: when Christ made as if he would have gone further, being come to I
maus, The disciples constrained him, saying, abide with us, and he went in to
tar^ with them, Luke 24.28, 29. David found God when he ^ought him, In the do
when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my
soul. Psalm. 138.3. When the angel sounded glory to God, he proclaimed peace;
and expectation or hope to us, as some read it, Luke 2.14. (...), non a (...)
sed a (...), expecto unde (...) expectatio. Lud. de Dieu.


end of your desire must be observed, for if your end be wrong, you are not
like to speed; take heed of drawing down the things of God to your ends, for
this is evil, Look to the end.
it is a making of God to serve you; for the end rules, and all that leads to
it, is beneath it; the and is above the means, and all the means, as Jacobs
sons sheases, bow to Joseph's sheafe, do homage to the end; they are all for
the ends sake, and what a thing is this, to set God in a servility to our
designs? if the vessels of the temple might not be put to common use, how
much less the help of grace? take heed therefore of seeking your selves, and
desiring assistance to advance your selves, this is to desire God to lend his
help against himself, and to make his Spirit the ladder of our ambition, it is
as if a Pyrat should crave aid of his Prince, to rob his Country; or as if a
subject should pray his Sovereign to help him, to lift the Crown from his
head, to set it upon his own head: you may seek your selves, your own ends
are allowed you, but they must keep their place, God must be your last end,
come then and say, Lord help me that I may honor thee; I owe all to thee, but
I can do nothing without thee; if I have life from thee, I will live to thee;
what I receive from thee, I will lay out for thee: restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation, uphold me with thy free Spirit: this is David's prayer, but what
is his end: Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee Psalm. 51.12, 13. As if he had said, help me by thy hand,
and I will help others Draw me, and I will bring company with me: we will run
after thee, Cant 1.4. Again, the words following also show the like spirit in
him; O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shen forth thy praise, Psalm.
51.15. as if he had said, my tongue is like an instrument prepared, if thy
mercy may but touch the strings, it shall sound forth thy name; I will run
the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32.
Hold thou me up and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy Statutes
continually, ver. 117. Thus be you faithful with God, and his help will not
fail you, but while your eye is on him, his hand is with you.

CHAP. XXII. Fourth means, keeping the favor of God, with Directions how to
do it.
FOurthly, keep his favor, Direct. 4. Keep Gods favor.
and you shall keep his presence, love delights and dwells with love: though the
Lord have married you to himself in a covenant that is unchangeable, yet you
may have less of your husbands company, except you keep his love; it is not
inevitable transgression, but voluntary offenses which separateth betwixt God
and you O pus est ut tu non recedas ab eo, qui ^unquam recedit, opus est ut non
deseras and non desereris; no^cadere and non tibi occidet; si feceris casum,
ille tibi faciet occasum; si autem tustas, praesens est tibi. Aug. apud Greg.
de Valent. t. 2. disp. 8. qu. 1. p. 6.
; take heed then of harboring lusts in imagination, or purpose, take heed of
frowardness and rebellion of heart; unkindnesses breeds unkindnesse, can you
with reason expect that God should be with you, when you regard him not? Can
two walk in one way that are not agreed? Amos 3.3. walk then before him in all
well pleasing, keep close to Jesus Christ, for all the love of the father is
laid out upon the son, and comes to you through him, be dearly affected to his
people, for they are his friends: God dwells in such. 1 John 4.12. When you
have your friends good will, you have your friend, and when you fall into
straits and lusts, and men and devils shall take up arms against you, if you
come and say to God as Iehoram to Iehoshaphat, The King of Moab has rebelled
against me, will thou go with me against Moab to battle? God will answer as
Iehoshaphat did, I will go up, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, and
my horses as thy horses. 2 Kin. 3.7. My brethren, you have a sure way to retain
the favor of your God, he has showed you the way that is good, and have you
not one always with him, which is the delight of his soul, one ready at your
request to interpose himself, and to take up all differences betwixt you and
him? lie not therefore under any guilt, but every day renew thy peace and
league with God, by making Christ thine advocate, then shall his face shine
upon thee, and his Spirit shall not be withheld from thee. Think it not
enough to escape his wrath: a friend not only dreads displeasure, but delights
in the favor of his friend; it cannot satisfy a living and a loving Saint,
that Gods hand is not against him, except it be also with him, or that God is
not his adversary, except he be his friend; a wicked man may fear his wrath,
but a good man cannot bear his absence; if then you desire his presence, keep
his favor; and because nothing but that which is against his will displeases,
Take heed of crossing God.
take heed of crossing his will. And for this I will prescribe two Rules.

Keep up love, Keep up love.
for this will make you of on heart with God, there will be an harmony in your
hatred and his, your desire and his, your delight and his, your wills will run
in the same channel with his: fear may make the life better, but love makes
the heart better, it carries a man out of himself, and casts his affections
and actions into Gods mould, it works after his pattern, and does all to please
him, as love is the wife subjects her desires to the desire of her husband;
love would hol^ you in an uniforme course of holiness, and all strayings in
life are from decayings of love, this binds the soul to God, so that as the
hinder wheels in the Coach follow the forewheeles being all conjoined; so the
heart ^ drawn after God by love, love will not suffer you to please your
selves with any thing that may not please you God, nor to swerve from this rule
to gain the world: but as Gods love sub^ fills your will in giving all good, so
you love in its measure will fulfill Gods will in doing all good; and this is
the property of our communion with God, there is a continual intercourse of
love, Gods will and man's sweetly conjoyning in a happy concord, mutually
delighting each in other, and mutually filling the desires each of other, God
dwelling in his, and they in him. 1 John 4.16. they cleaving to him, and he to
them.

And let me a little more open the power and efficacy of love in this
business, and when I have done, you shall see that it contributes not a little
to the keeping of the heart to God. Love quickneth and preserves desires.


It sharpens and preserves desires Animae motus radix est amor. Paris. pars 1
partis 1. de universo c. 21.
after God; and what are desires but reachings of the heart? the soul by
desires does as it were with extended and spread arms raise it self after
God, it will make a man unsatiable, always thirsting, and now though the
armies of the Philistines be in the way, yet the soul will break through all
for the waters of Bethlehem; desires after God have much good in them, they
capacitate the soul, an hungry man eats much, the promise emptieth it self
freely upon such. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be filled. Mat. 5.6. and they quicked the soul; as they make it
receptive, so they make it active, Psalm. 63.1. It sets all the wheels in
motion, it will not suffer the soul to be at rest, it cannot take content
(...).
in any thing except it be fulfilled, but will put out all her Sails and
Oars, in strong pursuance, Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee.

It makes resolute.
It makes resolute, regardlesse of all things in comparison of what it longs
for, and fearlesse, Quid non audet amor?
and invincible; no terrors can deter him, but as a Giant he rejoices to run
his race Grata ignominia crucis qui crucifixo non est ingratus. Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 25.
; It makes also unweariable, no labors too great but love will find patience;
no difficulties so long, but love will find tolerance, and longanimity, nay
love thinks nothing hard; The Commandments art not grievous, 1 John 5.3. It
is a great advantage to have strength of resolution, for now the soul will be,
1. more full in all endeavors; the bow full bent delivers the arrow with full
strength, a piece full charged will go off with great force, and its fullness
and vigor indoing that, is the grace of the action. 2. More steady, it is hard
to stop the soul when she runs with strength: what was said of Aristides is
much truer here, you may as well almost stay the Sun in heaven, as put such a
one out of his way; when resolutions are strong, the soul is like a fenced
City, it is hard for tentations to break in: there is room left for Satan to
work, when through coldness of affection there is weakness in the resolution,
a faint denial begets new suits, and a door left unbarred gives easy
entrance, When you cleave not to God with full purpose of heart. Acts 11.23.
other things may get in betwixt God and you, the steeple moves not because it
is settled upon its basis, but the Weathercock is turned with every wind.

makes the soul of an yielding temper: It makes yielding.
when God has your love, he has the key of your hearts, love sets him in the
throne, all the faculties will bow themselves with offerings to him, love opens
the ears to hear God, and moves the hands to work, and the focte to walk, and
the head to devise for God: God may have any thing in a time of love, he never
comes out of seas^^, when the heart is in this temper, if her say the word, it
is done, love cannon say no to God, it is full of promises, easily entreated,
is not churlish, but of a liberal property, it stands ready for all service,
and will trample upon all reasonings, respects, contradictions, rebellions that
rise up against God; if God say of the dearest lust, fall upon him, it will not
spare; if God say I must have thy liberty, it says, there it is; if God say
thou must be impoverished for my sake, it says, I am content; if God say I
must have thy life for my glory, it says Lord it is thine, take it, I am
thine, do what thou will: love cannot hold when God as keth, but will give all,
do all, suffer all; if God call, it will run out of estate, peace, friends, the
world it self; yea, when it does much, it thinks it little, yea nothing, and
so when it has been laboring for God, it still says with David, What shall I
render to the Lord, and with the Apostle, Lord what will thou have me to do? it
sticks at no cost, nay it is glad it has any thing for God, and counts this
the best use of all, to lay it out for God, and this the best possession of
all, to lose all for God.

4 Love will make you fearful of losing God, every man's fears are equal to
his love; so that as the worldly man fears to lose the world which is his God,
so a godly man fears to lose his God. Elies heart trembled for the Arc while
he sat watching to hear news of the battle, 1 Samuel 4.13. fear makes men
wise (...) Arist. pol. (...) Clem. Alexand.
. Prove. 1.7. it keeps the heart waking and watching, it keeps the eye upon the
treasure, and soon apprehends the least recesse of God from a man.

keeps the intentions right. It keeps the intentions right.
right end, it is as the by as to convert the soul in all her ways to her
God: On the right end.
for what is love but embracing of God, and such a closing with him, as that as
it finds indigence and want of him, so it has complacence and contentment in
him, yea and that contentment breeds hunger after what it has not, and
gratitude for what it has, and so turns all designs and her whol^ course to
this thing, that she may be^ still blessed and more blessed in the fruition of
God. 2 In due plight. 1. actual.
2. It keeps the intentions in due plight in themselves: 1. Makes them actual:
love has a good memory, it carries the stamp of God upon the heart, and
seldom forgets him; the soul lives where it loves Animus ubi amat non ubi
animat.
: and as love came in by the eye, so it delights by the same door to run out
to God Vbiamorioi oculus. 2 vigorous.
. 2. I^ makes them vigorous and serious, and so able to order and regulate all
the motions of the soul in their right way: Thus love is very useful in this
point, to keep you from straying from God, and consequently needful, that you
may by holy walking retain his favor and presence.

Hold this as a fixed verity, That you may not cross or offend God, hold fast
this truth, that Gods will is best.
that that is best which God wills; all that are come to God do believe this,
else they had not come, for what could draw the heart from all its good but
that which is greater then all; but though this be habitually in them, yet they
do not always actually believe it, for what should be the cause of their
excursions and deviations, but because at present they think it better to walk
in another way then the way of God; there are but three causes of voluntary
declining any thing, either it is because 1. the thing is not worth
entertainment, at least 2. upon such terms, or because 3. a better thing is
presented which we cannot enjoy with it, so that if a man could carry this
truth in his heart unblotted, that it might ever appear legible, it would be
to his gadding affections as a curb, and settle the soul on God as on her
Center. If you could believe that you cannot mend your selves, or make your
condition better any other way, you would be steadfast and immovable, for how
you would see a conjunction of Gods will and your chief good, so that in
crossing his will, you should cross your selves, as wisdom speaks; He that
sins against me, wrongeth his ^wn soul; all they that hate me, love death.
Prove. 8.36.

To help you in this as in a matter of ^eat importance, Means to hold that
fast.


Get a clear knowledge of God, wit^ he is in himself, and of the wisdome^ God
in the Commandments, which at full of reason, and of the end of the command,
thy good, and of the nature (...) that good.

Make this knowledge actual, of^^ mind it.

3 Know that there is reason to gio^ the lie to all opinion of good out of Gods
way and against his will.

1 Because Gods love is fully toward you, and so perfect that he has not c^
off any good from you.

2 All that is truly good agrees wi^ his will: as the formality of truth is
the agreement that it has with the mind of God; so the verity of goodness is
the agreement that it has with the will o^ God: and again, all true good is
from him and eminently in him Omne honum in summo bono
, therefore that which stands in opposition to h^ cannot be good.

3 Consider the subject of such mis^^ prehension; he is either one cover^ with
darkness, or clouded with passion men naturally are blind, and so call evi^
good, and good evil; and good men sometimes are clouded, and with a fren^ie of
passion distempered, and judge that good, which when they become sober they
count the greatest evil, and which is the truest judgment, whether that of a
man drunk, and not himself, or that of a man that is calm, clear and
himself?

4 Remember that you must needs are in judging that to be good which you cannot
entertain with contentment, but a godly man finds these two things as sure
notes of the true evil in every sin. 1. Fear before, and in admission of it.
2. Pain and repentance after, and that ever Chilo damnum lucro turpi se
pretulisse dixit, (...). Laert. in Chil.
.

5 When you see two cross counsels, weigh well these two things 1. the
Counselors. 2. the Reasons.

First, weigh the Counselors; consider well who they are that stand up to
oppose God, and you shall find that which may disable their testimony, they
can be but one of these, either you own lusts, or Satan's suggestions and
tentations. As for your lusts, consid^ 1. They cannot incline. to any good for
kind which God allows not, all the difference between God and them is in the
time, measure, order, manner, meant, and therefore since you have the same good
in Gods way, is it wisdom for circumstances to hazard your souls? 2. They
urge without reason, therefore called foolish lusts, and brutish; it is true,
they have a color of reason, but such as a spark of wisdom would see to be
folly. 3. The order of reason and nature is that you should affect by judgment
Crates dicente quodam optimum esse, quae quisque cupit frui. resp. (...) apud
Laert.
, and not judge by affection, affections are blind guides. 4. Lusts can see
nothing but what is present and sensual, but they see not the spiritual
evil, nor the future calamity and doleful consequents of sin: now it is
against reason to be so improvidently praecipitant.

And as for Satan; what can be expected by his counsel who seeks in all to
destroy? and let this prevail with you, that all opinion of good in that which
is against the will of God, is either immediately, or mediately from Satan.

Therefore see what cause you have to believe that that is best which God
wills, and if you can carry this truth engraven upon you, it will be as a
wall to limit and shut up your inordinate affections, and to shut out and break
the force of Satan's temptations; here you begin to be taken when you are
seduced, if this fort had stood, you had been safe, and if you keep to Gods
will in all, you shall have his favor, and consequently his presence in all.

2 Weigh the arguments that are used on both sides, for you shall by this
better judge betwixt them. 1. God urges debt, you are his creatures, you live
at his cost and charges, he has done you good and not hurt all your days: can
your lusts plead this? whence comes fears, grief, pain, want, death, hell,
but from sin? You are then debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh.
Romans 8.13.

2 God proposes good without evil, can your lusts do so?

3 God proposes eternal good, but the pleasures of sin are but for a mi^ment
Momentaneum est quod ^electat, aeternum quod cruciat. Greg.
.

4 God proposes a certain good, bu^ lust cannot, ambition may reach at honors
that it may never attain, covetousness may hunt for riches, which it ca^ never
find.

5 God proposes all good, but lust only some particular good; volupt^ousnesse
proposes pleasure, not dignty, etc.

6 God proposes good to the posterity, but can lust do it? nay it draws t^
evil without care of posterity; yea, t^ the shame and calamity of posterity.

7 God proposes true good; the which comfort and gives life i^ deed, but
all the proffers of lust are delusions: Solomon tried it, many spies have
traversed this land and find i^ continent of lying vanities and tr^ miseries,
therefore keep close to God that you may have his favor and presence with you.

CHAP. XXIII. Fifth means, keeping in Gods way.
FIfthly, take this direction: Direct. 5. Keep in Gods way.
Keep your selves in Gods way, else you cannot expect his help. Thou meetest
him that rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy
ways. Esaias 64.5.

Here are two things to be carefully observed.

the things which we undertake be good, that we may pray as David, Let that we
do be good.
Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foot steps slip not. Psalm. 17.5. For
in an evil action to ask his aid is to provoke him, it is an high indignity,
it is to draw the great God into a cursed confederacy with sinful man against
himself.

as we are called unto; What we are called to.
for if out of rashness and folly, or pride and vain glory, we thrust our
selves into actions, or difficulties without warrant or command, we may miss
our aim, if we think to be carried through with a divine hand.

Quest. called to such or such a work.

Answ. 1. Some actions are tied and appropriated to an office, as
administration of Sacraments to a Minister, exec^tion of Justice to a
magistrate, etc. Concerning this take these rules.

1 Ordinarily no man is called to the work of an office which is not called to
the office; therefore Saul and Vzziah sinned: Samuel told Saul when he being a
King had meddled with the work of the Priest in offering sacrifice; That he had
done foolishly, and kept not the Commandment of the Lord his God. 1 Samuel
13.13. And when Vzziah went into the Temple to burn incense upon the Altar of
incense, Azariah with his brethren withstood him, and said unto him, it
appertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests that are consecrated to burn incense, go out of the Sanctuary for
thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17, 18.

2 No man is called to the office, in whom is not fitness, and ability for it,
these things at the least are requisite.

3 No man is called to any act of office, but according to commission and order
annexed to his office, as for the Magistrate to execute judgment without
hearing the cause, etc. So long then as I keep my self in my station, and do
the work that belongs particularly to me in my place, I may comfortably expect
the good hand of God, and with cheerfulness I ought to walk in my way, and not
to afflict my soul, with fears and cares; God that hates presumption in meh
thrusting themselves into things too great and weighty, does require alacrity
in those who^ he calls to his service; when he put Iosuah into that great office
of being a leader to his people Israel through the wilderness, he promises to
be with him, and often presses this; Only be thou strong and very courageous.
Josh. 1.5, 6, 7, 9. What should I speak of Moses, Gideon, David, Jeremiah, Paul
and others, in whom you have so many patterns of Gods goodness, not leaving
his servants in that way which he sets them to walk in.

Answ. 2. Some things belong to me^ as partakers of the heavenly calling, as
all acts of piety and charity; yet in these take this rule:

A man is not so called to these as that all are to be done by any one, at any
time, in any measure, in any manner, but we must wisely know how to order out
ways with discretion, for it is note. nough to do good, but we must do all
according to pattern, in due season, and in due order, for a good work may be
marred in the handling, when we walk not by rule, as when a man neglects his
calling and is unseasonably in conference, hearing, fasting, praying, he cannot
upon just ground expect Gods assisting presence, and blessing in his way, and
so on the contrary.

Answ. 3. Sometimes a man is above ordinary course called to some work; and
here we find the calling of a man to be of God. 1. When he has a particular
word Quilege privata ducitur, publica non constringitur. apud Episc. Sarisb. de
justitia operum. c. 42.
; so Abraham had a particular charge to leave his Country and to slay his son
in Sacrifice; So Peter also had a particular word to walk upon the water, and
God failed them not. 2. A strong bent and inclination of heart, so Paul was
bound in his spirit to Jerusalem, though dangers waited for him, Acts 20.22. so
it is judged of Ehud in killing Eglon; of Phyneas in slaying Zimri and Cosbi.
3. When God fits not only with a disposition, but with a spirit for the work,
as when he called Saul to the Kingdom, he gave him another spirit. 4. When he
gives peace of heart in their way, and bears them out against all accusations
from within or without, so Paul and Silas had this testimony of their calling
to their work, a spirit of glory resting upon them.

Quest. flush of spirit, courage, ability, peace and confidence, have they this
of God?

Answ. 1. wicked men, and may for the service of himself and of his Church,
fill their sails with a full gale of great gifts, and carry them on with a
strong hand, so he helped Cyrus, He says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and
shall perform all my pleasure. Esaias 44.28. and, Thus says the Lord to Cyrus,
whose right hand I have holden or strengthened, etc. Esaias 45.1.

natural strength which may do much, some have a natural vigor and
confidence, which enables them to do and suffer much.

lusts and sinful ends and respects may add activity and vigor to their
spirits in good actions Vis. Hug. Grot. de verit relig. Christ. l. 2.
, Iehu was zealous, but that flame of zeal was inkindled by the love of the
kingdom; and many others do much, but it is by the strength of their
self-love, and politic ends.

diabolical power of that Prince of the air, who works in the children of
disobedience, which makes his zelots as God has his Pertinacia haeretica est
obduratio voluntatis ipsorum, and obligatio diabolica, qua eos trahit quo vult
and sicut vult, and ut furiosi, casustinent ex insania cordium quae vix sanitas
sustineret. Guilielm. Parisiens. de tentat. and resist. Vid. eundem de
virtutib. cap. 21.
, as Pharaohs Magitians wrought like unto Moses, so Satan transformes himself
often into an Angel of light, and in a way of seeming piety, and devout zeal
makes many to be valiant Champions. But there is this difference of that common
assistance of the spirit of God to evil men, and of the strength from nature,
lusts, or Satan, from that which the holy Spirit gives to the godly in their
ways.

1 That which is from natural temper, lusts, or Satan, is often found in an
evil cause, as Saul's Zeal before he was called of Christ, was madness
against the truth.

2 Only the spirit of holiness works by love to God, others for other ends.

3 Only the spirit of holiness makes more holy by all assistance which it
affords, this only wins the heart, so that the more God is with him in his
way, the more he loves him, and loves to serve him, and so has this evidence
that it is from God, because it tends to him; so David's heart was silled with
love when God appeared for him. Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the
voice of my supplication, the Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart
trusted in him, and I am helped, therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with
my song will I praise him. Psalm. 28.6, 7.

Let this suffice in this digression for brief answer of these questions, now
let us return to the direction; be sure you keep in Gods way, for you cannot
find God but in his own way, when the ark^ and pillar of fire (the word) moves
before you, walk after it, and then yo^ shall find God pouring in himself,
and girding your Ioynes with strength (...) Wait on the Lord and be of good
courage, and he shall streng then thine heart, wait, I say, on the Lord. Psalm.
27.14. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I
will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness, I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand,
saying unto thee fear not, I will help thee fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye
men of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord, and thy redeemer the holy one
of Israel. Esaias 41.10, 13, 14. It is a precious promise, a man may say and sigh
in himself, alas the work is great, and I am weak, but God says, I will
strengthen thee and help thee; and if the difficulty be too great for thee, yet
it is not too great for me. But a man may say, alas, they that war against me
are many and great, and I cannot stand before them, I find mighty lusts,
strong disputes, strong tentations, but see what God says, ver. 11, 12. They
that strive with thee shall perish, they that war against thee shall be as
nothing, and as a thing of naught; they may come against thee, but thou shall
be above them, they shall vanish, they are no more then a shadow. But a man may
say, I find my heart shaking at the sight of these sons of Anah, and I am
ready to say in my self, I shall one day fall by the hands of Saul: to this
God answers. 1. by a repulsion of fear in a word of encouragoment, Fear not
nor be dismayed, which he repeates again and again. 2. by ^teration of the
promise, I will help, I will help, I will strengthen thee, I will hold thy
right hand: as if he said, I will surely do it. 3. by calling in his attributes
as witnesses and assurances, I am Jehovah, one that is, and will give being to
all my words, I am the holy one, one that cannot deceive you. 4. by pleading
his relation and affection, I am thy God, I am Jehovah thy God, thy Redeemer;
as if he had said, I have given my self to you, and have undertaken to save
you, and therefore fear not; though thou art but a worm Jacob, yet will I
uphold thee; oh then that we could now in our way rejoice, and say as the
Prophet, The Lord Jehovah will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded.
Esaias 50.7.

CHAP. XXIV. Sixth and Seventh means: Be doing, and wisely and diligently use
the means of grace.
BE doing: many cry Lord help, Direct. 6. Be doing.
but they stir not up themselves, Orans and non operans iramprovocat. Greg.
mor. l. 18. c. 3.
but think to live all upon supply from heaven: but if you keep the seed in
the garden God will not increase your store, you must plough and sow, and in
your endeavors look for the blessing from above; you have a life in you, and
you must put it forth, God has said he will help you: that is, you must do
what you can, and he then will join with you Dii facientes adjuvant. Certate,
adjuvabo; vincite, coronabo. Aug. apud Parisiens. de ten. and resist. c. 1.
, he has said, he will meet you, Esaias 64.5. that is to say, he expects that
you should be coming, and then he will come; the mother will lead the child by
the hand, but the child must use his legs, he will do as men do with young
swimmers, he will hold your head, but you must use your limbs; I shall speak
more of this when I come to speak of such as seem to be deserted of God but
are not, they find (...) deadness, but it is not because God will not
co-worke with them, but because they do not co-work with him: I will at
present only say what David said (...) Solomon his son, arise therefore and
(...) doing, and the Lord be with thee, 1 (...). 22.16. Sit not weeping and
sigh^^^, for that will not profit, you must be ^^ing Si lachrymae prodessent
malis auro eas emeremus. Plut. consol. ad Apoll. (...), Dictum Priami ad
Achillem. apud Homer. Direct. 7.
.

Wisely and diligently improve the means of grace, for God does ordinarily
work only in them and by them, where they are afforded: he has showed you
the way of life; if you walk no^^^ his counsels, no wonder if deadness and
deformity of Spirit overtake you; having spoken somewhat of this before, I will
here add these two things. 1. The faults of men in the use of the means: 2.
The inducements to use them rightly.

First, there is a faultiness in the godly, often in the use of the means,
which weakens them and takes off th^^ vigor.

1. Profaneness, when men co^^^ with slight and common spirits to the^^ holy
things, without due composedness, reverence, and preparedness; this is to
provoke God to forsake his sanctuary, and to leave his ordinances, uncloathed
of their wonted working power, and quickening virtue, for this is not service
that he can bear, it overthrowes his Majesty, and lays his honor low when
men come so before him; If I be a Father where is mine honor? Mal. 1.6. As if
God had said, your unholy and contemptible carriage in my worship, declares
that you set light by me, and make nothing of me; if you had me in esteem as
your God, you would worship me as God; Let us have grace whereby we may serve
God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28.

2. Confidence misplaced; when you make the minister his gifts, graces,
prayers, or the things that he administers your trust, God will not bear it:
remember that gifts and ordinances though they be ordained for edification, yet
they are but instruments, and the whole force of the Instrument depends upon
the chief agent, the waters of Bethesda heal not except the Angel move them
Ipsa adjutoria distinguenda sunt; aliud est sine quo non fit aliquid, aliud quo
fit: prioris generis sunt media instituta a Deo, secundi est gratia Dei. Aug.
apud Camer. coll. amic. p. 306.
; neither is he that pluteth any thing, neither he that watere^, but God that
gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. God has not appointed these a things without
which he could not work, but out of liberty, because it pleased him, partly
to convey himself i^ a way suitable to nature; the word and Sacraments being
fit things to de^l^ with intelligent and rational creature, and partly that
his name might be more honored in the fellowship ^f many in the ordinances,
therefore o^ trust must not be in them, but in God. 1 Cor. 2.5.

3. Men come not to them for this end, but as the empty spirits of men
unchanged, gather the chafe, and cockle, but lets go the wheat, and prefer
a fine weed before the ears of corn, so many that are good do catch at
things less useful In picturis, Colores plus afficiunt quam lineae. Plut.
(...). picturam amamus, (...), at, orationem non quae convenit, sed quae
placet. ibid.
, for the most part men ha^^ what they seek and no more; in a fie^^ one comes
to get wood, another to pi^^ flowers, another to take air, and the sheep come
to get food Sicut in agris apis captat florem, capra germen, sus radicem, etc.
sic in legendis poematis, alius hister: am captat, alius elegantiam, idem ibid.
: there is a spirit among men too much carried after difficulties, novelties,
depths, disputes, and by this means they become to be like some children of
swelled heads, but weak limbs and little strength: this should be your end, to
get life, to meet God, to be filled with the Spirit: you may be fatted in
gifts, and lean in grace, like a tree full of leaves and branches, but empty
of fruit: knowledge is good, when it is sought to a due end, not to set up your
selves above others, but to set up God; it were good to count nothing good to
you, till you find God in it; a thousand notions are but vanities, and as
empty clouds in the air, except they dissolve themselves in showers of grace
and holiness upon the heart; As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2.

4. Men use not the means in faith, but are ready to say as Naaman, what are
the waters of Jordan? except you believe you shall not see the power of God;
when you say in your hearts, my heart is corrupt, dead, dark, past cur^^ what
is this but to charge God with weakness and folly, in appointing these helps
that cannot profit? though lusts and tentations be many and strong, yet
remember God is able to deliver. (...); Dixit Antigonus Nauarchae ob hostium
multitudinem metuenti. Plut. apophth.


5. Not drawing out the efficacy of the means, by prayer, application,
neditation; you should hear for hereafter, the word should remain upon you,
and you should mould To. 6.17. (...).
and form you hearts to it, and by it: the benefit of the ordinances comes not
always at present; they are like grapes that must b^ pressed: what
encouragement does God give oftentimes? If you were wise you might get much;
does not God prese^^ them sometimes like the flowing breasts? now if you would
lie sucking, how might you be filled? you p^^ from you the word when it is
like (...) mine not half broken up, yea often when you are near to springs of
life, yo^ cease to dig; the diligent hand maket^ rich; a hungry soul finds
many sweet meals in your leavings, God would give much of himself if you would
stay by it: what if nothing come at present, do with the ordinances as with a
pump, dwell at it and the waters will flow; it is not much hearing, but wise
hearing that carries the blessing, the word must be laid up, and must soake
into the heart. Ioh. 8.37 (...). i. e. (...). Camerarius. Sermo meus non
penetrat in vobis. Ludov. de Dieu.
.

Secondly, let me add a little for indutement, to put you upon seeking God in
this way.

1 Consider it is Gods way, therefore you must not expect good without it, it
is his way and he will make it good; he has appointed the means for this end,
and therefore they shall prosper that use them; his power, wisdom, goodness,
stand all inviting you, being as so many seals of this truth, that they shall
live that hear, and they say to thee, Oh thou that art named the house of
Israel, is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doings? do not my
words do good to them that walk uprightly? Micah 2.7.

2 His promise is with you; how fully has he expressed himself in this,
Incline your ear and come unto me, he are and your souls shall live. Esaias
55.1, 2, 3 Verbum Dei animae vita, virtus victus, custodia, etc. Bern.
. And has not Christ annexed his prsence to his ordinances, for his people
good unto the end of the world? Mat. 28.20. Look then at the ordinances in the
promise, and see how God has engaged himself unto his servants: if you could
believe, you would see God more in his Sanctuary; but as it is said that Christ
wrought no more miracles in his own country because of their unbelief, Mat.
13.58. so God shuts in his power from working, because your hear^ is shut up in
unbelief; you should go^ with gladness to the house of God, as to a place of
feeding and healing, rejoicing in hope to find an effusion of the Spirit from
on high, according to the promise.

3 God has done it; you see by these means he prevails upon men, and turns
from darkness to light, and raises from death to life; you see others how
they flourish in the Courts of Gods house as trees by the water side, and have
not you your selves found God often, causing the ordinances to come as Ships
laden with rich treasures for you? has not your heart burned when you have
heard him speaking? have not some sermons been as Elias Chariot? has not
Christ come often when his Disciples have been together? why do you not then
upon such experiences, walk diligently and cheerfully in the Gospel?

4 It is Gods glory to meet his people; it sets out his goodness, wisdom,
power, mercy, faithfulness Caesari, cum statuas Pompeii delapsuras erigi
jussit, dixit Oice. to, (...) Flut. de capiend. ex. hostib. utilit.
, as the Sun in clearenesse, it makes his name precious, his ways sweet,
his people fruitful, and herein (says Christ) is my father glorified, that ye
bring forth much fruit, John 15. therefore you have cause to seek to enjoy God
in this way.

5 Consider with whom you have to deal. 1. One that knows who seek him, he
knows who are his friends, and sees all the reachings of thy heart after
him: Christ asked the woman whom she sought, but he knew she sought him, and
so showed himself unto her; the child may, seek the mother and she may be
ignorant of it; but there is not a prayer, not a sigh after him, but it is in
his ear, not a tear for him, but it is in his eye. 2. He can do what you
desire; he can carry you on as upon Eagles wings, he is a fountain of life,
and has enough for you, and for thousands. 3. He is pittyfull, he is sensible
of your case Heb. 4.15. Compassio cum impassibilitate perdurat. Bern. de grad.
humil.
, he knows your need of him, what weakness you are left in, if he be not
with you, what tentations and lusts break in, what sorrow and heaviness if you
enjoy him not. 4. He is the author of that desire which you have after him, and
God knows the meaning of his own Spirit; these desires he sent from
himself, to be as Pharaohs Chariots to bring Jacob to Joseph; and when they
have brought you to God, will he not accept you? he would not have sent for
you, if he meant not to help you, therefore seek him with faith and diligence
in the means, that you may have his presence for your guide and guard in all
your ways.

CHAP. XXV. Three counsels to such as are deserted.
NOw I come to deal with such as are forced to draw this sad conclusion
against themselves, that God has departed from them: and I fear when men
seriously consider what has been said, that it will be found that not a few
have cause to sit down in the dust and to pour out tears in the sad sense of
their grievous loss of the quickening presence of God; Me thinks it is visible
in some that they are changed, and have declined from that luster, life and
activity of spirit, which seemed once to be aloft, and to be elevated to an
excellent height of holiness, and heavenly mindedness, but now lies
grovelling in the dust, with clouds and chains of evident darkness and death
upon them. And now I wish for such a spirit, that I might come to them with
like success, as the Angel to S. Peter when he lay sleeping in the prison. The
Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison, and he smote
Peter on the side and raised him up, saying, arise up quickly, and his chains
fell off from his hands, and he went out and followed the Angel. Acts 12.7.9.
God has sent us also to strike off men's chains, and to open the iron gate
that leads into the spiritual City, and has given us the hammer, Ier. 23.29.
and with it the key of the Gospel, Luke 11.52. And oh that he would manage
these by his strength, that men might be delivered that are in prison.

In dealing with such, I will take this course to draw them out of these deepes.

I will lay down the matter of persuasion, arguments to prevail, rules to
direct.

First, the matter of persuasion, or the things that I plead for are,

1 To consider well whether you be not in this case: 1. Counsel. Consider if
it be not so.
Call home your thoughts and send them as spies throughout all the Region, and
see if you find Christ in it as in former times, see if thy soul lie not as
Jerusalem, when the Babylonians came upon it, are not the walls broken down,
the gates burned, the Temple spoiled and pillaged, the inhabitants driven into
captivity? Inconsideracy undoeth men, you will never sit down by the waters of
Babylon and weep, till you remember Zion from whence you are carried; there
could not be place for so much sloth and security in you, if you did see and
consider how you are. According to the acquaintance which men have with
themselves, so are their fears, cares, joys, endeavors. No man will seek
for what he thinks he has. Laodicea dreamed golden dreams, when she slept in
poverty and sought not relief, because she knew not her need, Apoc. 3.17. it
is not a slight view, or weak conjecture, or transient thought, or light
suspicion which will rouse the heart out of her sleep; these things may
disquiet, but they are as weak physic, which moves the humors, but removes
them not, working pain, but not cure; If you saw your selves indeed wrapped in
darkness and death, lying like Lazarus in the grave, covered with earth, bound
up and putrified, you would then hear when we cry to you, Lazarus arise.
Necessity would quicken you, nothing could hold you, you would mourn and howl,
and pray, and seek, and not cease till you find, therefore put the case out
of doubt, and be serious and impartial, it is wisdom to know well what it is
not safe to bear, and to know we have not that which is misery to want.

2 When you see in what case you are, 2 Counsel. Make have to recover.
make have to recover, take heed of trifling, the business requires speed,
therefore as the Angel said to Peter, so I say, arise quickly, Acts 12.7.

you are at a constant loss; you will not let your money lie dead, Because you
are at a constant loss.
you count every day loss when it is not used, when your Ships be ready to go
out, or come in, but cannot for want of wind. My brethren, Grace is your
stock, your money, the estate which is laid up in the soul, as in a Ship that
is bound for heaven, the place of the richest trade, and when you lie becalmed,
and cannot put forth, you lose much: if you had a wind, if the Spirit did come
with gales of grace you would grow rich. The more goods you send to heaven the
greater will your account be; But when you lie still and trade not, or when your
commodities are not vendible, you wrong your selves: Think of it, you have but
a few days to trade in, and what you sow, that you shall reap; if you were
good husbands, diligent and industrious, what might you get? Whereas by
carelessness you are at loss, you might be getting, more grace, strength,
testimonies of divine love, sights and tastes of hidden treasures and pleasures,
in this life, and might be also still adding to the heap of glory in the next
life. Count therefore every day a great loss, and be speedy. Do as the
Disciples when Christ called them; Immediately they left all and followed him;
and as David, I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, I
made have and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.59, 60. weigh it
well. 1. Grace is the richest treasure of heaven and earth, that brings in the
best advantage. 2. You lose it may be, such a time of trade as you may never
have at gain, as the days of youth and strength, and health, when grace does
waste, or the days of the Gospel; while the sun shines you should make hay
(...);
.

There can be no reason of delay; There is no reason of delay.
if your case be sad, and you fear to begin so doleful a work, and so stir in
such a wound, will it not be worse? and must not the thing be done? and though
there be pain in stirring, yet it is the way to the cure, and the disease is
worse then the pain: or if you think to take a fitter time, I say there is no
choice in present necessity; deliberation is idle where the eminence of the
danger requires present action: would you lie still and consult of a fit time,
if you were in the Sea, or if your house were on fire? or if you think to
dispatch some business first? then I say this is folly, may not both be done?
or will you with Saul be seeking your asses when a kingdom seeks you? will
you leave your child starving, to go to feed your hogs? or if you think it is
hard to recover your loss, and so rather sit down in heaviness Compressis
manibus. prove. and Latin. and Heb. Live. l. 7. Drus. prove. hebraica.
, then put forth your selves in endeavors; then I say mourning will not help
it, is it hard, but is it not necessary? will it not be harder? or if you
think I may find my self in better case, my heart more quick, more soft, I
may have a better time, then I say, and you may not; what promise have you that
while you lie still, your work shall be done to your hands? nay, have you not
learned, do you not understand that if you come to him with what you have, you
shall receive what you have not? there is therefore no reason for delay.

Delay is very sinful in this case. Delay is very sinful.


Disobedience.
1 It is disobedience Si praetaeriit tempus, praeteriit ^arifitium. prove. i.e.
non litat qui suo tempore non sacrificat. Drus. prove. Ca^^. 1. l. 5. Minus
solvit qui tardius solvit. Elem. Jurispru. part. 2.. 10.
: the authority of a Superior is as much crossed in the time as in the matter
of his commands: the Jews had sinned as well in mispla^ing their feasts, as in
neglecting of them; you call your servant to (...) presently, and he says I
will co^^ week hence, and how do you const^^^ this? the Jews thought to build
(...) Temple, but because they did it not (...) Gods time, God was angry. Hag.
1.^,^

It is ingratitude; Ingratitude.
God calls you to come to him that he might do (...) good, and you say you
will come at leisure, would you do so with your K^^^ in such a Case?

It is contempt of God, Contempt
and of his ^^vour, you count it not worth your pa^^, for if you were willing
you would (...) what he demands, nothing keeps y^^ at a distance from it but
dislike, if the heart were pleased it would yield.

hard thoughts of God in it; Jealousy.
you think he will not pardon, or accept you, but then why do^^ he call you?

It is disloyalty; Disloyalty.
why are you willing to be unserviceable to your G^^ for a moment? what are you
fit (...) when you are asleep? and would you not that your servant should rise
wh^^ you awake him? much time is gon^ you have but a short time of service, and
your reward is for eternity: up then, and ^ose no more time for shame, that
have ^ost so much; is not he worthy of all thy ^^^e, that is thy life? rest not
then in purposes and promises; for if the heart were faithful, it would not
only wish but work, not only purpose but perform (...) vocabantur qui semper
^^^unt (...) sed non dant. Sic Antigonus vocabatur, (...) etc. Plut. in Paul.
Aemil.
.

Delay is dangerous. Delay is dangerous


It is Satan's advantage; when you are without God, It is Satan's advantage.
he is diligent to deprave and corrupt; when the body is dead it is meat for
worms; when the house is empty, there is room for lusts and all evil. Mat.
12.45. you may get guests which you can never be rid of.

God may depart again; God may depart again.
It is a great condescension when the great God comes to call upon you to come
to him if you stand off he may turn from inviting to threatening, and from
kind i^reaties to bitter chidings; love will not bear contempt Debet amor
laesus irasci. Qui rogantem contempseras, forsitan audies objurgantem. Hier. ad
Heliodorum. de laud. vit. solit.
; therefore hear (...) he calls: if you take not his offer (...) you accept
not the season, you may provoke him to go, never to return aga^^ but you may
run out your time in a ^^ing life, your sun may be clouded whi^^ you live, God
may leave you to the w^^^ of Satan in a great measure, to but (...) and bind
the soul in chains: therefore be speedy.

3 Put on to purpose. 3. Counsel. Put on in earnest.


With strength.
that you may recover your selves out of the hands of those the have prevailed
against you, and the you may regaine the ancient liber^^ which you have lost,
and have a gracious hand of God with you in all yo^ ways, you may seek and
not find^ except you seek with much conte^^^ on. 1. The heart that has long
go^^ astray will not be easily brought (...) frame, there is such an habitual
dea^nesse upon it, that without much i^ tensnesse of endeavor it will not be^
raised. 2. God will be hardly pursue^ and pressed, he has set all things i^
way of Justice, (...). (...). in
so that he that fig^^^ shall overcome, all degrees of grace and enlargements
of spirit in life and joy come as rewards: he is not in case to receive that is
not in case to seek, for he knows not the worth of his presence, that does
not strongly seek it: many times many lose the commodity, because they will
not give a little more.

With continuance.
sit not down till you have attained; press on, and resolve never to be at
quiet till God return again: he seeks in vain that seeks not till he
find.

CHAP. XXVI. ^ Debet amor laesus irasci. Qui rogante^^^ (...)
Motive to use these counsels; ta^^ from possibility of recovery.
THe second thing is, the argument to persuade; if a man lose (...) health,
friends, riches, liberty, it is (...) hard thing to persuade him to end (...)
vours of recovery, and to run after th^^ that he may bring them home against
but in spiritual things, men are of^^ content to sit down with the losse^
things of greater worth, and it is ha^^ to set the wheels of the soul movi^^
in a serious study to regain them. But (...) such who find themselves deserte^
provoke themselves, to endeavor t^ cure of this evil, and I will propou^ two
things as perswasives.

1 possibility of recovery. 2 necessity of recovery.
First, 1. Motive. It is possible to recover.
it is possible to regain what you have lost, it is a comfort that there (...)
hope, hope adds life to endeavour^^ but despair kills them; sit not dow^ ^ if
all hope were cut off, say not my wound cannot be healed, lay not out your
selves for dead men (...). Soph. in Antig.
, you may recover.

You have power to seek it; though much deadness be upon you, yet if you be
in Christ, Because such have power to seek it.
you have a spirit of life in you, you have a natural life, a rational life,
and a spiritual life; reason does much in many without grace, much more may
you; a Christian is a living thing, and all life has power to do the acts of
life, not to be able to act is to be d^ad Vivere est agere. Sen. at hoc
reprehendit Scalig. de subtilit. exercit. 102.5.
: I have showed before that God never leaves his people wholly; but though he
withdraw his arbitrary influence, yet not the vital; that may cease in a great
measure, which is to the well^^ing of a godly man, but yet neither does that
cease totally, nor does God at any time hold back that which is to life and
being; you have a power, therefore you must blow up the grace of God in (...),
2 Timothy 1.6. (...).
there is fire in the ^embers, (...); Thou have a ^itle strength. Apoc. 3.8.
And as in a natural way, God expects that nature should work, or else he will
not wor^ so in a spiritual way, think not to ^in^ God except you seek him.
Call upon your selves Been responsum fuit Rustico Her cusem invocanti, cum in
limo haerebat plaustrum, manum ro^ae admove, boves stimula, sic Deos invoca.
(...). apud Suid.
, set your minds to con^^deration, commune and plead w^^^ your selves, for
your life is preserv^^ by knowledge, as it is wrought by it; a^^ consideration
is like the drum in (...) Army, to put all in motion; a considerate man is an
active man, apprehensio^^ and thoughts put life into the hear^ therefore stir
up your selves; if yo^ will not help your selves, God w^^ not; but if you will
do what you c^^ God will draw near, James 4.8.

Are capable of reviving.
You are capable of reviving: though^ now deadness be upon you, there is (...)
warnith left Quidui ac cedere possit a quo r^cedere potuit? Bern: in Cant.
Sermon. 82.
, there is great difference between one in a swound, and o^^ dead. Aptius
multo, est sub^^ctum om^e od recipiendum influxum Deisemel, praehabitum, ^uam
eum (...) semper caruit ut titio recens ex^inctus, and adbuc sumigans apt. or
est ad (...) mam. Mau. Ben. Isc. de resurr. li. 1.c. 4.


There is encouragement in this case.
As you have a power, so you have encouragement, you have need to consider
this, for an humble spirit is apt to oppose it self, and to sit down with
hanging hands, feeble knees, weeping eyes, fainting heart, as if it were
incurable, like them, Acts 27.20. In such a dark and stormy season they reckon
themselves among the dead, and think that all hope is gone of getting out of
these deepes; but now consider there is hope.

The life you have is from Christ, Their life is from Christ, and dear to him.
it is dear to him; he laid down his life, that you might live, he has
planted in you that grace you have, and will he not cherish his own work,
which with so much cost and care he has undertaken? the breathings of thy
soul are the breath of his own spirit, and he will own it; if you come to him,
he will in no wise cast you out (...).
Joh. 6.37. That grace you have was given you to fit you for communion with
him; and when you come to him, will he shut the door? he opened the door in
your heart when you shut it, and will he not open his door when you knock? he
loves to do much for his, for he loves them much: you are not straightened in
him, but in your selves; what is the meaning of the Gospel, does not Christ
stand with a fullness in his hand? why do you not look to him with faith who
is as full of goodness as of power? is he not your head? are you not his
members? he feels your pains, and sickness, yea he well knows and that by
experience in his kind, what it is to be without God, and knows there is no
help for you but in himself; your unkindnesses shall not hinder, if you will
be friends with him, he will be a friend to you; the adulteress shall find
acceptance if she return, Ier. 3.1.

There is a promise to such as seek.
You have a promise, why then do you not lift up your heads? you cannot come
before you are called, and what you want is ready for you: he has said he will
give rest to the weary, strength to the weak, light to the blind, health to
the sick; he would not have said these things, but that he would have you
rejoice in hope; when you come to ask the spirit, it is granted before you
ask, Luke 11.13. If you that are evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? Do you think that you have more compassionate love then he? you
think if your children come hungring, crying, fainting for bread, you could
not deny them, how much less will Christ? your love is nothing to his. He is
love. 1 John 4.16. that is to say, he is the fountain of love, he works it
where it is, and that love that you have to him, is from him; and would he be
loved of you, if he did not love you? certainly he was your friend, before he
made you his friend. 1 John 4.19. So then believe, and God is ready, good hangs
in the promise like ripe fruit, if you shake the tree Verba cupressis similia,
dici solet de promissis speciosis quidem, sed f ^llentibus. apud Caelium. l.
25. c. 2.
the fruit will fall; turn this promise into prayer, plead with God in his
own language, make his bond thy petition, live upon his word; if you believe
it shall be well; if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, those
mountains that lie upon you shall be removed; when God deals with us by way
of promise he deals the sweetest way, for what would you expect but his good
will? and how would you know his good will but by his word? by the promise you
have God not inclining and yielding, but determining, binding himself: by this
ladder climb up, and bow thy soul before him, upon the pillars of faith,
which does so surely interest thee in thy God: he proclaims and makes heaven
and earth his witnesses that he is yours, he has given such power to faith,
that he that believes sits upon the throne with Christ, Apoc. 3.21. and is made
Lord of all the treasures of the kingdom, All is yours. 1 Cor. 3.22. Yea, God
has so tied himself to his people, that he has not only said ask, seek,
pray, but command me. Esaias 45.11.

You have experience; Experience.
you are ready to say as Gideon, what sign do thou give me? still the heart
cries for security, and is hardly satisfied: have you not signs? what is the
word but a sign of his favor? what is the Sacrament but a sign and seal of
his love? what is the grace you have but a sign, and earnest of his love? What
are all the Saints but signs, a cloud of witnesses? Esaias 43.10, 12. Chap. 44.
8. Others.
How many cripples have you seen walking and leaping? how many sick healed? how
many dead raised? and why do you think he should be harder to you then to
all? what think you that he has some special quarrel to you? are you
alone, and have you none like you in sin? what if it were so, yet is not all
the sins of all the Saints more then yours? cannot he pardon thy personal debt
that has sealed a discharge to so many thousands? it matters not how much thou
owe, a mountain is as easily covered in the sea as a molehill.

Have not you your selves experience? Your own.
bethink your selves, have you not often been refreshed by his hand? did you
never find your bones out, and your soul sick till now? and who helped you?
when you came grovelling in the dust, with your backs bowing under pressures,
did he not lift up thy soul with a renewed strength? when you came with yokes
upon your necks, irons on your hands, and feet like poor captived slaves, did
he not hear you when you cried? when you had but a little room to peep at,
and could out of a close, stinking, dark dungeon see but little of heaven, when
your souls were almost among the dead, and you had but so much life, as to cry
Lord help me, did he not help? Nay, how often unsought has he come to you?
When Pharaoh and his taskmasters made your souls to serve, you did not send up
the groans and cries that Israel did, yet he came and led you out, not into
the wilderness, but unto Canaan, and gave you liberty, peace, and the good
things of the land, when you had run in a sort out of all; you came not as the
Prodigal to his father, but he came to you, and renewed your stock, and filled
your becalmed souls with fresh gales of grace; And now after all this, when
he has been such a friend, so faithful, such a father, so merciful, will
you say there is no hope? No, rather say, if new tentations arise, and new
lusts that break in and spoil, say as David, The Lord that delivered me out of
the pawe of the Lion, and out of the pawe of the Bear, he will deliver me out
of the hand of this Philistim. 1 Samuel 17.37. and as the Apostle, We had the
sentence (...).
of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God
which raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver us, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us (...). Lubin. (...) l.
1.
. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.

CHAP. XXVII. Motives to seek recovery, taken from necessity.
SEcondly, 2. Motive. It is not to be rested in.
as your recovery is possible, so when you feel a decay of spiritual life,
this is no state to berested in; for it is sinful. for it is hurtful.


1 It is sinful. 1. Because it is sinful.


what becomes of that precious talent, Talents lie dead.
and trust of worth which lies in your hands? does it not lie dead by you?

Where are you in such a case, Where are you?
are you not sleeping in Meshek and in the tents of wickedness? is not thy
heart gone out from the presence of the Lord? are not other Lords in Christ's
throne? is not thy way a way of spiritual whoredom, robbery, disloyalty, etc?
are not other gods set up in the temple of the living God? are not you found
with Saul against David? are you not departed and gone afar off?

Either you know that it is thus or ^it; if not, then what stupidnesse, If you
know not your case,
what carelessness, not to miss him who is your Lord, your husband, your
father, your life? if yea, then to rest without him, is to despise him highly;
what do you but choose Egypt and her calves, before Canaan and the arc, and
presence of the Lord? What do you but set God, his Son, his Spirit in the
dust, to be trampled upon by every vanity, and every base lust? to cast off the
yoke of Christ, to serve the beast^; yea, to cast down the crown of Christ,
and to make his throne the footstool of his enemies?

2 It is hurtful, Secondly, it is hurtful.
and it must needs be hurtful that is sinful.

it cuts off the comfort of the soul; Comfort cut off.
^he Sun shines not bright when the air ^s full of clouds, and the Spirit is
not a comforting spirit, where it is not a quick^ing spirit; you may enjoy for
a time some contentment in the creature, but ^hen these trees shall wither,
when these fountains shall cease, or be imbitered, then what will you do? you
cannot find comfort in God, w^^ you are far from him.

All things are dead when you (...) dead: All things dead. Nil misere vivit me
moriente mihi.
a dead man loses with himse^^ all things, and all things die to h^^ when he
dies in himself.

ceptive and active power is weak^^ you cannot so well comply with (...) means
of life, there is a great unsut^nesse; as water that is frozen is no^ capable
of impression, nor so ap^^ move as before, a weak man can^ live upon his food,
as he was wo^^ the wheels of a Clock that are ^l^ged with dust cannot run
well; th^^ must be some fitness in the recipien^ join with the agent; wet
wood (...) not enkindle so soon as dry woo^^ living heart will find that to be
effe^^ all, which a dead heart finds but (...) shadow; those promises, those
^^cies, those duties, those though^ which raise others with much po^^ are but
as the blasts of wind upon (...) rocks to you, those means which (...) as the
waters of Nilus, which ma^^ ^^e land rich in fruits, are to you but as ^inter
showers, which bring up no^^ing.

The power of God is the life of all, though you had as much life as an Angel,
and had the food of Angels, yet except God be in it, you will not thrive: the
ordinances are called the power of God. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.24. because they
are the instruments of his ^ower: now we know the power of the ^nstrument
depends upon the agent; the plough is fit to cut the ground, but the skill and
strength of the husbandman must guide and move it: if the Angel of Gods
presence move not in these waters, they will not heal; All means are nothing,
it is God that gives the increase. 1 Cor. 3.7. therefore there is no safe
resting in such a state without God.

heart grows worse and ^orse: The heart grows worse.
as the dead body grows more and more corrupt; this should awaken you; if you
get not, you lose.

Consider 1. What a change this is: you did converse with God, and now with
devils, you were Christ's freemer, now drudges to Satan and your lust^ you had
Eagles wings to soar alo^^ and now you are like the Serpent that creeps on his
belly and licks the dust thy soul was beautiful as a pleasan^ palace for the
King of kings, and no^^ it is a dungeon of darkness, a sepulchre^ a prison, a
den of unclean spirits; (...) the vast difference that is betwixt a^ man
enjoying God, and a man forsaken; and to this consider, that it growe^^ worse
and worse, your bondage en^ creaseth, your lusts grow, the palla^^ grows more
ruinous, the dungeo^ darker the den fuller, all goes downe^ ward, worse and
worse.

2 Your case grows more incurable (...) the heart grows harder, the min^^
blinder; Satan is ever working, he lo^seth no time, and you may be carried out
so far into an ocean of sins, and miseries, that it will be hard recovering
land again; the continuance of sin leaves so deep a dye, as sometimes will
not out till death; when the temple was sorely wasted and spoiled and lay ^^ng
in ruins, though in time it was built up again, yet the second temple was not
like the first; therefore you hurt your selves much by carelesnes: stir up and
awaken your selves, be not willingly worse and worse, suffer not that to abide,
which when it has entrenched it self, will not without much difficulty be
beaten out again, and when you have wearied your selves, it may be you will
not be able to raise your spirits to their old vigor; diseases hanging long,
leave often such impression, that nature seldom gets up: the fire of the
second temple some Jews say was not like the fire in the first Ignis super
altar cubabat sicut (...),quia vis ejus extincta erat, at in priore templo,
erat igni^ ist^ sicut le^. C^naeus de rep. Hebr^ l. 1. c. 14.
.

You may have a worse time to seek unto God then now: if age, if sickness,
You may have worse times for seeking of God.
if captivity, if poverty, if any misery come, then it will be an ill time to
find thy heart so out of frame to have banks to mend, when you have less
time, esse help, less strength, and when also he winds are high and the seas
un quiet breaking in upon you, is to be taken i^ an ill time: consider this,
you must be better ere you dye, you must build u^ the ruinous house within; if
you neglect these times of rest, you may be forced to do it in a hard time,
when you must work by day, and watch by night, carry a tool in one hand, and a
weapon (...) the other; if you have a journey (...) take, you will take the
fittest season, now is your summer, walk in the ligh^ while you have it; now
you have the help of strength, health, friends, ordinances, prosperous estate;
you will find when these are gone it will be a sa^ thing to have this work to
do.

God will fetch you in, God will fetch you in if you come not.
if you come not, he will shake thy soul with fears, and drop bitterness
into thy spirit, o^ send outward afflictions upon thee to visit thy
carelessness upon thee. Physicians (they say) in the cure of the Lethargy, do
sometimes put the patient into a feavour; when Ephesus lay in such a stupefied
condition, Christ came with a sharp medicine, I will come unto thee quickly, and
fight against thee, etc. Apoc. 2.4, 5. afflictions will stir you: when God
lay^th on the rod, you will feel that it was a bitter thing to neglect him,
then your heavy eyed and sleeping conscience shall hit you home, and as the
young Lions roar and yell, so shall the thoughts of your hearts fill you with a
cry like unto that of the Propher, Have thou not procured this unto thy self in
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way? Jer.
2.17. and now it will put you in mind of running to your pleasures and sinful
vanities, as the Prophet does; Now (says he) what have thou to do in the way
of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor; or what have thou to do in the way of
Assyria, to drink the waters of the river? thine own wickedness shall correct
thee, and thy backstidings shall reprove thee Peccatum est spiritui sancto
locus quasi dialecticus, and medium ad conclusionem contra peccantem. Vid.
Paris. de libel. divin. c. 25.
: know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that his fear is not in thee. ver. 18, 19. My
brethren, if the word will not, the rod must; learn then to avoid blows; if
counsel draw you, you ^ay escape, but the rod is for the back of fools; if
you come not in, expe^ some sad messenger; God will do^^^ Absalom with Ioab,
who set fire on i^ corn, because he came not when he sent for him. 2 Samuel
14.29, 30, 3^ Therefore while the season is calne put forth, and seek to regain
what you have lost.

6 God is not well pleased when he^ witholdeth himself; when he estrargeth
himself, and is not with you, it is a sign that he is angry. Remember those
words of Moses, Numb. 14.4, 42, 43. When you go to fight against the
Canaanites and Amalekites, your lusts and tentations; you cannot prosper.
Because ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with
yo^. And how does the Church bewail the displeasure of God against her? Thou
have cast us off and put us to sham, and go not forth with our armies. Psalm.
44.9. It is true, that sometimes out of his sovereignty and absolute dominion^
he may do this, but yet the thing in i^ self is a sign of disfavour,
therefore i^ is not safe to abide in such a case; le^ then your relation to
him, the knowledge of his power, the sweetness of his favor, your love to
him, the kindness which he has showed you, put you upon a study of
reconcilement, that you may enjoy your former happiness, and his ancient
loving kindness.

According to the presence of God with you, 3. Motive. As Gods presence with
you is, so is your life.
the proportion and measure of spiritual life will be; as the more the plants
have of the Sun, the more they thrive. All the efficacy of ordinances, and all
the activity of grace depends upon this: as the house of Obed-Edom was blessed
and all that pertained to him when the Arc the signs of Gods presence was
with him, 2 Samuel 6.11, 12. so great prosperity of soul is there where God has
his abode, and where he puts forth his power and spreads his quickening virtue
upon the soul: were it not an happiness to be enriched in grace, and to have
your grain of mustard seed growing up unto a tall tree? Awaken your selves and
fall to thinking of this matter, We should not be content with little.
why are you willing to live so poorly that might live like Princes? and to
creep with the snaile, when you might mount as Eagles? let me suggest a few
incentives to quicken your spirits.

have but little, you can do but little, Because if you have but little, you
can do but little.
for nothing can exceed the sphere and compass of its ability; much grace
makes strong to work, and abundant in working; a full spring makes a full
stream, much grace gives much willingness, and as your willingness is, so is
your strength; I say not that strength and willingness are always equal, for I
know a godly man's will is beyond his power, and he cannot do what he would.
Gal. 5.17. but yet by how much the more the heart is prepared, by so much the
more it is enabled; the greatest part of the impotency and deadness of
unregenerate men is this, that they are unwilling and averse unto God, and
disaffection binds them as in chains, that they cannot walk with God; and
the strength of a godly man lies most in his will: what is the strength of
lusts in others, but the will? what is the strength and courage of a soldier
but a strong will? what is the bounty of a liberal man but a large will to do
good? This will be then your advantage, you will do more when you have more,
and the more you do, the greater will your reward be; He that sows sparingly
shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully,
2 Cor. 9.6. Every man has a large field to sow in, for the world is as a field
to every man; therefore get much into your garners, that you may now sow much,
and reap much when the harvest comes.

Your works will be more perfect and complete, if you have much; Your works
will be more perfect.
every thing works as it is; there is a great difference betwixt the work of
a child, and of a man; When I was a child I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I thought as a child, but when, etc. 1 Cor. 13.11. Actions are the
births of habits; and the child will carry the likeness of the Father; if the
spring be affected with an ill quality, so will the streams also; a man that
has but little of his trade and art, cannot make complete work, but his work
will carry a print of the weakness of his skill. A famous Painter coming to
his friends house, and not meeting with him, would not leave his name, but with
his pencill drew a line, and bad the servant show his master the line, and when
he came home and saw it, he knew whose hand it was. The Apostle took care to
raise up the bounty of the Corinthians to such a height, that something might
be done that might be excellent and honorable, 2 Cor. 9.5. So that all that
you do will be more mature and excellent: by how much the more grace you have,
and the more perfect your actions are, the better will your reward be, they
shall have more praise with God: and your desire should be, that all be done
exactly. Perfectum esse nolle delinquere est. Hieron. Epist. 1. de vit. solit.
laud.


Less sweet.
The more grace is raised in you the sweeter will your way be; and that,

greater agreement between your spirits and your work, and rule; what is the
cause of that weariness in duty Lassitudo est deficientia virtutis moventis.
Scalig. de subtle. exercit. 76.4.
, and backwardness to it, but a disproportion between you and it? when your
hearts are more prepared you will be as a smooth bowl in a smooth way which
runs with much ease and few rubbes.

2. There is a sweetness in doing good, and the more you are able to do the
more sweetness you have; the deeper you dig, the more treasure you shall
find; every action spiritually performed casts a reward upon the soul, it
is like the pressing of grapes, his labor drops in that which is better than
wine: the ways of God are as beds of spices, the more you walk in them, the
more they requite you with sweet delights and inward refreshments; all the
ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. Here motion is rest,
as in the heavens, their perfection is their motion; Gods ways are large, the
soul is most free and at greatest liberty in them. Libertas voluntatis est
amplitudo etc. Gibieuf. de libert. Dei and creaturae l. 1. c. 1. Iniquitas
arcta est, sola innocentia lata est. Aug apud eund.


less grace the more corruptions; this is the nature of contraries which admit
no middle thing, More corruptions.
to partake of either, that where one is not, there the other is, and the loss
of one, the more of the other, as the less light in the air, the more
darkness; now so far you are miserable as you are sinful; it is not
immunity from calamities, but from sin which makes happy: and what calamity
is not upon him that has many and strong corruptions? think of all evils in
the world, and you shall find them meeting in such a one; his lusts are all
evils, and contain all in their bowels, fears, sorrows, wants, wars,
chains, wastings, sickness, etc.

brings in more comfort, Much grace brings much comfort.
little grace will bring but little joy.

The soul is not so capable; much grace makes capacious; a little vessel
cannot receive much; It makes the soul capacious.
a small candle cannot give much light: The same promises are sweetest to the
heart that has most of God; the same food is sweeter to a healthful strong
man, than to a sickly, weak man; the godly here have the same objective
happiness with the Saints in heaven, but not the same subjective happiness;
they are more happy in heaven, because they are more capacious and take in more
of God.

the less evidence of truth, and of Gods favor; as a letter written in small
and imperfect letters is not so legible as that which is written with more full
characters; It gives more evidence.
you will be troubled to spell Gods love out of weak and low graces; what is
grace but a seal and stamp of God upon a man? the more visible the seal is,
the more assurance it yields; when a plant is in the sprout, you can hardly
discern what it is; but when it rises up into a tree, it shows it self
fully: gold in the Oar cannot be discerned by every eye; but when the earth
and dross is taken away, then it is apparent; in a cloudy night the little
stars are hid, but the greater are more easily seen.

Comfort is usually given as a reward; they that are very holy, Comfort is the
reward of grace.
and walk much with God, in much love and heavenly mindedness, do usually
exceed others in comfort; Acts 9.31. They being edified walked in the fear of
the Lord, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost. Though sometimes the best and
chief of the Saints come short in comforts, yet I say, that they have cause
more than others, and it is by accident that they rejoycenot; either they mind
not what they have received, or they are under a dark cloud of unbelief,
which cuts off the light of joy from them; but whose fault is it? the promise
lies fair for them, and they have a greater advantage to believe than others,
because with the promise they have a pledge.

this end left defective, The end of what you have is to put you to seek more.
that laboring with meekness you might seek continually for more: God has
so ordered the conditions of his people, that he will have them live in a
perpetual dependence, and come daily to the throne of grace for alms; and
more encourage your selves, for God is on the giving hand, the days of the
gospel are dole-dayes, he has reserved better things for his people now, than
he gave in former days; the Church of the Jews was a child in Minority, and
had less, Gal. 4.1. But in these times he promised to pour out his spirit
more abundantly, Joel 3.28. Which though it was literally fulfilled, and more
eminently in the coming of the Holy Ghost upon them, Acts 2.17. yet it extends
it self unto all the Church unto the end, Acts 2.39. So the Apostle
acknowledges an abundance of grace upon the godly afterward. 2 Cor. 8.7.
Ephesians. 1.8. Tit. 3.6. These times are also times of affliction and trouble, and
God is wont in such times to give much of himself, therefore seek to abound,
and to this end, labor to recover your selves, and to gain the good presence
of God with you, which you have lost.

CHAP. XXVIII. Two directions how to seek recovery.
NOw I come to the third thing propounded in the way of cure, Directions to
further your endeavors of recovering your loss.

quicken your desires after God, for desires will yield a twofold advantage.
Quicken desires after God. For
1. The promise is full to such as (...) sire much. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for the shall be filled (...).
. Mat. 5.6. It is not every velleity and cold wish which entitles (...) this
promise, every weak appetite and desire of meat and drink is not hu^gring,
and thirsting; when you are impatient, and long much after him, then you shall
be filled; (...).
the word is borrowed from feeding or foddering of cattle, and it imports
this, that though now you are put to graze upon the dry and barren mountains,
yet if you long after more, then the faithful shepherd of Israel that leads
Joseph, like a flock will put you into green pastures, and feed and fill you by
the waters of rest; Gods band is shut, because your hearts are shut; has he
not said, Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it? the first grace is given
without precedent desires, God stound of them that seek him not; but this grace
that we speak of, is given to them that seek it.

Desires, when they are high beget endeavors like themselves, They beget
endeavors.
strong and vigorous; and the more you labor, the more you will get; therefore
blow up your desires by the bellows of meditation, sit down and consider what
it is to enjoy God, and what to want him; these thoughts if they abide, will
fire you out of the bed of sloth and sleep in which you lie.

2 Bewail your selves and your state before God, sit down and mourn: Direct.
2. Bewail 1. your loss.
mourn I say, for 1 your loss, for 2 the cause.


1 Bewail your loss, take up a lamentation, and say Vis. Parisiens. de
Rhetor. divin. c. 26.
, woe is me, for my God, my life is departed from me, and how am I changed? I
was as the tree plant by the rivers side, spreading and fairishing, and my
fruits were fair (...) full, but alas, now I am become (...) tree in the
desert, withering and shall (...) both fruits and leaves. My sweet Sp^^^ is
turned into a sad Autumn; my first day is were my best days, and my last days
at my worst days; I was filled with li^^^ and life, but now my sight is
dimm^d, my strength is wasted; time was wh^^ faith had life in me, and I had
life by (...), but now oh woeful over-spreading (...) clouds of darkness, and
incredulity (...) my pleasant days of life and luster at fled away, and the
bonds of death ha^^ taken hold of me; my soul was the temple and throne of
Christ, and I received daily oracles from his moun^, but now I am the
habitation and Region of vanity and darkness: what sweetness did I find in
flights aloft, when it was my greatest solace to be with God (...) but now I
that was as a star in heaven am fallen into deeps of vanity, and an become to
my self as gall and wormwood; my soul was an enclosed garden, and the
chiefest of ten thousands did walk in the shadow of the trees, and was
delighted in their fruits, but now the fence is down, my love is gone, the
beasts break in, and Sharon is become a desert; time was when the thoughts of
sin did pierce me, and the remembrance of God lift me up to the third heavens,
but now my heart has lost its fence, the things that I know have not their
ancient strength, my tears which were as pleasant waters to my taste, which I
could pour out before my God are gone; that melting of heart which was my joy
is vanished, my heart is frozen, the spring is stopped, the heart of flesh is
become a heart of stone; that blessed society of graces, those holy desires,
those heavenly dispositions which did meet in a happy conjunction in my soul,
seem now scattered, and to lie in chains, whiles the troops of hell do hold
all in possession; my soul that did walk with an heavenly guard of divine
graces, lies now like Daniel in the den among devouring Lions; oh how was I
wont to meet God? and what communion had I one (...) with him? but now he hides
himself and will not come at me; I pray an^ he hears not, I hearken after him
but he speaks not, I call but he answers not, oh those golden days, will
they never more return? I was wont to be feasted in my fathers house, the
fatted calfe was killed, and the ring, and the best garments were put upon me,
but now I am forsaken, and not owned; I go hungry and naked, and feed among the
hogs; and in this I am more miserable then they, because I was a son, (...) is
a misery to have been happy: Lord if I had never known thee, I could have
lived without thee, but this is my misery, not so much that I am without thee,
as that I have lost thee Miserius est perdidisse quam omnino non accepisse.
Tertul. de poenit.
: many are well without thee, because they never enjoyed thee; the children of
beggars and slaves count it not their misery that they are not Princes, but it
is a bitter evil when the children of Princes shall become beggars.

Thus then betake thy self to these sad thoughts, make thy closet an house of
mourning, breath out thy sighs, send forth thy groans, pour out thy tears,
rend thine heart, cast up thy weeping eyes, with the sad complaints of a
bleeding soul to thine ancient friend; thou may prevail upon him; though he
have forsaken thee, yet he has not forgotten thee, he has not forgotten
himself, and all the kindness that he has showed thee; he cannot hold from
coming, when thou can not hold from calling; the melting of thy heart
causes the earning of his bowels: can the mother forbear when the child
cries? God will not deny mercy to the mourners. Blessed are the mourners, for
they shall be comforted. Mat. 5.4.

In two Cases especially God will not deny mercy, God will not deny mercy to
mourners.
when the sorrow of his people is great, ingenuous.

1 When the sorrows of his people are great, First, when sorrows are great.
then his compassions are drawn out; when the woman came with a troubled
spirit, pouring out tears upon the feet of Christ, and wiping them with the
hair of her head, the Christ poured out comfort upon her, and sent her away
with the pardon of all her sins. Luke 7. And when Zion sa^ in the dust, melting
her self in heaviness, and crying, My God has forsaken me, my God has
forgotten me: when she was tossed and afflicted and not comforted then God came
in and opened a well in the desert, and in the deeps of her trouble did no
longer conceal himself, but brake out in a most gracious protestation of his
love; Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should (...) have
compassion on the fruit of her womb, yet will I not forget thee: Behold, I
have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before
me. Esaias 49.14, 15. The words are a strong expression of his dear and
faithful affection, the mothers affections are dear and tender, so are mine;
the mother loves her child because it is the fruit of her womb; I also have
begotten thee, and thou art my child: the mother is most tender to the sucking
child which cannot help it self; if it cry, she cannot hold, you also are
such before me; the mother may possibly forget, but I will not, you are always
in my eye, and if I cannot forget my self I cannot forget you, for you are
engraven and imprinted in my hand: Thus God has comforted his people, and will
have mercy upon his afflicted. Esaias 49.13. He comfort those that are cast
down. 2 Cor. 7.6. When the heart mournes much, God will show himself.

end of sorrow is not to afflict, but to profit, not to cast down only, The
end of sorrow is not affliction, but healing.
but also to raise up; when God casts sorrows upon the wicked, his end is to
afflict and to punish, and their sorrows do attain their end, when they lie
like loads oppressing their spirits; but that which is a curse to them is a
cure to the godly, their mourning is but sowing in tears to reap enjoy; sorrow
in the spirits of such is like the rain upon the grass, it puts the soul
into a flourish, it makes it yielding and tractable, as wax when it is softened
will easily receive impressions, and metals dissolved are apt to be drawn out
and to be molded as you would have them. Sorrow is better than laughter, for
by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. Eccles. 7.3. the
sad looks of others has a natural force to work seriousness, and
consideration in us, much more when our own hearts are full; Ahab himself
would do much in a pensive fit, and Manasseh his monstrous spirit was tamed by
sorrow. God brought upon him the Assyrian, and he bound him with fetters and
carried him to Babylon, and when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord
his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed
unto him. 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. You see the sweet fruit of this bitter root, and
what was the issue? God was entreated of him and heard his supplication, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. ver. 13.

It makes a fit object of mercy.
the fitter object of mercy; mercy is for the miserable, and none more
miserable then such as mourn in the loss of communion with God, this wound is
the deepest and most bleeding of all wounds, the soul in such a case has no
help in all the world, all things yield not more then a drop of water upon
Dives his tongue: Look now upon the nature of God, and you shall see him full
of mercy; upon the promises, they also are full of mercy; upon the ways of
God, they also are full of mercy; therefore if you clothe your selves with the
garments of heaviness, and can come before God with spirits much lamenting
after him, he will appear to you, He will revive the spirit of the humble
(...). Chrysostom.
, Esaias 57.15.

3 Much sorrow will put upon strong pursuites after God, it will make you full
and strong in prayers; and the power of prayer is great with God, it makes the
soul to run to Christ, and to improve all the hope, and faith and interest
that it has in him, and they that seek the Father in the Son, shall find him.

4 Now God will be welcome, when the soul is bitten with his absence; God
leaves his people because they slight him, but when they have learned to prize
him, now he will come; no place fits him but the highest, and now God is lift
up when the heart in the presence of all things which were delightful and
precious, pines after him; love is seen in sorrow; we grieve much in the loss
of that we love much.

2. Then sorrow prevails with God, Secondly, when it is ingenuous.
when it is ingenuous.

When for the cause, not loss only.
When not only for the loss but for the cause; when you can mourn, not only
that you are Deserted, but because you have sinned; when you can grieve much
that you have procured this evil.

When not only for sadness, but also for the sinfulness of the loss.
When your sorrow is not only because of the misery of such a state, but also
for the sinfulness; there must needs be many fears and great anxieties in
such a soul as sees it self left of God; but a holy heart will grieve for
this, not only that it is fallen into such misery, but also and especially
that sin has regained strength, that the life and luster of holiness is so
weakened; Grace has a great beauty in the eye of him that has it (...). Naz.
orat. 5.6
, and sin carries in it the greatest deformity and misery unto him, so that
such a one minds not so much his ease as his cure; yea his heart is carried in
such strong desires after God, that it overlookes its suffering; weeping is no
burden, and so that he might recover his loss, though it come through a
storm of fears, cares, griefs, he would count himself happy; another man
who has no greater thing to fear or desire then hell and heaven, dwells upon
his fears when he is afraid, and is held in them, and if he could be
delivered from his fears, he would be at rest; but a godly man though he feel
his troubles, yet would he not count his case happier, if these storms were
down, but he will mourn still till he be restored to his former life in God;
David was not satisfied till a new heart was created in him, and a right spirit
renewed. Psalm. 51.10, 11.

When not for loss of comfort only, but of God also.
When not only for the loss of the comfort and sweetness in a holy converse
with God, but for the loss of God himself; a child has much comfort and
relief from his father, but when his father is gone, he does not only lament
his loss of comfort, but his loss of his father; so the wife more laments the
loss of her husband, then of her good by him; when a man sees what he has
lost, he cannot but mourn to think what days he had when he lived under the
wing of his gracious father, but yet all the comforts that ever he had or hoped
for, do not lie so heavy as God himself: For to a godly man all comforts, and
graces and all good that he receives does serve to lead his heart to, and to
fix it in God; God has his end here, for he sends out these but as Joseph
sent Chariots to bring his father and brethren to him, all these things are but
conveyances, and servants employed betwixt God and his people to invite and
draw their hearts to himself; and the Saints do not rest in these, they do
not match with the handmaides; the fruits of Gods love are sweet, When for
loss, not only as bitter, but as a sign of Gods displeasure
and because they are sweet, therefore God is precious, Christ is precious to
them that believe. 1 Pet. 2.7.

sorrow is not only for the loss, as it is your evil, but also as it
betokens displeasure in God; a true friend is grieved when his friend leaves
him and casts him off, not only for his own great loss, but for his friends
anger, he can as well be without his friend as without his love, and is as
loath his friend should be displeased, as himself endammaged.

When because by this loss, you are disabled to serve him.
When your sorrow is that you have less strength to serve him; grace has a
great recompense in it self, but can you grieve that by bringing your selves
into this state of deadness, you have lived to little honor to your God, When
you can submit to all terms of reconcilement.
and are not now able to do much for him? this is ingenuous sorrow.

you can gladly submit to all conditions of reconcilement and of restoration;
though God require much, or impose much, yet you count all nothing in
comparison of God; can you say, Lord command me, chide, rebuke, smite, do what
thou will (...) inquit Themistocles Eurybiadi plagasque minanti dum sanum in
praelio co^silium decerit. Plut.
, though it be through a desert, yea through a Sea of straits and troubles, yet
I am content to go, so I may arrive at last at my desired end; if I may have
thy good presence it shall be enough; if thou will come to me, if I may come to
thee, every way shall be sweet; though I go through thorns and briars, to the
raking of my flesh, and the effusion of my blood, yet this shall be nothing to
me, if I may enjoy my God who is all in all to me.

When your sorrow is ingenuous, then you will find God, yea indeed he has
found much, whose frozen heart begins to thawe, and to dissolve it self in
showers of tears for the return of God unto his deserted soul; the Lord has
looked upon thee, if with Peter thou weep bitterly Tunc peccator visitatur a
Domino, quando compungitur ad lacrymas: nam et Petrus, tunc flevit quando in
eum Christus respexit. Bern. de mod. been viv. ser. 10.
.

Ephesus languishing in a like disease; I have somewhat against thee, Bewail
the cause of the loss.
because thou have left thy first love, remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent. Apoc. 2.4, 5.

Quest. Whether the substraction of the quickening influences of the spirit be
always for sin.

Answ. 1. Sometimes it is like he does it not because his people have sinned,
but for higher ends; as Peter was left to be strangely foiled with fears of
suffering, falling exceedingly beneath his former spirit and resolution, yet
not for any particular sin of his, but as it is likely, that he might see how
unable he was of himself, that so all the glory of his future heroic acts and
sufferings might come not to himself, but unto Christ; and so Paul was
buffetted that he might not be exalted; God let loose Satan, not to punish, but
to prevent his sin. 2 Cor. 10. so the case stood with the blind man. John 9.3.

There is also cause in us, though God make it not a cause to himself and to
his action, therefore your way is to consider your ways.

usually does it for sin; and if you search the Scriptures, they testify that
sin is the usual spring of this evil: Sin separates betwixt us. Esaias 59.2. he
bath threatened, If we forsake him he will forsake us. 2 Chronicles. 15.3.

Quest. How a man may. find out what sin is the cause?

Answ. First, sometimes the cause, (...) visible, and a man can scarce look
besides it. 1. When upon some particula^ gross failing, a damp has fallen
upon him; in such a case God points at the sin, and discovers the cause of his
displeasure by this sudden punishment inflicted on him; Scriptures afford man^
instances of discovering the sin by the time of the punishment.

2 It may be there has been an eminent neglect of those means by which life
was upheld, and gross carelessness in omission, or palpable remissness is
duties, vanity of mind, sinful affections, and other evils connived at have
so broken in, that a man may plainly se^ the time when his fall began, and when
his sun began to set.

Secondly, Upon consideration, (...) though the cause be not transparent, i^
may be discovered, and for help in this I will propound four rules.

1 Pursue your loss, and sad condition to the birth of it; consider how long
this night of darkness has been upon you; look back to the days in which you
were happy in a living communion with God; if a man have lost a thing, he
bethinkes himself when he had it, and where, and so as much as may be,
pursues his loss to the very time and place. It may be when you come to this,
you will have much light to find out how you lost your treasure; God goes not
away upon small offenses, you will by searching find the gap that let in these
floods.

2 Consider, what things have been most pressed by God from time to time upon
you; for though the whole law, and all righteousness be enjoined to all, yet
there are some things more especially pressed: so Iosuah was much pressed to
courage, so much, as if it had been his only task. Be strong and of a good
courage, only be thou strong and very couragiou^. Josh. 1.6, 7, 9. The
Israelites were mightily among other things, called on to take heed of
forgetting God, and what he had done, when they should possess the land of
promise, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Only take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently,
least tho^ forget, etc. Chap. 8.2, 5, 10, 11, 14, 18. And after their return
from Babylon some things especially were again urged, as not to mix
themselves with the heathen, which things Ezra and Neh: labored much in; and
to build the temple, which the Prophet Haggai again and again enforces, etc.
So every Christian according to his station, temper, measure of gifts and
graces, relation, age, course, etc. is put upon some things in a special
manner: hear what the spirit says, the voice calls upon you it may be, for
more humiliation, or more meditation, or more thankfulness, prayer, reading,
zeal, mortification of particular lusts: now if you have been deaf to these
calls; it is like here grew the difference betwixt God and you; for here is
great disobedience, when a man sin; against such strong and continued calls; a
friend takes it ill, when he is often denied and long put off in a thing much
desired, and strongly requested.

3 Listen to conscience, for that is Gods deputy, and it will tell you what it
is that God takes ill at your hands; observe at what door conscience lays
this sad birth, this miserable plight of soul which you are in, for that is
like to be the Father; as God witnesses with our spirits, so usually he
chides with them, at least he never chides without them, but when he will
rebuke he sets conscience to do it; hear then its errands, and receive its
charge: it may be it will say, this is thy pride, or thy slightness in duties,
thy neglect of God and Christ, thy harbored lusts, etc.

I deny not but Conscience may err, and does often, charging that as sin which
is no sin, or making sin greater then it is, or accusing a man of that which he
is not guilty of, or judging and condemning when the sin is pardoned, therefore
I add.

4 Pray the Lord to show you wherein you have offended: it was Elihu his
counsel to Job in his sad case, Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have
borne chastisement, I will not offend any more; that which I see not teach thou
me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Job 34.31, 32. And when you
are convinced of the evil of your ways then look on them and mourn over them
what a thing is this, that I should provoke him to leave me, in whose presence
I have had such light, such life, such strength, such liberty, such peace such
victories, such treasures, such joys? Hear oh ye heavens, for I have
committed two great evils, I have forsaken the fountain of living waters, an^
have dug to my self cisterns, broken cisterns that hold no water. Jer.
2.12. Oh wretch that I am, that that precious communion which I had with my God
was of no more esteem with me; that those sweet streams of comfort which I now
want, but then had from the well of life, those quickening beams from the Sun
of righteousness, those refreshing, those ravishing sights and tastes of Jesus
Christ, those pleasant banquet^ which I had in the ordinances and i^ duties,
those blessed embraces of the everlasting arms of the Lord my God, were of so
low account with me, that I should lose them by my folly; I have been careful
to keep my name, my state, my health, yea my vanities, but I have not been
careful to keep my God; that life and comfort of the Spirit which Christ
purchased with his blood, I, like profane Esau, have sold for naught.

Woe is me, that the Spirit of Jesus Christ should come in mercy to make his
abode with me, and yet has no better entertainment. I set the doors open that
he might depart, yea by entertainning lusts and vanities, I have made him weary
of his dwelling, and he is gone in anger, that came in love; Lysimachus, (...).
Plut. Apophth. and de sanitate tuenda.
that which I begged with tears, and enjoyed with comfort, I have lost for
sin; oh what have I done against my God? yea, what against my self? what
madness was this, to gain my lusts, and lose my God? like that great Commander
who sold himself for a draught of water.

Thus break open the rountains within, and add sorrow to sorrow, drink your
tears like water, and mourn and mourn again; say, oh my folly, that have lost
that for want of care, which now^ would redeem with my blood; bu^ when once
God is gone, who can te^ me when he will return again? he^ goes from many
and takes leave for ever; and now if I go long in heaviness, I may thank my
self; if my soul be spoiled with long hostilities, and tyrannies of the power
of darkness, if my sins rage like the Sea, if I walk a^ a shadow of death, my
own hand has brought all this upon me; for God left not me, till I left him
Tu me non deseris, nisi prius ego te deseram. Aug. in Solilo. cap. 14.
.

Yea further, cause the waters of sorrow to rise yet higher, look upon former
times, and say, what was I then? what am I now? my silver is become dross,
take up the lamentation of the Church, and make it yours. How is the gold
become dim, how is the most fine gold changed? the stones of the Sanctuary
are poured out in the top of every street, the precious sons of Zion,
comparable to fine gold, how are they as earthen pitchers, the work of the
hands of the potter? they that fed delicately are desolate in the streets,
they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils; her Nazarites were purer
then snow, they were whiter then milk, they were more ruddy then Rubies, their
polishing was of Sapphire, but now their visage is darker then blackness; their
skin cleaves to their bones, it is withered, it is become like a stick; we are
orphans and father less, our necks are under persecution, and we have no rest,
servants have ruled over us, and there is none that does deliver us out of
their hands, the joy of our heart is ceased, our dancing is turned into
mourning, the crown is fallen from our heads; woe unto us, that we have
sinned; for this, our heart is faint, for these things our eye is dim.
Lament. 4.1, 2, 5, 7. Chap. 5.3, 5, 8, 15, 16, 17.

Look about you, and gather matter of sorrow into your hearts, cast your eyes
upon your ways, and say, how little good have I done, how much evil? how
poor is my life, my duties like things without life, and my unfaithfulness
appears as the light in all my ways; I wonder how I could own such actions,
which stand all like the children of beggars, clothed with rags, and full of
vermin; cast your eyes upon others, and say, such as had less engagements,
less encouragements then I, are got far^ before me, the last is first, and the
first last; many are grieved and dulled by my deadness that should have been
quickened by my life; look up to God, and say, Oh foolish and unjust man, have I
thus requited the Lord my God? look up to heaven, and say, I might by sowing
much have made my harvest rich and full, but now it is just, I should reap
little, that have sowed little, yea, that having sowed vanity, I should reap
iniquity.

Repentance is the way to make up your losses, and to repair your ruins, God
has promised grace and mercy to the penitent Qui delictis poenam per judicium
destinavit, idem and veniam per poenitentiam spopondit. Tertul. de poenit.
: When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee (or
have found thee) if thou turn to the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, for
the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not forsake thee, neither destroy
thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.29, 30, 31. Take then the counsel of the Prophet, which he
gave to Israel, when God was departed from them: Oh Israel return unto the Lord
thy God for thou have fallen by thine iniquity; take with you words, and turn
to the Lord; say unto him; Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously,
so will we render the calves of our lips. Hos. 14.1, 2. That you may find the
like favor, and God may do for you as he promised to them; I will heal their
back slidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him;
I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth
his roots as Lebanon, his branches, shall spread, and his beauty shall be as
the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon, etc. ver. 5, 6. When Ephraim repented
and mourned, God pitied him; I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself:
thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, etc.
Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

You see then what encouragement you have to seek in this way for peace with
God, and for the quicknings of his Spirit which you have lost: sin arms God
against you, but he cannot hold back mercy from the humble, his promise has
given repentance a power to prevail with him; and he will not contend with the
broken hearted, he has a special eye upon mourners, and will not hide
himself from the cry of the afflicted, a contrite heart is a sacrifice which
he will accept, Psalm. 51. He is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and
saves such as be of a contrite spirit. Psalm. 34.18. The father Quit ille nobis
intelligen lus pater? Deus scilicet. Tam pater nemo, tam pius nemo. Is ergo te
filium suum etsi accepti^e ab eo prodegeris, etsi nudus redieris, recipiet quia
redisti. Tertul. de poenitent. Patris cibus est salus nostra. Beda and Ambr. in
Luc. 15.
of the Prodigal made have to receive and welcome his straying son, and
rejoiced that he that was lost was found again, and that he that was dead was
alive again. Luke 15. this is the way, walk in it, if God should deny such, he
should deny himself, because he has said, though he has been Sorely
displeased, turn you unto me, and I will turn to you. Zach. 1.2, 3.

Till you repent, your sin is continued, and conse quently Gods displeasure.

Therefore consider seriously of your case, for want of serious thoughts does
great hurt, so that though the heart be affected, yet not enough, it sees
often that all is not well, and knows the cause, yet because these things lie
not upon the spirit by ponderous thoughts, a man bears his misery happily
complaining, but not wisely and strongly endeavoring to remove it. And the
heart is not soon brought down: you must hold up the objects of spiritual
grief by consideration, that they may be able to bear down the heart,
therefore be much in pondering these two things.

1 The sad effects of the loss of God; see what blindness, barrenness,
weakness, depravednesse, vanity, fears, accusations of heart, what cries and
clamours in your souls, and now what if afflictions come, how will you be able
to live in such a time other then a dying and a fearful life? what if death
come? either a black cloud of darkness will overspread you, or a storm of
affrightments and terrors will torment you; and now remember your sin has
brought all this upon you.

2 The sinfulness of the cause; why did you neglect and despise your God? if
you had not set him shamefully at a low rate, you would not have turned your
back upon him; what, Could not the infinite Majesty, and mercy of the Father;
the incomprehensible love of the Son; the unutterable comforts of the holy
Ghost prevail with you? Do you see what you have done? have you not said to
the Father, I neither fear thy Majesty, nor desire thy mercy? and to the Son, I
care not for all thy love, nor yet for thee that dyedst for me? and to the holy
Ghost, I regard not all thy saving counsels, living influences, and high
refreshments? do you not hear these pleading with you, each for himself, and
each for all? they are one, and what you have done in this, you have done
against each, and against all; weigh well then what your carelessness and
disobedience amounts to, that you may meet him with an humbled spirit, drenched
in tears, and clothed with shame; put case now that God should requite you in
your kind, and that his heart should not be toward you, then you might bid
peace, yea life, yea hope adieu for ever.

Consider further, how God did follow you, and entreated you not to go from
him, did he not tell you, he could not bear contempts; and that you would
repent it at last; and will see, that what you have done against him you have
done against your selves; did he not kindly use you; and were you not always
welcome to him? Oh my people what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I
wearied thee? testify against me. Mich. 6.3. and when you were going, did he
not cry after thee? Return thou back sliding Israel, and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, and I will not keep anger for ever.
Jer. 3.12. Yet you would not; Consider now how long you have lived without him,
and how often God has called upon you to consider your ways; if you will let
your thoughts out, you will find abundant cause of grief; and when you seek
him with repentance, you will find him in mercy drawing near, and he will
forget your unkindnesse and you shall hear no more of them; doubtless your
sins this way are very great, so that sometimes God has been put as it were
to a stand what course to take; when God had promised mercy to his revolting
people, he adds, But I said, how shall I put thee among the children? and give
thee a pleasant land? and I said thou shall call me, my father, and shall not
turn away from me. Jer. 3.19. When the Church had been disloyal, she at last
fell to this course of repentance, and see the issue; A voice was heard upon
the high places, weeping and supplications of the children of Israel, for they
have perverted their ways, and they have forgotten the Lord their God; return
ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. ver. 21. and oh
that you also would tread in their steps, and say, We come unto thee, for thou
art the Lord our God. ver. 22.

CHAP. XXIX. Two other directions how to recover.
THirdly, go to Christ, Direct. 3. Go to Christ.
and beg of him to cause a spirit of life to come into thee; I put you upon
Christ, but take heed of mistakes here: 1. greater willingness in Christ; then
in the father, or the holy Ghost, to show mercy to you; You must honor the Son,
as you honor the Father Quomodo par non erit aequaliter cum patre honorari, cui
adidentitatem substantiae nihil prorsus deest. Cyril. apud Cornel. a lapide.
, John 5.23. they must have the same honor, for they are one; they have the
same being, and the same will, and the same thoughts, I and my father are one.
John 8.30. they have the same friends. All thine are mine, and mine are thine.
John 17.10.

what you have from Christ, you have from him exclusively; for they are one
fountain, and as they are one in nature, so they are one in all that mercy
which is showed to us; therefore so cast honor upon Christ, as that you also
honor the Father and the Spirit. All that Christ does as Mediator, he does by
Commission, and the (...) fore he says, he comes to do the w^^ of his Father,
Heb. 10. John 6. Loo^ then upon this great Mediator, as one sealed of the
Father, and filled with the Spirit, yea and clothed with our natures, and
standing betwixt God and us, to make both one, and to convey to us, (...) the
riches of his Father; himselfes the Son of God is equal with the Father, and
has a natural and eternal sovereignty with the Father; but as Mediator, his
power is oeconomicall, dispenses and delegated to him; All power Inchoate in
incarnatione, complete in ascensione. Cornel. a lapide.
is given to me, both in things in heaven, and (...) things on earth. Mat.
28.20. Therefore lift up your hands with joy, and come to Christ, pray him to
look upon a poor beggar; he has power in (...) hand, he is the Lord of life;
say, Lo^^ I need much; thou calledst me, to (...) of thee gold, and raiment,
and eye salve. Apoc. 3.18. Now behold my peverty, nakedness, blindness, and
(...) me; say to him, Lord I could rather bear all evils then this evil; I
could think my self happy, if I might enjoy thee, though all other troubles
were upon me; Lord thou know what it is for a soul to be forsaken, it was
sometimes thine own case, when thou complainedst, My God my God why have thou
forsaken me? not O my Lord! but that thou had a divine supportment, but thou
had not (it seems) that inward joy which at other times did fill thee; now
thou art in thy glory, pity a worm in misery Da dextram misero and tecum me
toll per undas. Vargil. Aen. 6.
that mournes and desires more after thee, then all things: Lord thou paidst
dear for my good, let good come unto me; I desire more from thee, for thee:
not merely that I might have more happiness, but that thou might have
better service; if thou will give me much, I will return much; thou have bid
me, If mine enemy hunger, to feed him, if he thirst give him drink, Romans
12.19. Prove. 25.21. Lord deny not such mercies to thy children; though I have
sinned, yet thou art my Father; and though thou have been angry, yet am I not
thy child? this shall be thy glory, when these dead and dry bones shall live;
when the grave shall be opened, and the bonds of dea^^ shall be loosed, and I
shall walk before thee; thou said to the woman of Samaria, That if she had
known the gif^ (...) God, and thy self, she would have as (...) of thee, and
thou would have given (...) living water. John 4.10. Now Lord. I know thee,
and this gift, those wate^^ would be sweet to my thirsting hea^^, oh give unto
me also; I remember t^^ mercies of old, and my heart both joyeth and dies, the
remembrance of the^^ sweetness does delight me, but th^^ thoughts of their
absence does afflic^ me Mencer sum, quanta pacefruebar cum in Domino gaudebam;
ideo nunc magis doleo, quia scio quid perdidi, scio quam maxima bana amisi,
read quod per peccatum mihi abstuli, read quod mea^ culpa perdidi. Savanar^
medit. in Psalm. Miserere, etc.
; I could not have desired th^^ presence but by thee; these desires a^^ thine,
turn them not back without the^^ end; I was well without thee (as (...)
thought) till thou came to me, a^^ since thy coming, I fell asleep against,
and was at rest, but thou have called (...), and now Lord what will thou do
for me? a little will do me good, and will bless thee. There is no sorrow
(...) this, to have thy face hid, and lusts and devils to break in; Lord what,
and how many are the troubles of my soul? Oh in the multitude of thy
compassions help me, who am compassed about with a multitude of evils; art thou
not set for the rising of them that fall? and to be a repayrer of breaches? is
not thy name Jesus? and is not salvation thy employment? Oh be a Savior to me,
and pull my soul out of the deeps, remember the Covenant, etc. Thus take up
words and courage, and go to the throne of grace; carry thine empty sacks to
Joseph thy brother, for he is Lord of all Egypt; stand not wasting thy self
in sad thoughts of thy misery, but arise and pray; turn the streams of thy
grief toward Christ, he will turn them into streams of joy; sit not like
Hagar weeping in the desert for her child, that is ready to die for thirst, is
not the well before thee? Christ is the fountain Omne imperfectu^ redigitur ad
perfectum, sic nos ad Christum, a quo omnis perfectio descendit. Savanarol.
Expos. 4. orat. Domin.
, let down thy bucket, and drink and live; go with inditements against thy
self in one hand, and with Christ's promise and thy petition in the other, and
thou will be heard; if thou will take this course, then you proud lust and
troops of hell, you must pack and be gone, you clouds of darkness and unbelief
must be scattered, you chains of death must get you hence; here is no abiding
for you; for here the King of glory will make his temple, his throne, his res^^
only come with the whole heart; col^^ prayers and remissness of spirit lost
what you seek, and fervent prayers wi^^ find again, what you lost; be not
discouraged, here is the gate of life, he^ that dwells here is never from home,
not ever asleep, extend (...)
your prayers, as they Acts 12.5. stay til the alms come; the thing is sure,
only the time is in the Lords hand; many times prayer is lost because you wait
not for the answer; (...) at the gate, you need not fear to knock the Lord
will not be angry; you may be urgent; wrest the door open (...) strong prayers,
it shuts not because you should not enter, but because you should knock: ask
leave to enter, the bars of the gate are mercy, thy prayers are like Petards
to break way into the City; therefore turn thy fears into hopes, thy
complaints into prayers, thy lamentation into supplication; and Christ will
turn thy darkness into light, thy deadness into life, thy bondage into
liberty, thy weakness into strength.

Fourthly, Direct. 4. Working and endeavoring.
you must set your hands to the work; for it is in vain to expect that God
should help you, if you will not help your selves; you must use your hands as
well as your tongues Levemus corda nostra cum manibus ad Deum: qui orat and
laborat, cor levat ad Deum cum manibus: qui orat and non laborat cor levat ad
Deum and non manus; qui, etc. necesse est cor in oratione ad Deum levare, and
manus cum operatione ad Deum extendere, Bern. de Mod. been vivend. lib. 51. and
eisdem pene verbis. Hieronym. in Lament. 3. (...). Aeschyl. in Pers.
: idle beggars must be whipped; he that will not work must not eat. Remember
what I have said: you have a life in you, if you be in Christ: and as you have
a life, so there is a never-failing presence of the Spirit, to attend that
power which you have; if then you put forth your selves to what you are able,
and as far as your power extends, God will draw near to you. It is true, that
which you want is out of your reach, you are not able to make crooked things to
become strait, and lay those swelling mountains of corruption level, but yet
yo^ must set to the work; Joshua could no^ with the strength of Rams horne^
sounding cast down the walls of Ierich^, but yet he must set upon the work;
when the Midianites fall, there must be the Sword of the Lord and of Gideo^
Judges 7.18. The father holds a^ apple to the child, the child cann^^ reach
it, yet his short arm must be p^^ forth, and then the father whose arm^^ is
long enough will reach it to him^ you must be doing.

Before I come to show what is to be done, For you have a power.
it will be needful to convince you, that men regenerate have power to do
something of themselves; for oftentimes men misunderstanding the state of
regeneration, do either excuse the (...) negligence by pretended inability,
(...) sit down discouraged, as having no power in their hands at all; how
often do they complain and sigh in vain, alas, I am nothing of my self,
except God give me a heart and strength what can I do? I can do nothing, etc.

To these I say, that these conclusions are ill drawn from a true principle,
which is this, that all is of God, and that by nature we are dead; but it is
ill urged in this case, Because life.
1. because they are living, and all life is a power to act, Else no difference
betwixt regenerate and unregenerate.
no specificall difference betwixt a man regenerate and unregenerate, if both
were still dead and without strength.

renewing of that Image of God and holiness, which we lost in Adam. Ephesians.
4.24. but that was a power to do what God required, Grace renews that which
Adam had
therefore so far as that Image is repaired, so far there is a power.

benefit by the second Adam, Else we have not so much by the second Adam as by
the first.
as we had by the first; the first would have communicated his power to do
good, and being corrupted does communicate power to sin, therefore much more by
Christ have we a power to do good in our measure.

objected that it is said, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. So that
it seems that we have not power in our selves.

implanted into me, ye can do nothing: the word without me (...) Scorsim a me.
Caly. Camer. etc.
signifies, separate from me, or apart from me, and intimates this only, that
till we be knit unto Christ, we are but dead, and barren branches, and so
Christ explaines himself. ver. 4. As the branch cannot bring forth fruit of it
self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

It is God which works both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

place proves what I say Vide Zanch. in loc.
, that the Saints have a power, it is true, it is of God; therefore we should
work out our salvation in humility, not boasting in our selves; for all is
received of God. More fully, God is said to work the will and the deed, 1 By
giving habitual grace, a renewed frame of heart. 2 In exciting and
strengthening this grace.


And both these are ever afforded to the Saints, only the latter is more and
less according to his pleasure, so that in the worst times a Christian has a
power to do good, though not alike at all times: And this power you must use,
and put forth your selves, as you are able, else you cannot with reason expect
his help; a Ship has instruments of motion, (though not an internal
principle) and if the Mariner would have help by the winds, he must loose his
Cables, and hoise his sails; so must you, or else you may lie still.

Now that which you are to do is, Things to be done First, stir up your selves.


1 To stir up your selves, for God has promised to meet you, and to reach out
his hand to help you, if you be not wanting Fas non est, ut qui ipse guavus
est, vel amicos agere sua causa jubeat, nedum ipsos Deos. Demost. Olynth. 2.
Apud Dominum utraque haec sibi necessario congruunt, and ut oratione operatio,
and operatione fulciatur oration. Hieron. in Lament. cap. 3.
to your selves; it is certain a godly man cannot by the strength of his
endeavors alone raise up his soul, nor recover his loss, though he should
lay mountain upon mountain, and pile endeavors upon endeavors, yet he could
not reach that life he seeks, but the strength of all our endeavors is the
grace and promise of God (...) Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad Antioch.
, but as endeavors without God cannot, so God without endeavors will not;
therefore labor to quicken your selves, that is, work upon your hearts by your
understandings; as the striking of the flint and steel together begets
fire, so the meeting of these two faculties, having an internal life in them,
do quicken the soul; God has made the understanding the guide and treasure of
the soul, upon this altar lies the fire of God; if these coals be blowed up
and cast upon the heart, they will warm, melt, purge, and quicken it.

There are two things in a renewed mind;

1 A treasure of habitual knowledge; You have 1. a treasure of knowledge.
it is the ark of God, in which the tables of the law are kept; the mystery of
the Gospel is engraven on it; so that the mind is as the head to the body,
which gives sense and motion to all the members; spiritual truths are as the
spirits in the head, for the quickening of the soul.

There is a power to use and improve these truths, Power to use it.
by meditation and application (...). Homer
, to awaken and provoke the will; as a man has power to counsel and persuade
another, so he may do this to himself by this discursive faculty: so we see
David pleading with himself, sometimes chiding: Why art thou cast down oh my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.5. sometimes exciting
himself to duty, Praise the Lord oh my soul, and all that is within me praise
his holy name. Psalm. 103.1. Sometime comforting himself in God, Return to thy
rest oh my soul, for God has dealt bountifully with thee. Psalm. 116.7. it was
a usual thing with him, to talk with himself; the mind has a language as
well as the body, My reins teach me in the night season. Psalm. 16.7. and he
found so much good in this way, that he puts all upon it: Commune with your
hearts upon your beds, and be still. Psalm. 4.4. Bring out those truths which
are laid up in you, and whet them upon your selves, God has fitted you with
faculties and powers to do this, you have an apprehensive faculty, to lay in
truths and notions, a retentive faculty to lay them up, and a recollective
faculty to lay out; you have not only power of intelligence, but also of
reminiscence, that you may call to mind and ponder of things known, and call
them out of the Cells in which they lie, to revive the heart: the understanding
is to the heart, as the breast to the child, or as the stomach to the body,
all is fed by it; set therefore upon your hearts with quickening thoughts; for
as rubbing and chafing the hands or other parts with hot oils is a means to
recover them, when they are benumbed, so the plying of the heart with stirring
thoughts, enforcing arguments, is a means to revive it; among all thoughts
there are none more prevalent, then of sins past, of heaven, hell, eternity,
love of God, the death of Christ: Rules helping to quicken the heart by the
understanding.
these are strong cordials to cheer up the spirits.

To help you in this work of dealing with your hearts; let me propound these
rules.

Make every notion practical; let the heart share with the understanding,
count not your selves better for a thousand notions, except there be some
heat in them; mind your hearts, and strive to gain by all things; if you
read, or hear, or discourse, let your aim and desire be, to better your
hearts.

Be frequent in thoughts, for mindlesse men, are livelesse.

Be ponderous, for slight thoughts are weak in working.

Pitch upon things which most concern you; all are good, but some are more
seasonable.

5 Observe the temper of thy heart, most; all thoughts have not the like
efficacy in all, the constitutions of men's souls differ; learn to know your
tempers.

thoughts begin to take hold, ply them, keep the fire burning, and let it not
go out for want of blowing.

Arm your thoughts with prayer, beseech God to be in them.

Thus then employ your minds; this is Gods way; God will keep his method which
he has set, he has appointed the mind to this office, and he will not balke
it; Kings do all by their officers: God comes not himself into the inward
temple, but by this gate; all his workings upon the heart are in a rational
way, suitable to the state of the creature, he deals with the heart by the
mind, and upon the whole man by the heart; as the first pipe takes in water
for it self and for all the rest; what ever is in the cistern of the heart is
conveyed by the mind, this is the spring in the watch of your souls; wind
up this, and all the wheels will move.

Attend the ordinances, Attend the Ordinances.
I will say no more of this having met with it before.

Take the help of the Saints, crave their counsels, Seek help of the Saints.
their prayers, use their company, for they are living, and they will impart
their life: they will be helpful to the infirm, they have a spirit of
compassion to succor the necessitous. Woe be to him that is alone; if he fall,
who shall raise him up? it may be your forsaking the assembly of these has
brought you into this withering state: God has appointed the Saints unto
fellowship, and when they knit not but carelessly out of pride, vain fears, or
envy, or any the like ungodly principle, they hang off from each other, they
shall not prosper.

Do your first works: Do your first works
this is the counsel of Christ to a back sliding Church, Apoc. 2.5. Do your
first works for quantity, as much as you did: you see abatement has
impoverished you; therefore work harder, to make up your selves again. Do
them also as much as you are able for quality as you did before, remember from
whence you are fallen, call to mind with what fear, with what reverence, with
what diligence, with what intention of spirit, with what tenderness you were
wont to do all, so do again.

I cannot, this is my misery: if I could do as I have done, I could rejoice.

more then you do.

2 See if the fault lie not more in the defect of will then of power, and stir
up your selves, if you were more willing, things would be more easy (...).
Nazianz. De patre suo adictionem Episcopi Caesariensis prosecturo, cum
valetudinarius and sevex est Orat. 20.
.

3 The more you strive the more y^^ will gain; the root of discouragement is
unbelief; when God bids you repent, he knows how little you strength is,
and how hard your hea^s are, and so when he bids you pray, he^^ knows your
infirmities what th^^ are; both those of Infancy and defect^^ grace, and those
of sickness by de^^ning from him, and his intent is not tha^ you should work
out these alone, but he calls upon you to put to your strength, and he will
join with you, and will g^^ hand in hand with you (...). Aeschyl. apud Stob.
, therefore awaken your selves and be encouraged, for if you be doing, he will
work with you, in you, for you; And so you may recover your selves again, and
what is (...) your sorrows and labors to this recompense? if God will return
aga^^ you will think all labor and paint well bestowed: oh how sweet will
(...) be after such a time of deadness, how sweet will a clear understanding
and an established faith be after such mists of darkness and unbelief? how
sweet will liberty be, after so long a time of cruel servitude? how sweet
will victory and rest be after so long and so bloody a war? now the Ordinances
will be as the green pastures in which your souls shall feed and delight
themselves; now you that did dwell in the dust, and were compassed about with
hellish lusts, and unclean spirits, shall be filled with the Spirit of Christ,
and shall converse with God; it will be a sweet time when all things shall
become new; when your diseases shall be turned to health, and you, shall renew
your strength as the Eagles, when Christ shall come into his ancient throne, Ps.
103.5.
and rule you with the Sceptor of his grace. And I pray God that all that have
been deserted may seek him and find him. This shall suffice for the first sort
of spiritual desertions, viz. real, now follows another sort (if I may so
call it) desertions only in appearance.

CHAP. XXX. Of Defertions in appearance only, with causes of mistake in this
Case.
HAving finished the first sort of desertions, or Gods with drawings of the
quickening influences of his Spirit, which are when men are really so deserted;
I now come to those desertions which seem such, but are not; (...) godly man
sometimes may and does draw sad conclusions against himself, and conceives
that God has departed from him, when it is not so. And this mistake proceeds
from such causes as these:

1 Fearfulness: 1 Cause, Fearfulness.
this abounds (...) some more then others, the matter (...) weighty, and in
such cases man is apt to fear; as one upon a Tower, though the place be strong
and he sure, yet when he looks down, he is appalled at the dreadfulness of
the precipice, and counts himself in danger: This fear is (...) creased in
men because they know they may sink into such deeps, and they see many have
fallen; now as in a time of pestilence and great mortality, fear so takes hold
of some, that they think sometimes that they are stricken Quod fore posse
timet, moestus adesse putat.
, and that they also are going to the house of silence and darkness, when as
they are in healthful state, so sometimes men think in this case. And the
tempers of some spirits are such, that they are apt to fear; there are dusky
clouds of Melancholy darkening their reason, so that they think with that
melancholy King, that they of men are become beasts, and so are ready to depose
themselves from that Princely state which they lived in, to feed with oxen. And
to all this there is a working of the Prince of darkness, laboring to hide
the light, and to increase the darkness and sadness of a fearful soul; and
this fear being raised, does create dismal visions, and apprehensions, that a
man seems to himself to be metamorphosed, and thinks he is as one cast out
from God, when yet his case is good.

Mistake in the cause of present deadnisse. Mistaking the cause of their
present state.
(...) When they are clogge^ with indisposednesse, and ill disposednesse they
lay this to Gods with drawing himself, which indeed is the fruit of their own
carelessness, slothfulness and untowardnesse; they take not pain^ with
themselves, but suffer their heart to die, and to be depraved, and then (...)
out that God has forsaken them; the^ is an aptness in men to charge God, bu^
awaken your selves, lest God withdraw indeed.

Misjudging themselves: Misjudgeing themselves. Error in judgment occasioned
by,
They think worse of themselves then they are, and there are sundry things
which occasion them to mistake.

Spiritual poverty: A poor man is apt to domplaine, Spiritual poverty.
and an humble man is apt to think meanly of himself. There is that makes
himself rich and has nothing, and there is that makes himself poor having
great riches. Some men's hearts are high when their worth is low (...). de
Athanasio Naz.
: the emptiest ears stand highest, but the richest Mines lie low; an humble.
Christian is a rich treasure^ yet he thinks he is worth but little: But I must
tell you, all is not gold that glisters, all in a godly man that seems grace,
is not, there is a bastard humility, as well as a genuine humility; true
humility is Judicious, though it think meanly of it self, yet justly; it
judges not against truth; false humility is distempered, and erres in
Judgment; I say it is a melancholy distemper in the habit of humility, which
can see nothing but ill sights, it can see no good; when it looks this way it
cannot see wood for trees; it ever is in substraction in its account of real
worth, and matter of encouragement; but ever in multiplication and addition
beyond measure of faults and wants and all matter of discouragement: Ask him
how he does, and he will tell you, he is a very beggar, a miserable man, a
bankerupt, full of sin, empty of God, he is nothing, has nothing, sees
nothing, tastes nothing, does nothing, yea, he will tell you (but who can
believe him that knows his rich worth?) that he is worse then nothing (...),
hoc unum se scire dixit, quod nihil sciret. Socrat. apud Laert.
.

Hungring and thirsting after (...) grace: Hungring of spirit.
this is a sweet companion of humility, but it has this property, to le^ the
soul still outward, and is so sering in seeking what it has not, that it
minds not what it has; a cove^ou^ man is ever poor; because ever wanting; he
forgets what is behind, and is still pressing to that which is before (...).
Chrysostom. (...). Prove. Graec.
: It is the fault of such as are filled with strong desires after God, that
they much for get what they have received; pride ^ver feeds on what it has,
but humility sees best what it has not: But you should remember that strong
desir^ after God are strong evidences of his presence; other things are first
desired and then attained, but spiritual things are first attained, and then
desired: without these the heart would rest without God, and as it cannot be
without some chief good, so it would seek it out of God; but when it is
wheeled about with a strong by as toward God, doubtless God is there.

Much love: Much love
This also is near in blood unto the two former, and is an occasion sometimes
of sad thoughts in the heart; Love has qualities which expose the heart to
trouble. 1. It is jealous, ever fearful least it should lose the happiness
which now it has in enjoying God; this sometimes rising high, inclines to
think that God is gone; it is the nature of a fearful heart, to fall from
care to fear, from fear to jealousies, from jealous suspicions, to sad
conclusions; as the mother out of the vehemence of affection to her child, if
he be out of her sight, first takes care, then is filled with fears, and
sad conjectures, at last cries out, where is my child? 2. Love is liberal,
and is never satisfied, it would still do better, and be better, and the more
it is, the less it seems to it self; and is so enlarged in dispositions and
resolutions to do good, that as it knows it cannot do enough, so it is apt
to think it does almost nothing: hence many complaints arise, that it is not
with them as in former days: that which they did before seemed much then,
because love was not much, and now all seems little, because love is great.
But you should consider, that God is much there where he works much, and that
this flame of love is blown up by him, for God is love. 1 John 4.16. that is
to say, the fountain and author of love; as love is eminently and infinitely
in him, so it flows from him. And he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him.

CHAP. XXXI. The false Rules of men's judging themselves, causing mistake in
this case.
Judging by false Rules, The first false rule, Less vivacity.
is a third cause of mistakes, as for instance; 1. Men judge that they are
deserted, and fear they are in a state of declension, because they have less
quickness, and vivacity as they conceive, then they have had. I confess this
is an ill sign, Here 4. considerations about vivacity of spirit.
yet this may be where there is no just cause of such sad conclusions; and to
satisfy such, let me propound four things.

Distinguish betwixt Gods working in gifts, and his working in graces;
Distinguish betwixt Gods working in gifts and graces.
God is sometimes pleased to carry up the gifts of men very high, when their
spiritual life has not a proportionable elevation; we see he is much this
way, sometimes in men that are not good; gifts are given to the members for the
body, and for others sakes oftentimes he pours out great measures, and
bears them on with a full gale of assistance, and when the work is done to
which those gifts serve, then God may withdraw; I doubt not but many saithfull
preachers may find a weakness and dullness in their gifts in Judgment, upon
the people; for the deafness of the hearers, he smites the messengers dumb,
and so in sundry cases it may fall out; it is said, Christ could do there (in
his own country) no mighty work, etc. Mark 6.5. his hands were as it were
tied and bound, his power was suspended because of their unbelief, and where
God had some great work to do, he opened the hearts of the Apostles, and much
enlarged their spirits; wisely therefore distinguish betwixt gifts and graces,
though you be not able to do as you have done, yet see into the frame and
disposition of your hearts toward God, for that may continue when the other
fades; It may be you have not occasion for the use of gifts, as heretofore,
and except they be used, they grow dull inevitably; as the most expert Musician
by disuse may lose his skill. But note here, that where there is occasion and
use of gifts, and they are not stirred up, but suffered by idleness and
carelessness to be quenched, this is a sin against the Spirit, and breeds a
damp not only upon gifts, but upon grace.

sometimes more full assistance to the graces of his people then he will
perpetually continue, God in some cases gives more then he will continue.
and the abatement of this is no just cause of concluding that God has
forsaken them.

In times of seeking to him, In times of actual converse with him.
and of mediate converse in prayer and meditation and the like, there is a
fuller taste of him than at other times; a godly man enjoys God in all
things, but especially in duties of piety; there is an evident reason why a man
has more of God then, because grace is now acting, and feeding upon God:
duties are the meals of a Christian, and other actions are his work; he comes
in duties to receive strength, in other things be uses it; as the body gets
strength and refreshment by eating, and draws it out in working, and then
comes to repair it again by eating; times of immediate approach to God are
meeting times; there is a mutual visit betwixt God and the soul, and this is
the proper end of these things, that God and the soul may meet together; it
were an happy thing if those impressions which the foul receives at such times
were abiding: but such is our condition here, that we must hunger and eat,
and when we are filled we shall hunger again: Heaven is the place of constant
life, there is a continual feast, but here we cannot have it so; the mind is
but finite, and being of necessity to converse with other things besides God,
it cannot be expected that it should be so constantly filled with him; so much
a man enjoys him, as he seriously minds him; therefore they that neglect
duties, or slightly perform them, must needs lose much of God; but it is not to
be expected to carry such a spirit in other employments, and in other actions,
as in conversing with God, though the more a man has in duties, the better he
will be in all things, In times of great necessity.
and the fitter to meet God in his seasons.

times of great necessity. God is wont to afford more of himself then at other
times, when tentations, afflictions and dangers are many and great: then, as a
father when his child comes to a ditch or deep way which he cannot pass,
takes up the child into his arms, but when he is got over sets him down
again; so God in such hard cases ministers more abundant aid, which he does
not continue always. Hence we see that even the weakest of the flock become
Lions, and those that seemed to be but little, prove like mighty Champions,
victoriously conquering all difficulties, and treading under feet the glory
and terror of the world, yea the fears of death it self. These by the
transcendent nobleness and high courage of spirit (so far above their ordinary
pitch) do declare that there is another power with them than their own, which
makes them so gloriously to exceed not others only, but themselves also. As the
Spirit came upon Sampson when the Philistines came upon him, so it is in this
case; but God is not always at so much cost; when the necessities of his
people are less, then he gives them their accustomed pension; when Israel was
in the desert, a place barren of comforts, but full of troubles and exigences,
God by his mighty power did work greater things for them then ever after, yet
was he still their God. At the first coming of the Gospel, the way being new,
and so subject to cavils and persecutions, which Christ knew the world would
raise against it, he poured out more of his Spirit, and wrought with more
glorious power then in succeeding ages, yet the promise of Christ stands firm,
Lo I am with you Christus nobiscum. 1. Politice, ut Rex in regno; Dux
inexercitu. 2. Oeconomice, ut Pater in domo. 3. Ethice, ut ratio in homine. 4.
Physice, ut anima in corpore. Cornel. a lapide.
to the end of the world.

At and about the time of conversion there may be more quickness and vivacity
of spirit then afterward: At the first conversion
and hence many conclude that they are sinfully abated, and that they are
fallen from their first love. But although I doubt not but that it is indeed a
just complaint in many, yet I believe that some do charge themselves without
cause. Note therefore that by two things there may be a greater flush of
affection, at that time then in after time.

1 The newness of the condition, naturally new things affect much, the
suddenness of the change to be translated from blackness of darkness into
mavelous light does greatly affect them: in this case distinguish betwixt
solid affection, and fleeting passion; the soul of a new convert is put into a
kind of astonishment, to see so strange and sudden a metamorphosis, as if he
were become another man, and the whole world turned upside down, so that
heaven stands where the earth did, and the earth in the heavens place, high
things are made low, and low things are set on high; these things put the soul
into a maze, but much of this will wear off; suppose a man going to execution,
in great heaviness, and fears, and in the way, his pardon, with promise of
the Princes favor is brought to him; me thinks I see his heart leaping, his
spirit dancing, and the man filled with abundant joy: But mark him, and in
process of time you will see much of this vanishing, yet his life is still as
dear as ever: or suppose two persons married, sweeth conjoined in dear
affections, and after many dangers and difficulties happly enjoying each others
desired company, what a flush of joy, what a violence (...) affection is
mutually expressed? but (...) time much of this cease, but true love still
remains. Count not all that gr^^ which is working at the time of the (...)
conjunction of Christ and the soule^ there is much passion in it, yet such at
is holy and good; but as it was stirred upon a special occasion, so the
occasion ceasing, it may cease, and yet the ca^^ may be good; the Jews were as
the^^ that dreamed when they were first delivered, but that dream did not
always last; the lame man when he was fir^^ healed, was seen walking and
leaping, and praising God. Acts 3.8. but though^ he was always glad of his
recovery, yet he did not ever leap and dance.

2 God does more at the first conversion for his people.

1 He gives more assistance; for now ^ man is entering upon a new way, a way of
difficulties, and all the power of hell comes out as Pharaoh to reduce their
escaped captives, therefore God covers them with his hand, and fills them with
strength to grapple with this legion, and ^o break through these difficulties.

2 God often poures in much comfort it that time. When the Prodigal was
returned, his Father made him very welcome, and calls to his servant, Bring
forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes
on his feet, and bring hither the fatted calfe, and kill it, and let us eat
and be merry, for this my Son was dead, and is alive, he was lost and is found.
Luke 15.22, 23, 24. Here was more then of necessity, not only shoes, but a
ring; not only clothes, but the best robes; here is feasting, and joy, and
cheer: This Son was as welcome afterward, yet had not this entertainment
every day; it may be some of that comfortable presence of God which he then
affords, some of that abundant joy may cease; because it was given upon a
special occasion, an^ yet no just cause given to raise such sa^ thoughts, that
God has for saken you.

may be less activity; Activity of spirit varieth much, as the body changes.
no from change of the spirit, but of nature; the body may be more feeble,
sickness or age may clip the wings of activity, and take off much of a man's
former vigor; the body is the instrument of the soult, and as he that rides
upon a weak and tired horse, cannot ride post, so when the oil of natural
life and vigor begins t^ wafte, it cannot burn so clear as it was wont; we
see in sickness, when the natural strength is decayed, how the loss of
spirits degrades them from that high luster wherein they were admired in the
time of health; by the way it may be a Caveat and warning to careless and
dilatory spirits to be better husbands in opportunity, and while their blood is
full in their veins, and their arteries are rich in spirits to take hold of
time by this golden forelock, and to make their voyage while they have full
tide and wind, lest when death creeps on, and by diseases has dismounted them
from their vigor, they find darkness and sleepiness to bind them in
chains; But for those whose feet did run in the ways of God, and who were as
the winged bird, when youthfulness and vigor was in them, and their breasts
did flow with milk, and their bones were full of marrow, though now nature
being decayed they seem less, yet their case is safe, and good; Alas, when the
keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, and those that
look out of the windows are darkened, and when the Almond tree shall
flourish, and the grasshopper is a burden, and desire falls, when the silver
cord is loosing, and the golden how breaking, when nature is brought to this
low state, how can it be that there should be that liveliness of soul which
was before. Second false Rule: they think they are deserted, because they do
less. It is dangerous to abate in doing.
Eccles. 12.3, 4, 5, 6.

Second false rule; Men think they are in this sad condition, because they do
less then they have done; And I say, that this is an ill sign simply
considered, because all things work as they are, and I desire not to be
mistaken here, for I would not be so injurious to God, or cruel to men, as to
nourish a slothful and backsliding person in his Apostasy and carelessness,
but I say this, that it is possible less may be done, then has been, yet
without all loss of life; for besides that which has been said before, But
not always a sign of a declined heart. For 1. it may be more was done then
should.
I add in way of satisfaction these considerations.

1 It may be that which was done before was more then should have been;
another men are apt to fall short, so a godly man is apt to exceed, especially
when his necessities pinch him, and when the fears of God lie heavy upon his
soul, then he neither minds business, nor friends, nor himself, but is so
intent upon this one thing, as if it were the only thing which he had to mind;
I have spoken largely before, how a man may know when he does so much, as that
he may with comfort walk in his way.

abundance of doing, Measure of doing varieth with occasions.
is to rise and fall according to occasions; when a man is in straits, he may
and must do much, yea more then is required at other times.

less opportunity for the same abundance of holy duties at all times, God may
give less opportunity.
he may put them upon such conditions and employments as may take them up
more, as a woman when she is married, by the variety of occasions that attend
that state, may be deprived of some opportunities which she had when she was
free. There is difference between a wife and a virgin, she that is unmaried
cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how she may please the Lord: but
she that is married cares for the things of the world, how she may please her
husband. 1 Cor. 7.14. The Apostle means not, that the married care not for
the things of God, but that that condition will bring distractions, yea, and by
Gods appointment does put them upon such things, that they cannot have that
fullness of time, for exercises of godliness, which they had in a single
state: in all abatements of spiritual action, a special eye must be had to
the cause; for if either we thrust our selves into a thicket of businesses
unnecessarily, or have lost that edge of holy desires and dispositions which
we had, we have here cause to lament our elongation from God.

CHAP. XXXII. Other false Rules causing mistake in judgment.
THird false Rule: Third false Rule. More stirring of corruption
More stirring of corruptions; because men feel greater workings of lusts and
corruptions then before, they think that God is not with them as before; but in
way of satisfaction to these, as I must needs grant that this also is an ill
sign, yet I will demonstrate that it may be the case of a man who is as full
of God as ever.

1 Distinguish betwixt corruptions formally considered, and effectively
considered, But 1. distinguish betwixt corruptions considered, formally,
effectively.
there may be many motions to sin, which are not corruptions; then they are
corruptions, when they do corrupt and deprave the heart; Christ himself had
motions to sin, though not rising from himself, but caused by the tempter, so
that his soul was but as a glass of pure water jogged, and though the motions
to sin which arise from that sinfulness in us, are formally and in
interpretation of the Law sins, yet except they take hold of the heart, and do
infect it, they are not corruptions, not such as argue less of God; nay, as
when a man lives in an unhealthfull and infectious air, the power of God is
much seen in keeping him up in health, so the power of the Spirit is much put
forth in that soul which is kept sound from the plague, in the midst of
infectious and poisonous workings and foamings of that sinfulness within; it
was the Apostles case, he had some burning lust like a splent or coal in his
flesh, but God kept him; My grace is sufficient for thee, Sufficit mihi gratia
tua, cum desicit virtus mea. Bern. apud Cornel. a lapide in locum.
for my strength is made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.

may have more occasions to stir corruptions then before; Occasions of sin may
be more then have been.
and occasions to lusts, are as wind to the Seas, or fuel to the fire; it may
be you thought better of your selves then you had cause, you might think you
had more meekness, when you were less angry, but it may be your anger was
not so much, not because your meekness was great, but because your offenses
were few; know this, that occasions do not so much beget, as bring forth
corruptions.

have not more life, but they seem so, Lusts may seem to have more life when
it is not so
because you have more.

More light to see them; at first, grace is busy about the outward man, and
grosser sins, but afterward it descends into the lower and more retired parts
of the soul, and by the candle of God searches the hidden deepes, and finding
still new worlds of sin, you are apt to think you are worse then you were; the
puddle smells when it is stirred, but as the Sun shows a great deal of dust
in the air, yet you know it was there before, though not seen before, so, etc.

more sense: when there was but little life many lusts might work unfelt, but
now every touch of sin is felt, and so you may think amiss, that you have
more, when indeed the cause is not increase of sin, but of grace; the Apostle
made nothing of lustings, and many other things, till grace had incorporated it
self, and made him quick to feel the bitter and stinging workings of it. Romans
7.

It may be your life has been in a continual tumult and warfare, It may be
lusts had not time to work.
with great afflictions of body and mind, so that corruptions had no time to
work, but now being brought to a greater calm, they begin to stir; In a
tempestuous day, the birds hide themselves in the hedges, and the Conies in
their holes, but when the storms are past, then they come forth; while Rome
was held in wars, and while the Athenians were busied by the Lacedaemonians,
their own dissentions and internal evils lay asleep, but when they had rest,
then that which lay hid brake forth to their great hurt: we see men that are
serious, laden with weighty concernments, living in croudes of affairs, or
distracted with great cares and fears are free from many vices in their lives,
which break out when they have more liberty; Consider well, if there be not
some eminent change in your conditions, for a calm estate is subject to many
inconveniences in this kind, but it is not because lusts have more life, but
because they have more advantage.

God may permit Satan to work in men, Often stirring of lusts works their
death.
and suffer their corruptions to be drawn out, that they may be more
mortified. Then we take up arms and fight much when we see our enemy coming
upon us; if the enemy had kept in his trenches and holds, he had been safe, but
by coming out he falls into our hands; the rats and mice in their holes are
secure, but when they show themselves by coming out, they are taken and
killed; when therefore the snuff that you thought was extinguished, smells and
begins to burn again, it is that you may make surer work in more full
extinction.

Fourth false Rule: Fourth false Rule. Opinion of others.
Men are too much swayed by the opinion which others have of them; if they be
censured or rejected, or discountenanced by such, it takes deep impressions
upon them, especially if they be near, beloved, wise, godly, such as know
them; there is a disposition in a man to be much affected with the judgment
which he knows others to make of him: hence come those inquiries into others
breasts, to see what strape we hold in their mirrours; Strad. de bello Belg.
as the Emperor acted himself dead, and caused his funerals to be solemnly
performed, his hearse erected, his followers clad in mourning, and himself
carried as a dead Corpse, that in the mean time, through a secret passage, he
might observe what respect he had in his subjects hearts. Hence also arise
suspicious and secret dejectments of mind, upon conjecture of disesteeme and
improbation of others: hence also vain glorying and supercilious elation of
mind, upon the applause and fame which men have with others: and indeed, to be
approved of men wise and good, is both desirable and honorable, the
concurrence of their testimony is a glorious thing Gloria est consentiens laus
bonorum, and incorrupta vox been judicantium de excellenti virtute. Cic. Tuse.
qu. l. 3.
. And by the same reason, the disfavour and ill opinion of such, to an
ingenuous spirit is an unhappiness. But sometimes there is too much weight
laid in these things: If the opinion and judgment of others were infallible,
reason would require that we should mould our thoughts of our selves, to the
model of other men's opinion, but others are not always competent and
sufficient judges in this case; therefore as their sentence is not to be wholly
neglected, so it is not too much to be valued. God sometimes discovers his
displeasure by stirring up his servants against men, as when the master of the
family will estrange himself from one, he bids his children and servants to
show him no countenance: if it be your case, you should humbly and wisely
consider it, and say as David when Shimei reviled him, The Lord has bidden
him. 2 Samuel 16.11. Consider your selves, and rest no way in the sentence which
men give, but appeal from them to the supreme Judge, and study to approve
your selves to God, For he is a Jew which is one inwardly, whose praise is not
of men but of God. Romans 2.29.

Fifth false Rule: Fifth false Rule. Not growing.
Men think they grow not, and hence conclude sadly against themselves, they
think the time has been when they thrived more in grace, and that therefore
they are in this deplorable state of which we speak. But here may be great
mistake, and for the relief of such, let me propound some considerations
tending to the rectifying of their judgment in this Case.

growth in some graces some, Growth in some graces hinders the weak, in
discerning growth in others.
times to weak spirits, hinders the discerning of growth in others: besides
that spiritual poverty and humility which I have spoken of; the increase of
light proves sometimes an impediment. 1. The more light, the more weight lies
upon the soul concerning the matters of eternity, which sometimes does raise
up care and solicitousnesse to that height, that a man is disposed to fear and
jealousy concerning his condition. 2. The more light, the more duties are
discovered; a Christian sees not all his work at first, God raises up his way
to his eye by degrees, as a child is put at first to such things as are
proportionable to his age and strength, and as he grows in years, to more
capacity and ability, so he is put on to greater things. Now the godly finding
still a disproportion in their strength to their work, think that they grow
not; as if he that takes a measure of his height in a tree, coming afterward
to measure his growth, and finding that he does not exceed, yea scarce reach
his mark, should conclude he has not grown, this were no good reasoning,
because the tree is grown also. Or as if one that tries his strength by
shaking a tree when it is young, coming some years after, and upon trial
finding that he cannot stir the tree more, yea it may be not so much, should
conclude he has not increased in strength, he should judge amiss, not
considering that the tree is also grown more strong, and more unapt to be
moved. The task of a godly man grows, his relations, state, temper, calling,
company, tentations, and such like things cause great variations in his work.
And God uses a gracious indulgence in not imposing so much in the infancy as
in the progress of his people; and as many things are not imposed at first, so
the spiritualnesse an^ exactness of duties is more and more discovered: and
hence it is that the godly laboring still with weakness and disproportion of
strength, do think (though causelessly) that they grow not.

different growths. There are different growths.


1 There is a growth upward, in hope, peace, joy.

2 A growth downward, as a tree that grows in the root; so many grown
humility, and lowliness, etc. and hence as I have showed, they are apt to
think meanly, yea, meaner of themselves then is meet Crescente gratia,
crescit and abyssalis vacuitas humilitatis, and ut mare cum ipsumintrant omnia
flumina, non reds dat, sic nec ipsa, imo quodest mirabilius, de ipsa repletione
ex nanitur, etc Guiliel. Paris. de morib. cap. 10. p. 236.
.

3 There is a growth in bulk, as who a tree grows bigger.

4 A growth in maturity; as a child which grows a great while more ^^ bulk
and quantity, then in ripeness and dexterity, but afterward he grows more in
perfection of parts, then extension of parts, he grows more strong, active,
apprehensive, wise; So a godly man grows at first much in the bulk of
knowledge and grace, but after these becomes more mature, to know the things
which he knows better, more practically and vitally, and to be able to do
what he did more spiritually and perfectly: an apple for a time grows bigger
and bigger, but afterward it grows better and sweeter. Now men not discerning
this, are apt to think that they grow not when they do.

mistake in the judgment of their growths, by being too hasty; Men are too
hasty in judging of growth.
the judgment of growth is, by comparing ones self with ones self, but if a
man measure himself to day, and a week hence measure again, his growth though
it be real, will be imperceptible: when you compare your selves with your
selves, if you find no growth, then look upon your selves at a greater
distance, if you cannot discern growth by comparing your selves with your
selves the last year, then see what you were two years, or three years, or
seven years past, and now tell me if you find not your selves better, if no^
sensibly increased in the bulk, yet a least in maturity and spiritualnesse of
your graces?

not always equal: Growth not always equal.
as in nature, a child shootes up sometimes more in one year, then afterward
in two or three years, so grace grows not so fast some times as at other
times^ as in nature, diseases, wounds, obstructions, ill diet, etc. may keep
down, so the soul by distempers, falls, ill diet, etc. may be hindered in her
spiritual growth. But a man must take heed of concluding in such Cases, that
God has deserted him: For as I have said before, it is not every fit of
unproficiency, which argues a man in such a state. Yea, all things considered,
it may be, though the growth in times past do exceed the present growth, yet a
man considering the abatement of means of growth, with other strong
impediments of growth, a man may have as full a presence of God with him,
though he for a time grow not as he did.

Be not therefore hasty in passing sentence; For as many through slacknesse and
slownesse to judgment of themselves, are declined, but know it not, so many by
hastiness in judgment, conclude they are deserted, when they are not.

CHAP. XXXIII. The second sort of spiritual desertions, loss of comfort.
NOw I come to the other head of spiritual desertions, the eclipsing of the
comfort of the soul; this is oftentimes the sad case of the Saints; the sons
of peace and consolation are often men of sorrows, cast from a Paradise of
comfort, into a wilderness of discomfort, wandering in a maze of perplexed
thoughts, heavy cares, afflicting fears, bitter sorrows, and vexed with
roarings and yellings of devouring beasts, yea, rent and wounded, and almost
becoming a prey unto them.

Before I come to treat of this mournful state, First, the nature of comfort.
in which the sweet streams of comfort fail, leaving the soul as a parched
heath: I must premise some considerations, about the comfort of the soul.

1 The nature of it. 2 The cause of it. 3 The desectibility of it.
First, of the nature of it: It is a chearelinesse of soul.
It is a chearelinesse or satisfaction of the soul; the name shows the
thing, Comfort is from a word Consortari
which imports strength: and what is comfort, but strengthening of the heart;
and it is expressed by strengthening in the Scriptures. Psalm. 27.14. Psalm.
52.7. Psalm. 104.15. 1 Samuel 23.16. Job 4.4. Esaias 35.3. and discomfort is the
enfeebling of weakening of the soul, so that it cannot walk in its way, but
falls and faints: But comfort keeps her upon the wing, and maintains, yea,
increases her strength; it is the life of the soul: So when Naomi would
express that Boaz should be a comfort to Ruth, she says, He shall be the
restorer of thy life, Ruth 4.15. For take away the contentment of the heart,
and it dies: the damned live in hell, yet because it is a life without
comfort, they are said to dye, and their estate is reckoned a state of death;
They are dead while they live; hence David calls it quickening. Psalm. 119.50.
Thy Word has quickened me: and ver. 93. restoring of comfort to mourners is
called reviving. I dwell with, etc. to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones. Esaias 57.15. So it is said of Jacob when
he heard of his Son, and saw the wagons which he had sent; The Spirit of Jacob
their father revived, Genesis 45.27. Those words of Ezra are not unlike; Grace
has been showed, etc. that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little
reviving in our bondage. Ezra 8.8, 9.

Comfort in a word, Of, A strength of soul.
is that strength and life which the object contributeth to the heart: there is
then a difference of comfort, according to the difference of objects. Every
good thing which a man has either in expectation or possession, yields a
comfort proportionable to its worth, and a man's propriety in it; all good
things in the world, are as the fence of the soul, or her fort against
invasions of fear, care, trouble, misery: so that as he that has the best
guard, strong and able soldiers, is strongest and safest; so the heart is so
much strengthened, as it has of good: Then the best things yield the best
comfort; as the freest fountain yields the fullest streams. But for as much
as not only the property of the object, but the propriety also is the measure
of comfort, therefore according to the degrees of enjoyment of God, so are the
degrees of comfort; those in heaven being fully possessed of God, have a
fullness of comfort; In thy presence is fullness of joy. Psalm. 16.11. But the
Saints in the world have but an imperfect comfort.

1 Not stable; sometimes it is gone, and a day of gladness is turned into a
night of heaviness, so that they complain as the Church, The joy of our heart
is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning. Lament. 5.15.

2 Not full; it is mixed with various fears and sorrows, which like waters of
Marah flow into the soul. For though the object of comfort be sufficient, yet
the assurance and enjoyment of it is deficient, so that as the soul is
comforted, because it has God in a measure, so it is troubled because it wants
still, not being so sure and full of him as it desires.

There are three degrees of spiritual comfort. Three degrees of comfort.


1 Peace, 1. Peace.
when a man agrees with himself, and is freed from that war and combustion
which was within him by incursion of fears, and terrors of soul. This is a
rest in the soul, a rest I say, but not from motion, but from commmotion and
tumult; an uncomfortable state is a tumultuous state; My bowels boiled and
rested not. Job 30.27. he was like the Sea moving and working; it is a
tempestuous condition. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempests and not
comforted. Esaias 54.11. Comfort is the laying of the storm, the hushing of the
winds, the stilling of the raging Sea. When a man has comfort in God, he has
a twofold rest.

1 Mental: While God is hid, the mind is agitated, and rolls to and fro to
seek him, hunting and beating it self out in running after him, but when it
sees him, then it is quieted, and says as David, Return to thy rest oh my
soul, etc. Psalm. 42.7.

2 Cordial: The heart sits in heaviness till it recover what it has lost,
unquietness abides with it, if the mind be puzzled, the heart is troubled; if
the Pilot be disconsolate, how are the passengers afflicted? what tears, what
palenesse, what wringing, what fainting may one see there? what sighing,
crying, howling, screeching may one hear? In such a troubled case is the
heart, when God hides himself and will not be found; like Rachell weeping for
her children and will not be comforted, because they are not: But when the soul
sees God then it is quiet, the cries of the heart are stilled, her wound is
healed, her pain cease, and all is calm.

Joy: Joy.
This is an higher degree of comfort; peace is negative comfort, joy is
positive comfort, that is a cessation or mitigation of trouble, this is an
higher contentment; that is like the laying of the storm, this like the
breaking out of the Sun; a woman in travel, when pain cease is at rest, but
when a child is borne she has joy, John 16.21. A condemned man when he is
pardoned, is at peace, his fears and sorrows cease, but if with his pardon he
attain preferment, he rejoices. There is a kind of joy in peace, and so joy
is the fruit of peace and rest, but still it is a farther contentment than
mere peace, sorrow is turned into joy, Joh. 16.21. but first it is turned into
peace; Joy is the noonetide of comfort, and peace is the morning; peace is a
return to it self, after that it had been tossed and driven from its desired
state, joy is an ascent above it self; peace is a rest within it self: joy
carries the heart higher, it is a kind of elation Gaudiu^ a (...) Ios. Scalig
in Conject.
, which if it be strong is called exultation, which is a kind of valting and
leaping of the mind, yea a leaping out of it self Exultatio est gaudium
gestuosum, ab ex and salto. Becmde orig. lat. ling.
: peace is contentment when the heart is bounded by its condition, and is not
effused, and poured out of its own channel, as the river is when the channel
is too scant or not passable; but joy is an enlargement of the heart Laetus,
qu. Latus. Vt moerore contrahimur, sic and gestimus gaudio. Sen. Laetis
diffunditur per universum corpus calor, ac plus foris motus ejus essertur, ut
tristibus intro. Galen l. 3. de causis pulsuum. Apud Cornel. a lap. in Proverb.
17.22. Dilatatur affectus per delectationem, quasi se tradens ad continendum
interius rem delectantem. Aquin. 1.2. q. 33. a. 1.
: It is called enlargement of heart, Psalm. 119.32. the heart opens it self, and
is filled with the thing it loves.

Triumph and glorying, Triumph, and that in two things
which is joy elevated, and it consists in two things.

victoriousnesse and magnanimous conquest of heart over all things;
Victoriousnesse of spirit.
when the heart is raised to this pitch of comfort in God, all the world is
brought under a man, and the greatest evils cannot daunt; There is such a
gradation as we speak of Romans 5. We have peace toward God, ver. 1. we rejoice
in hope, ver. 2. and not only so, but we glory in tribulation also, ver. 3.

boasting and holy vaunting of heart; Boasting in God.
the word which is used by the Apostle for glorying, imports a jetting, or
strutting of the neck, (...), ab (...), ab (...) Cervix.
it is often used by the Apostle for boastings, as 2 Cor. 9.2. Romans 2.17.23.
Chap. 11.18. 2 Cor. 10.8, etc. A man boasts when he is full of that which he
thinks excellent, and to add worth and excellency to him; when a man counts
it not only happiness but honor to have such a God, and is not only not
ashamed of him, but in his account magnified by him; when he is able to hold up
his spirit against the proffers and terrors of the world, and does profess to
heaven and earth amidst all blasphemies, jealoufies, threats, sufferings,
glory, which is in the world, that God is good, sufficient, worthy of all love,
fear, and trust: I say when the heart comes with undauntednesse and full
contentment, sets God against all, this is a holy boasting of God, or in God;
like that of David, I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall
continually be in my mouth, my soul shall make her boast in the Lord, Psalm.
34.2. In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever, Psalm.
44.8. Psalm. 64.10.

CHAP. XXXIV. The causes and root of comfort.
NOw from the nature of spiritual comfort, let us descend to the cause and
root of it, and that we may not run too large a compass, we will confine our
selves to the causes; 1 Efficient, First cause efficient, God.
2 Material.


The efficient cause is various, but we will only pitch upon the principal
working cause, which is God, who is called the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3.
Patrem dicens non unius misericordiae tantum, sed misericordiarum, and Deum non
unius sed totius consolationis: qui consolatur nos non modo in hac vel ill. 1.
sed in om^i tribulatione, etc. Bern. Sermon. 5. de natal. Dom.
here briefly two things; 1 That it is of God, 2 How wrought by God.


1 That comfort is of God, this appears thus.

1 Suppose a man dead in trespasses and sins, here is required the same power
to give comfort, which is to give life.

2 Suppose one troubled in spirit, vexed with fears, here no less power can
comfort then the power of God.

For comfort in this case is an act of supremacy; as in a civil state, none
can take off chains of imprisonment, but he that put them on; all creatures in
heaven and earth cannot loose him whom God has bound; though all should speak
well, yet if God frown, chide, smite, condemn, this prevails, because he is
supreme; nothing can comfort, but to have what God only can give, as pardon
of sin, deliverance from hell, etc. and to know what God only can reveal,
as whether sin be pardoned, God reconciled, etc. these things God only
knows, and none can know them but those to whom he reveals them; and
farther, when God afflicts, he does it for an end, till that be compassed, the
soul lies in the deeps; grief and fear is to bring in the heart to Christ,
therefore none but he can take it off, who is set to be the Physician to cure
the sores and wounds of a broken spirit; and there is in the soul when God
shakes it with his power, a disposition so set toward him, that nothing can
satisfy the soul but his favor.

3 Consider what comfort is: it is a strength or satisfaction of spirit. That
then which comfort, must be proportionable to, or exceeding that which may
cause grief or trouble; now if a man be in great affliction from the world,
that which can comfort, must be something greater then the world; or if
afflicted by terrors of conscience, comfort cannot be but by one that is
greater then conscience; if death, sin, hell, wrath disquiet the soul, what
good in heaven or in earth can weigh down these, but God himself?

Secondly, God works comfort. First, preparing the soul.
note how this comfort is wrought by God: There are three acts of God
concurring in this work of comfort.

Preparation, or disposing of the soul for comfort, by giving sight.
Preparation, or disposing of the soul for comfort, by giving faith.
Preparation, or disposing of the soul for comfort, by giving fitness.
Collation of the matter of comfort. Attestation, etc.
illuminates the understanding to see the true fountain and proper object of
true comfort, By illumination.
with the means and conditions of it; till a man know the excellency of
spiritual things, with their sufficiency and eternity, and till he see them
haveable and attainable, either the heart is deluded with the dying vanities of
this sinful and mortal life, or held under the terrors of a guilty, accusing,
misgiving and despairing conscience. Though there be incomparable worth, and
most delightful sweetness in Jesus Christ, yet what is this to him that dwells
in darkness? the understanding is the gate both of life and comfort; and as
the heart rueth not what the eye sees not, so it joyeth not in what it knows
not. It is necessary to true and strong consolation, that a man have a sight.

Clear; Dark visions breed but weak comforts; darkness is the harbor and
womb of doubts, and in this case, so far as the soul doubts, it dies. If a
condemned man have a pardon, but so written either for letter, or language,
that he cannot read or understand it though his pardon is his life indeed, ye^
it is but small comfort at present.

Extended; The heart cannot be established and filled with comfort, till the
latitude of the object of comfort appear; except the mind see things in all
their due requisites, which makes them able to comfort fully, there will be
somewhat wanting to a peaceful state; as if he see a worth, but not fitness,
or if that, yet if not the possibility, or if that, yet not sufficiency; or if
that, yet not perpetuity; I say, if any one of these appear not, the heart
will remain unsatisfied; what a check to contentment in a thing is this, when,
though a man sees it is good, yet he says, it is not fit for me, it pleases
not, or it is not possible, I cannot obtain it, or it is not sufficient, it
will not serve my turn, or it is fading and not certain, I may lose it again?

Actual; For not knowing good, but minding good does comfort, habitual
knowledge does not comfort; it has a power to comfort, but till our knowledge
be actual, it gives not actual comfort; it is but as fire in the Embers,
which warmeth not except it be blown up; the rich promises laid up in a
knowing man, is but as bread in the Cubbord, which except by actual knowledge
the mind feed upon, it starves. If a man have much wealth in his Chest, except
he take it forth for his use, wherein is he happier than a beggar? though the
Well be full of water, yet except a man draw it out, he may thirst: We must not
forget our consolation; unmindfulnesse breeds uncomfortablenesse; when
therefore God will give comfort, he is the remembrancer of his people.

Serious; For fleeting thoughts breed flashie comforts; passant viewes and
glances of the mind cannot raise a settled comfort, nay rather they discomfort
as much by their vanishing, as they comfort by their presence. The fruit of
such sights of God, Christ, heaven, etc. yields a present, but a transient
blaze of joy, like fire in straw, soon up, and soon down; yea, this sweelnesse
leaves a bitterness, and wounds the heart to lose that so quickly, which i^
had so happily; so that by such transitory gusts, the soul learnes more indeed
how to prize the things for sweetness, and how to lament them for their
absence; and not his comfort, but his sorrows are increased by such cursory
viewes; howsoever, this is sure, except our light be permanent, our comfort
will be transient, and the heart will be still unsatisfied; these fits of
glaring light, are but like night-lighinings, which make not day; it is night
still in the soul, because the Sun sets over it; when therefore God
comfort, he fixes the eye of the soul upon himself, and the good things of
his grace.

preparation of the heart for comfort, is working of faith, By working faith.
which is the main organ of comfort; though a man know the Gospel, yet except
he believe it, all the glorious treasures of grace and mercy in it, are but as
a golden dream, or a pleasant tale, or as a fire which is painted on a wall,
which yields neither light nor heat: the word profits not him that belee^eth
not. This was the case of the lews, they had great promises made to them, But
the Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it, Heb. 4.2. (...). h. c. Caleb and Joshua; qui soli crediderunt: sic
Chrysostom. Theoph. Oecumen, At intelliguntur potius ipsi Judaei. Par. etc. (...):
Vt vinum aqua temperatum fit mitius and utilius infirmis, ita ardua illa
promissio opinione major and incredibilis, non admis^a side, non profait.
Cornel. a lapide. a cibo been condito ducit Metaphoram. Camer. in Respons. ad
Quaest. in Hebr. at (...) Legunt Syridc. verse. Beza. Marian. Estius. Aug. in
Psalm. 77. etc.
As exceeding strong drink not tempered, and qualified, profits not nature, so
those great promises so much exceeding opinion, and expectation of reason, not
being mixed with faith, did not profit them; or as some conceive, the Metaphor
lies thus; as he that drinks of an empty cup, so were they not believing, the
promise to them was but as an empty cup; or, as in the margin of out Bibles,
they were not united by faith to them that heard, i. e. to them that believed,
so that they had not the same benefit by the word.

Faith then is a necessary requisite, and that 1. as a condition upon which
comfort is given. 2. As an instrument by which it is received; for faith gives
the promise a life and subsistence, though not in it self, yet in us; except
the Gospel be believed, it has no dwelling, no root, no power, no life, no
being to us, but is as a thing that is not; therefore God works faith which
does enable and dispose the soul to suck sweetness from the breasts of
consolation: Joy and peace are fruits of faith. Now the God of hope fill you
with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope through the
power of the Holy Ghost. Romans 15.13.

The third act of preparation, Thirdly, Sanctification.
is sanctification; which is simply necessary to true comfort; 1 As a condition
of the Covenant, for without holiness no man shall see God; Heb. 12.14. 2 As
disposing the soul; for these two things are required to make a man capable of
comfort.

Life; When a man is dead in himself, he is dead to all things, and all things
are dead to him, the best cordialls are no better then puddle water, the
richest jewels no better then the mea^est trash to a dead man.

Sutablenesse: What comfort does apiece of flesh yield to a sheep? and what is
a rich pasture to a man? that only is comfortable that is good to a man, and
that only is good which is convenient; the best dish is but as poison to him
who has an antipathy against it; the nature of man is such, that since it
forsook God, it so cleaves to the creature, that till it be healed it is not
capable of spiritual comforts, and could no more live in God then a Fish in
the air. There is a certain compass of goodness which every creature walks
in: the world is divided among them, and every sort of creatures has its
latitude, which is bounded by its particular form and disposition; the Fishes
keep below in the waters, their walk is in the deeps; the beasts in herit the
earth and go no higher, they mind not honor, riches, learning, etc. these
are the flowers of that Eden which mankind has in possession, and these are
the highest things of a natural man, but heaven, the Gospel, God, Christ,
etc. are the portion of the spiritual man, the new creature; man must be
elevated above the pitch of nature, (as now it is) to live in these things. The
eye is made for light and colors, the ear for sounds and voices, the smell
for favors, the mind for truths, the will for good, so every thing is fitted
for its object. And as in motion there is no rest but in a sit place, so the
soul could not be quieted and pleased in spiritual things, except there were
a fitness and agreement betwixt them Eis solum fruimur, in quibus voluntas
delectata quiescit. Aquin. S.P. 1.2. q. 11. a. 3.
. There are some velleities and imperfect motions of a natural will heightened
by the Gospel; but these give not true comfort, because the will eloseth not;
it is easily moved from them, as a globous or round body upon a plain, is
easily moved because it has but a weak hold, it touches but in a point; but
a plain or square body upon a plain stands fast and has full rest, because
their superficies do agree, and they mutually meet and close together.

The second work of God in giving comfort is collation of matter of comfort:
Secondly, God comfort by giving matter of comfort.
God bestows things comfortable, these are the food and fuel of joy; when
God says, Be of good cheer, be comforted, he does not do as those whom the
Apostle reproves, James 2.15.16. If a brother or sister be naked and destitute
of daily food, and you say unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed, and
filled, notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful to
the body, what does it profit? When God comes to comfort, he gives that
which may comfort, precious promises, sweet mercies; as pardon, grace, light,
heaven, his favor, presence, ordinances, Christ, etc. Who is able to sum up
the riches and treasures which God bestows upon his people as a portion to
live upon? great things in possession, greater in reversion: Oh how great is
thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou
have wrought for them that trust in thee, etc. Psalm. 31.19. Isay 64.4. Dic
nobis qui praeparas, quid praeparas? replebimur bonis domus tuae, sed quibus?
etc. id quaerimus quod oculus non vidit, etc. Bern. Sermon. 11. in Cant.
explicans illud Isaiae c. 64.4.
So that when a man shall see himself so fully stored, he may with mirth and
gladness say to his soul, soul take thine ease, thou have much goods laid up
for many years; having such a portion he is a rich man, enjoying such a
sufficiency as is a strong basis of rest and contentment, and makes him live a
life above men, Dives a Divus. Varro de ling. lat. l. 4.
a life only in degree inferior to the life of Angels: that Paradise which God
made for Adam was as a desert to this Sharon, those fruitful trees were but
shadows of the happiness which is in this new Eden, the garden which God has
planted for his people.

The third work of God in Comforting his people is, attestation: Thirdly,
witnessing
the soul is exposed to many controversies, and is prone to unquiet
agitations; it is hardly-satisfied; though it have a present happiness, yet it
has a provident and sollicitous eye upon future times, and extends her cares
and fears even to eternity. Add also unto this, the mind is hardly satisfied
in that which it comprehends not, and sinful reason will be wrangling where it
sees not its way and end, but must take all upon trust and credit: and in
things of moment a serious and fearful man is apt to entertain jealousies,
nam veluti pueri trepidant, atque omnia coecis in tenebris, metuant, sic nos in
luce timemus, etc. Lucret
and will soarce believe what it sees, quicquid id est, timeo Danaos et dona
ferentes.
but though God pronounce him blessed, yet he is apt to call his tenure into
question, and to cast himself in the suit: The doubts and controversies by
which the soul is vexed, may be reduced to 2. heads; concerning 1. the
Gospel. concerning 2. themselves.


question is about the Gospel. There is abundance of unbeleefe in the soul;
The truth of the Gospel.
it is a difficult thing and a rare thing to believe; there are two things
which much hinder faith.

1. A disposition in man to judge of all things by sense or reason.

2. The inevidence of the Gospel: As things are more or less clearly
propounded to sense or reason, so they are received with assent more or less;
A Philosopher believes more strongly, that the Sun is much bigger than the
earth, or that there will be an eclipse at such or such a time, than a Country
man; when we say the object of faith is not evident, we must distinguish of
evidence: Evidence is of 1. narration. Evidence is of 2. the thing.


Evidence of narration is when a thing is so expressed as it may be understood,
so the Scripture is evident and clear.

Evidence of the thing, is, when either sense or reason apprehends it.

Thus the things of the Gospel are inevident, Such as eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor etc. 1 Cor. 2.9.

The Gospel is divided into Doctrine. The Gospel is divided into History. The
Gospel is divided into Prophecy.
1. The Doctrine has in it somewhat that is evident, and easily falling in
with reason, for there are things in it appertaining to natural Philosophy,
as elements, men, beasts, trees, etc. to Ethics, as all the moral rules and
virtues; to Oeconomicks, precepts for ordering of families; to Politics, laws
for Cities and Common wealths. These a natural understanding can deal with.
But there are other things of more high nature, which are called Supernatural,
as the Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, etc. these are above reason.

2. The History: this is of things past, and have no evidence to sense, for
what can the eye see of Paradise, the Flood, the Arc, etc. nor to reason, by
any thing in themselves; how should reason conclude that such things have
been, but that they are related and revealed?

3. The Prophefie; this is of things to come, and so to come as that a man
cannot see them as a Philosopher may see the effects in their Causes, for they
come within such a course; nor can any creature by reason conclude their
futurity; but as their being depends upon Gods Will, so their manifestation
(that they will come) is only by Gods Word. Hence it is that nature being so
unapt to receive things upon trust, and desiring to see all hold to rules of
sense and reason, is very hardly brought to believe the Gospel. Because of
this unbeleevingnesse we need a divine assistance, which is the working of
faith, and witnessing unto faith, (or to the believer) the truth of the
Gospel; there are many witnesses of the Gospel, therefore it is frequently
called the Testimony, there is a cloud of Witnesses, miracles, Heb. 2.4. the
Ministers and Apostles and Prophets among them especially, Acts 10.43. c.
26.16. c. 5.32. the Saints, Esaias 43.10. but the Holy Ghost is the head of this
Grand jury, Heb. 10.15. 1 Ioh. 5.6. he comes with his testimony and setleth the
heart in assurance of the Gospel, that it may find firm ground and sure
footing: so long as faith is wavering, comfort will be unstable; the house
cannot be strong, if the foundation be weak, the Gospel is the foundation,
and if that be laid firm, the whole fabric of peace will stand strongly,
able to bear out all storms and tempests.

question is concerning themselves, Their interest.
and their interest in the Gospel: For though a man know clearly what that
faith and holiness is which gives him a real title to the promise, yet he may
be unable to know his faith to be that faith. There be many things which make
true faith, often hardly discernable. 1. Great imperfection; it is hard to know
certainly when 1 plant is newly put up above ground, what it is; a low faith
has but little evidence, there is a light in every grace to show it self; but
as it is with some stars, they are so small that they are scarce seen; so a
man may have faith, and yet not be able to say positively and peremptorily,
that he does believe. similitude of false faith and true: a man may know in
general what is requisite to the nature of gold, yet when he comes to apply
his rules, he may be puzzeled, because art can exactly imitate nature, yea so,
as that a famous Painter was deceived by a fly, which, though it was
artificial, yet he thought was natural. conscience is not always a competent
Judge, because it may be clouded with fears and jealousies, Satan often does
so snarle this question, that the soul is not able to extricate it self. We
need therefore the help of the Spirit, whose Office it is to be our Comforter.
And as conscience in its Court is witness, advocate, and Judge Ipse accusator,
Iudex, Carnifex, vermis remordens. Quintil. l. 5 Instit.
, so is the Spirit: he is a Witness giving evidence concerning the fact, that
this is done, i. e. that the man does believe; he is an Advocate to plead the
lquity of his Cause, and that by the law of grace he should live; he is the
Judge by pronouncing sentence, applying the Law of grace in a judicial way, and
says, the soul shall live. But all are comprised in the testimony, for it is
a testimony clearing and determining the Case. That there is such a testimony
S.S. donat animae pignus salutis, scilicet test imoniu^ quod silius Dei sis.
of the Spirit as does evidence the ^yuth and sincerity of grace, and
consequently a personal interest in the promise, appears farther by these
Arguments.

1. Ber. Sermon. 2. in Pent. Arguments proving this testimony.
The spirit of bondage and the Spirit of adoption, are opposed each to other,
Romans 8.15. Now the thing wherein they are opposed. is their proper working, the
one causing fear, the other peace: Look then into the work of the spirit of
bondage, and you will find (...) does not only enlighten the soul to know
and apprehend in general wrath against sin, and to apprehend what sin i^, but
it evidenceth to a man particularly, that his ways are ways of sin, and conse
quently works a kind of plerophorie of hell, a dreadful expectation of wrath
upon himself; so that a man comes to conclude upon conviction; I am the man
who have transgressed, and I am the man which (except salvation come to me in
Christ) shall be damned. And as the spirit of bondage thus joyneth in the
sentence of condemnation, by stirring up, clearing, fixing, and strengthening
the conscience, in like manner the Spirit of adoption works with Conscience
in the sentence of absolution, reconciliation, and adoption.

Comforter, which will not be questioned, it must witness the truth of our
believing, and by that our interest in the promise, because till this be done,
till a man be assure^ that his faith is saving, he cannot be satisfied in
this question which now troubles him, whether he shall be^ saved, or whether
mercy be his portion. There are three maine steps to comfort. 1. Salvation
comes through Christ in the free promise, but here it yields (...) other
comfort but this, it may be mi^^ if I receive it. 2. The heart goes (...) to
take hold of salvation, this is a farther step to comfort, and here the
foundation is laid; but yet though this be sufficient to life and salvation in
the end, yet it is not sufficient to peace and consolation at present; a man
cannot be satisfied till he attain a third thing; which is this, a knowledge
that he has rightly and savingly received salvation.

definition of faith and holiness were sufficient to give assurance to him
that truly believes, that he does truly believe, then none that are so
qualified, and do reflect carefully upon themselves, can be uncertain or
doubtful whether their faith be right or no: But now we see often times that
even men that have much grace, and quick sighted understandings are much in
fears of their own estates, and have given themselves for hypocrites,
unsound, yea dead, yea damned men, read Psalm. 88. and there see Heman as a sad
instance of such an heavy condition: Grace lies often so hidden that they that
seek it cannot find it in themselves Habitus fidei est (secundum Theologos)
medium incognitum, saepe enim non sentitur Baron. apod. ad Turneb. Tetragon.
.

4. Consult that text, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the children of God. Besides, the stream of
Interpreters, who give testimony to this testimony of the Spirit, let the place
it self be considered.

1 The Text: In which there are three things which come in as props to this
truth.

1 The Spirit witnesses with our spirits (...).
: here are two distinct witnesses, our spirits, that is, our conscience or
understanding renewed, and Gods Spirit; God keeps the course which himself
appointed, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every thing shall be
confirmed.

2 The Spirit himself (...), non idem Spiritus, qu. (...), ut Erasm. vis.
Estium
, sometimes the graces and gifts of the spirit are called the spirit, as John
1.15. Acts 6.5. 1 Cor. 14.32. Gal. 3.2. But so it is not to be taken here, Not
(...), but (...).
but the spirit in this place is the Holy Ghost himself, for so it is
expressed; not the Spirit, but the Spirit himself Non modo vox praestiti
charismatis, sed and praestantis illius paracleti, Chrysostom Non solius charismatis
vox est, sed donantis Spiritus. Oecumen.
: the graces of the Spirit are witnesses, as every effect is a witness of its
cause, so God left not himself without witness to the heathen, Acts 14.17.
but by his works did declare himself; so Christ says, his works be are
witness of him, John 5.36. But this is not all the testimony which the Spirit
gives to the Saints, but himself does it, says the text.

3 With our Spirits: There is the particular application of the Spirit, it is
not thus, the Spirit witnesses that those that believe are sons; as if it
were only a testification of the truth of the Gospel; but it is thus, the
Spirit witnesses with our our spirits, that we, even we are the Sons of God.

2 Consider the Context: the thing which the Apostle, (for their comfort) would
prove, is, that they shall live, v. 13. but how does he prove it? because they
are sons, ver. 14. and that they are sons, he gives a twofold evidence; 1
The Spirit of adoption, by which they cry Abba, Father. But they might say, may
not men be deceived, and claim a child's place with God when he is a stranger?
therefore he adds, secondly, the Testimony of the Spirit: The Spirit himself
bears witness with our spirits, that we are the sons of God: As if he had
said, you have a sure ground of assurance Si homo, Angelus, Archangelus aliquid
promiserit, forte quis dubitaverit, suprema vero essentia Spiritus Dei
testimonium nobis intus perhibente, quisnam dubitationi locus? Chrysostom. apud Par.
, for not only your own spirits, but God with them joins in testimony that
ye are children.

But concerning this testimony, note;

1 That all the Saints have it not, at least in such a measure as to settle the
heart clearly in this persuasion, that they believe, and are children; nor is
the testimony of our own spirits alike, in all, but as the graces are more
evident and conspicuous, so is the testimony clearer; and herein differs the
testimony of Gods Spirit, and our spirit; our spirits give testimony according
to the measure, workings, and evidence of our graces; but the Spirit of God
gives often less testimony to the best Christians, and all have it not, at
least not in a satisfactory degree.

2 It is a testimony, which for ought appears in the word may cease, they that
have it may want it, though it be true that when once the testimony is
obtained, though it abide not it self actually and always, yet the efficacy
should, so that it is weakness to doubt again, because it is the voice of
God, a judicial sentence.

3 It may be discerned from all fantastical, How this testimony is
discernable from delusion.
or diabolical Enthusiasmes.

It discovers it self in those that have it; as the light of the Sun does
difference it self from all other lights, so that he that has a full
testimony knows it to be of God: Ye know him, for he dwells with you and
shall be in you, John 14.17. And it must needs be so, else the testimony should
not be sufficient; for the question would still remain undecided concerning a
man's condition; It is as much to be regarded who speaks, as what is spoken
Tam refert quis, quam, quid?
: Though a man heard a voice from heaven, or a voice within him declaring and
pronouncing his reconciliation and adoption, yet except he know it is of God,
it will not satisfy. As if a condemned man should have news of his pardon,
yet except he know it is the Kings act, it cannot quiet him.

2 It is ever according to the word; the witness of the spirit, and of the
word, is the same; there are two voices or determinations, or testimonies of
the word; the one is concerning the way, the other concerning the end, that is,
the word says, They that believe shall be saved; but then the question is,
who believes? to this the word answers, by describing what that faith is,
which saves, and so as the rule gives sentence of that which is to be ruled by
it, when the word and faith in the heart are brought together by examination,
the word eytheraccepts or rejects, approves or disalloweth of faith, as it is
in it self true or false; but as when the gold is brought to the touchstone,
though the stone may give it for true gold, yet the examiner may want skill to
perceive this testimony, so it is in this case; the word is the Law, by which
all are judged; but as in a Civil State there is need of a Judge to open and
apply the Law to particular cases, so there is need of the Spirit to join with
the word to give out not another verdict, but that of the word, which is made
more intelligible by the Spirit; not varyed, but opened: Still the testimony is
the same; so that the Spirit never loses where the word binds, therefore
those that live in pride, idleness, or any other way of sin, and pretend
assurance of salvation given by the Spirit, are deceived; for if a man be such
as the word condemns, there is no absolution from God while he continues such.

is holy: holy formally, originally, effectively, it makes holy, more humble,
more contrite, more watchful, more zealous, more thankful, etc. That
assurance which breeds vanity, contempt of ordinances, neglect of duties,
security in sin, is deceitful and abominable.

Thus of the Efficient cause; The matter of comfort.
now the matter of spiritual comfort follows. That which is comfortable,
must be such as can in some measure satisfy and fill the desire and appetite
of the soul; for so long as desire is held from her object, there is an
unrest, and unquietness in the heart, there will be a whining and crying of
spirit, there is pain in hunger, and grief in want; now as desire is an
extension, or reaching of the soul after something futable, so it is not
satisfied; But, 1 Either by possession of the thing, 2 Or by hope and
expectation.


So that the proper object of spiritual comfort, is,

1 Things spiritual, given to us, and received by us here, as the light of
Gods countenance, the quicknings of his spirit, subduing of lusts, success in
our prayers, tastes of heaven, etc.

2 Things promised: as in the former, desire is turned into joy, and the
accomplishment of desire becomes a tree of life, Prove. 13.12. so here it
becomes hope, and this hope gives comfort; it is the Anchor of the soul,
and the best cure of sorrow in the want of things future (...). Naz. (...).
: we are saved by hope; Romans 8.24. The maine things of our life and happiness
for eternity are ours only in the promise Hoc ipsum quod Christiani sumus,
spei est. Cypr. de boo pat.
.

Concerning these things, note,

1 That the promise gives as strong comfort to faith, as things present to
sense, yea greater; For, 1 The things to come are greater. 2 More permanent, 1
Cor. 13. 3 Sure, Fidelis futura veluti praesentia possidet, and magis ea adesse
putat, quam praesentia. Clem. Alex.
so that faith makes them as present, Heb. 11.1.


2 The soul may have the comfort of hope, yet lose that of sense; it may find
the way sad, when it believes the end will be sweet.

3 If a man lose the life and comfort of hope, he loses the comfort of sense,
his way will be sad who is afflicted about his end.

4 According to the strength of faith and hopes claim, comfort is advanced,
when hope fluctuates and looks for eternal life, only as possible, or
probable, then comfort also is unstable and weak; but when it looks upon it
as certainly future, then the heart has a full rest.

Now having seen the nature and Causes, Comfort may be lost.
let us come to the defectibility of Comfort: It may be lost: the tenure of
grace and peace is not the same, in point of Comfort, we are but tenants at
will, and may in a moment be turned out of a heaven upon earth, into a hell
upon earth. Comfort is not of the being, but well being of the Saints; it is
rather a reward than grace, and belongs rather to glorification, than
sanctification. Not joy makes a Christian, but grace; as it is the light, not
the warmth of the sun that makes day: so that this may fail. 1. God may
suspend his testimony; or, 2. He may let in Satan to afflict; or, 3. Hide
himself, and not meet them in approches to him, in combats for him, etc. I
must cut my self short here, for I see the book swells bigger than I desire:
Let this therefore suffice for entrance into the business it self.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the state and degrees of this sad condition.
NOw I come to the sad state of the soul wanting the comforts of the Holy
Ghost, God withdrawing himself in respect of that gracious effusion of his
mercy, and manifestation of his love to the soul, shutting up those sweet
streams of refreshment which were wont to flow.

Here I will speak of 1 The Case, 2 The Cure.


The state of a deserted and disconsolate soul requires to consider of 1 The
nature, of it. 2 Degrees, of it. 3 Effects, of it. 4 Cause, of it.


First then let us see what it is; It is an eminent and abiding
uncomfortablenesse of heart toward God, or a loss of that comfort which the
soul was wont to have in God.

loss of comfort in God: A man may have much unquietness, It is a loss of
comfort toward God.
and yet not be in this case we speak of; discomfort, except the object of it
be Gods displeasure, or departure, makes not a deserted case: A man may be
afflicted in his spirit many ways, yet Gods wonted presence may continue: As
the conscience of some sin may cause much sadness, and mourning, either some
sin stirring, or some sin acted may much afflict; but trouble of
reluctance, or sorrow of repentance are there, and will be there where God is
most present; Paul is a pattern in the first, Romans 7. and David in the
other, Psalm. 51.

The sins of others may disquiet: Rivers of tears run down mine eyes,
because men keep not thy laws, Psalm. 119. Lot, Ezra, all that have most of
God, have most of these sorrows, and these sorrows are no miseries, but
mercies; there is much sweetness in this temper.

The troubles of the Churches, may in a way of compassion and sympathy afflict,
yea outward afflictions may in a natural way pain the spirit for a time, and
the soul may mourn because of its deficiencies, and poverty, wanting that
compleatnesse of holiness which it desires Non perfect de aliquo gaudet cui
non sufficit. Aquin
, though present degrees of grace are sweet, yea, because sweet, the soul is
not contented, being in a state of want, it will be in motion till it attain
the fullness, Philip. 3.12. but desertion imports a loss of comfort in God.

usual comfort; as the former kind of desertions is a loss of usual
quicknings, A loss of usual comfort.
so this is a loss of usual quietness. And as there are seasons in which God
gives more of himself in way of quickening, then he will constantly continue,
so he gives comfort sometimes in such fullness as shall not always abide; Not
of extraordinary comfort.
every day is not a feasting day: Paul was taken up into the third heavens, but
he came down again; the Sun does not always shine in an equal luster. God
sometimes gives coruscations of glory, but like lightnings they shut in again.
As a father sometimes sends for his sons from school and makes merry with
them at home, but these play times come not every day, they must to school
again, and live under tutors and governors till they come to full age: God
opens himself much at some times.

1 In special approaches of the soul to him, then a man sees and tastes
such things that he is loath to depart, but these comforts though they come
from Heaven, yet like plants that are carried out of their native soil and
climat, keep not their sweetness in a constant height; a man warmeth himself
at the fire and is refreshed, but this refreshment wears off again.

2. In times of great afflictions: the greatest comforts are usually found in
sufferings, then God opens himself. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. The Martyrs did shine like
stars in the night of persecution, and abounded most in comfort, when filled
most with troubles.

3. In the Ordinances lively administered; here so much is found, that a man
says as the Apostle, it is good to be here, yea as Jacob, This is none other
but the house of God, this is the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17. Tertul. l. de
fugat. Putat Iacobum hic vidisse Christum: apud Cornel a lap. in loc.


4 In times of abundant sorrow and melting of heart, God often in such cases
breaks in with sweet effusions of peace, as to Ephraim, Ier. 31.18, 19, 20.

5 At the time of Conversion, God often comes with extraordinary comfort, many
(as one observes) came to Christ in their sins and went away renewed;
afflicted, and went away comforted; coming with an hell in their souls, and
going away with Heaven; having a fullness of joy, instead of a fullness of
fears.

I need not make farther instances, the case is clear that comfort may fule,
yet except a man lose that comfort which he ordinarily did enjoy, he is not
deserted.

3. It is an eminent loss: 3. An eminent loss.
it is not every cloud that makes night, but when the air is full of
darkness, 4. Not a fit, but a state of uncomfortablenesse.
when the Sun is set.

4. It is not a fit of uncomfortablenesse, but a state; an eclipse of the Sun
makes not night; he is not a poor man that has a present want, but he that
lives in want; every cold blast makes not winter.

Secondly, The Degrees.
the degrees of this uncomfortable state follow to be considered: there are
some nights darker than others, and some winters colder than other, and there
are degrees of Gods withdrawing from the soul.

Degree, when his quieting presence is much abated: When quickening is abated.


1. Not so full as has been; 1. Not so full.
God seems not so friendly, but looks somewhat more strangely, so that the
soul complains as Jacob, I see your Father countenance that it is not toward
me a before, Genesis 31.5. When the soul come to God, it finds not those
enliveni^ and refreshing visions and tastes; the (...) of consolation that was
wont to b^ filled is now but empty; the heavens a^^ not so clear, his hopes
are not so full his knowledge of his happiness (...) more obscured, and fears
begin to ov^^ flow; the light of Gods face is darlened, and the soul is
troubled.

2. Not so frequent: 2. Not so frequent.
the visits of the comforting Spirit are more seldom; God holds off as if he
were about to break off from the soul; it is a grief when a friend goes
often by us, and seldom owneth us; so it is heaviness when the soul
complains, (to use the words of Job in another sense) Lo he goes by me and I
see him not, he passes on also, but I perceive him not, Job. 9.11. Time was
when the soul had good news from Heaven every day, but now she is like the
wife, who when her husband is gone far from her, hears but seldom from him:
returns are not so quick at a great distance; God is so sparing in
manifestations of kindness, that the soul thinks it long; How long will thou
forget me oh Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? Psalm.
13.1. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?
will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Has GOD
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Psalm.
77.7, 8, 9. My soul faints for thy salvation, I hope in thy word, mine eyes
fail for thy word, when will thou comfort me? Ps. 119.81, 82.

3. Not so permanent; 3. Not so permane^t.
God comes and goes: the day of their peace is often overcast, the comforts
which did flow, ebb again; the soul is grieved as much with Gods sudden
departure, as delighted in his gracious presence; it has not so constant
health, but is well only by fits; the soul that was as a dewlling place to
her friend, is but as an Inn now; He whom she loves comes rather as a
stranger and as a passenger than an inhabitant, so that here you may hear the
Prophets complaint, Oh the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble, why should (...) thou be as a stranger in the land, and (...) way
faring man that turns aside to tarry for a night? Jer. 14.8. Comfort come
like thin clouds that yield sweet showers, but are soon gone; the gourd whose
shade was sweet, soon withers; the heart is become like a cracked vessel,
which though it receive much, yet holds but little; the waters of life run out
as fast as they come in.

Degree: Much quickness, but no quietness.
is when there is much quickness, but no quietness: grace lives, but peace
dies; the soul is so far happy, that it seeks what it has lost, but
herein unhappie that it finds not what it seeks; it thirsts but drinks not,
it runs but obtaines not; holiness is in flourish, but it is the winter of
comfort. David was full of holy affections, even when he was empty of
consolation; when is the heart in better case then when it calls, inquires,
runs, weepeth, sigheth, cries after God? yet in such a case a man may want
all comfort: the richest ships may wander in the dark and be tossed in the
storm: sometimes a father will frown upon the best and dearest child; the
most living Christian may lay himself out for dead, Ps. 88. Grace and peace
are not linked in indissoluble society, these lovers may shake hands and part.
And the more a man abounds in grace, the more grievous it is to want the
comfortable presence of God; a fathers frown and such a fathers frown, is
bitter to so filial a spirit; strangeness to strangers is not strange, but to
lovers it is grievous. But it is a less evil in it self when God is with the
soul quickening it, though he do not comfort it, then when God leaves it in
uncomfortable deadness; though it be more bitter to sense, yet in reason it is
worse, when comfort cease, and grace sleeps at once.

Degree when both are gone.
Degree: When neither comfort nor liveliness, but a night of darkness and
woeful deadness covers the soul, when hope and love are both in a damp, so
that a man is as far from a holy and living state of heart, as from comfort,
neither joying nor desiring, but being fallen from the height of living and
joyful converse with God; he is like the prodigal brought to another life, to
feed upon husks with swine, instead of bread in his Fathers house. Many such
there are who had reviving tastes of Jesus Christ, and did rejoice to see the
streams of the well of Life sweetly flowing, and with overflowing abundantly
filling the Saints and themselves with comfort, but now the tree in the midst
of their paradise, is to them like the withered fig tree, the shadow and fruit
of it cease, and they are miserable in the loss of that which is the
happiness of those that have it, and herein their misery is so much the
greater by how much they count it less. Is it not a sad thing to see a man so
degenerated, that he can live without his life, and rest out of his place? that
place where he has had such peace and such contentment? Oh here is an heavy
spectacle; a man has lost his estate and he grieves; he has lost his name,
or health, or etc. and he grieves, but he has lost his God, and yet he
mournes not: he says it is well, alas, he is not himself; when the day
breaks, and the Sun sends, out her beams into this dark region; when a
spirit of truth and life shall brings this wandering creature home again, and
cause him to be himself, then you shall see the man acting another part,
alas, what amazement will ceaze upon him? how will he melt, that is now frozen?
how will he be afflicted to see himself and his case, in which, now he lies
as quiet, as Peter in his chains? Acts 12.

Degree: When not only loss of comfort but affliction of soul.
Degree; when God not only suspends his comforts, but afflicts the soul;
not only not continuing the staff of living bread, but feeding them with the
bread of sorrow and affliction, which he does diverse ways.

1. 1. By rebukes of spirit: 4. ways.
By rebukes of spirit: the Spirit of God comes sometimes in a way of
displeasure and chides and rebukes the soul; this David found which makes him
often cry and mourn, as the child whom his Father rebukes; this chiding is,

conviction of sin, not only of the fact, but of the sinfulness; God
sometimes comes to set out a sin unto man, and then it is very dreadful; such a
terror and astonishment ceazeth upon him by a full sight and sense of sin, as
that if there be not a supporting hand of grace and mercy extended to him, he
cannot stand under it. Sin is a strange thing, and if God should pull off the
visage of this monster, and discover fully the fearful nature of it, it would
be a but then too heavy to be borne; now then when God conceales his love and
reveals guilt, it must needs be bitter: when a man sees his indictment, but
has not his pardon, it must needs be grievous.

Opening the desert of sin, and showing a man into what a gulf he has cast
himself, that now in justice and in sentence of Law, he stands condemned to
eternal death; when the grace of the promise is obscured, and the justice of
the Law lively presented, it must needs cause a man to fear much. Now says
God, see what I may do, I may cause all thy welfare to pass away like a
cloud, and bring in a deluge of woes upon thee; I might shut thee by a decreed
banishment from my presence, and cast thee as a stone that is hurled from a
sling, into hell for ever. Such words as these are heavier than mountains;
when the soul sees that vastness of eternity filled with death and
sufferings, and sees not the refuge in the Gospel, this is a great shaking to
the soul.

By holding the eye upon these sad things, so that whithersoever a man turns,
his sin is with him, and hell before him; the cry of sin, and the curse of
the law is ever in his ears; My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.3. It was
also Jobs sad case, that the sins which he thought he had been rid of long
ago, returned upon him, and did so cleave to him, as if they had been his
possession, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the iniquities of my youth; thou put my feet also into the stocks, etc.
Job. 13.26, 27. this is an heavy thing, when God continues in this way of
displeasure, breaking the spirit with these grievous charges.

menacing outward or inward troubles, as he did to David when he had sinned
greatly against him, he told him what he would do, how he would follow him
with evils for ever, and that his posterity should rue his folly; and when he
had numbered the people, what a severe way did God take? now temporary evils,
especially spiritual, are often very grievous; when God shall say I will shut
up my peace, and my comforts from thee; thou rebel and ungrateful wretch,
thou shall no more see my face as thou have done; others shall drink but thou
shall thirst, others shall rejoice but thou shall mourn, I will no more meet
thee as I have done, I will spare thy life, but I will not show thee my favor
all thy days, thou shall live dubiously, and dye anxiously; I say, when these
words are heard, what an heavy case is this? how did David even wast himself
with grieving, when God did estrange himself? Psalm. 32. Psalm. 51.

But when God shall menace not only this, but hell and eternal death, this is
far more grievous; but this God does even to his own, and sets it on so
strongly, that he makes often their spirits to waste, and their strength to
consume. David and Heman were drenched in these deepes; and how grievous were
their complaints?

2. 2. By tradition of the soul. 1. Into its own hands
By tradition of the soul.

1. Into its own hands: the heart of a man is the greatest tyrant, and
cruellest monster against it self; it is more a devil than the devil: he
needs no furies to fulfill his troubles, who is given up unto an accusing
spirit; Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius. Plaut. This is
grievous.
it has cries, clamors, stripes, stings, wounds, deaths; it will be law,
witness, plaintiff, judge, executioner; chains, rackes, gibbets, what not?
he has a hell within him that is in such a case; For consider

temper and nature of the soul, it is receptive of much evil and misery, and
very active, and this activity is improved to self affliction. 1. Byguilt,
which is as powder to the flames, or as the winds to seas, which makes them to
rage and boil. 2. By the weapons, which the heart disquieted has against it
self; an eternal God, and a just Law. 3. By unbeleefe; by which the soul is
made naked to her own blows; a guilty conscience strikes the promise out of a
man's hand, and draws the sword and sheathes it in the soul; it undermines all
forts, and batters down all comforts in former evidences, as walls of paper; it
cuts off all relief, and presents God unwilling to hearken to any
reconcilement; and it has also many abettors, which contribute strength to
make this man more bloody; as temper of body, which powers in abundance of
dark and black thoughts and passions, and the Censures of others, who by their
cloudy aspects, and rejecting carriages, do sharpen the sword in the hands of
an unbeleeving and accusing conscience, that it may make more ghastly wounds,
and draw out fuller streams of blood: Thus the soul, like the man that fell
into the hands of Thieves, is left half dead; distracting and accusing
thoughts, are worse than robbers; a man may say of them, what David said of
Goliahs sword, There is none like that, 1 Samuel 21.9. Here is a soar battle,
when the soul like Saul, falls upon its own sword, 1 Samuel 31.4.

power of God; God has given to Conscience a commission to afflict; God has a
hand in all things, working and ordering; he can send Hornets into the soul,
even stinging thoughts, and piercing fears. He rules much in men's spirits,
and in these seas raises storms at pleasure; though he work not despairing
thoughts in his, yet he orders that unbelief which is in them; and as he
orders the finfulnesse of men's hearts this way or that way, not being a cause
of it, so he does in this case; yea he does present sin and wrath so, that
the heart being left to its own darkness and unbelief, cannot but be a
cruel and active enemy against it self; and now as the Prophet said in that
case, so it may be said to a man in this case, Oh thou sword of the Lord, how
long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and
be still; how can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against
Askelon, and against the sea shore? there has he appointed it. Jer. 47.6, 7.

2. 2. Into Satan's hands
Into Satan's hands: God may leave his people much to the will of Satan, as he
did Job, and he out of envy at our happiness, enmity against God, hatred of
us, is willing to improve all his skill and power to afflict the Saints; so
that a man may here take up that complaint; His troops come together, and
raise up their way against me, and encampe round about my Tabernacle, Job
19.12.

Degree: Degree: When to all this, other evils are added.
when to all this he adds an accumulation of other miseries; as, the disfavour
of the Saints, this is a great cutting to an holy heart, for he construeth
their favor and disfavour to be the reflection of Gods; and inded, oftentimes
God sets on his Children against such as he is displeased with, as a Master of
a family says to his household, concerning a child which he will correct for
much stubbornness, show him no countenance, eat not with him, keep not with
him; so here God says, with such a one have no amity, no fellowship, no
familiarity: it was a great grief to Job, and he complains of it; He has
put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from
me, my kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me, they
that dwell in mine house, and my maids count me for a stranger, I am an aliant
in their sight; I called my servant, and he gave me no answer, I entreated him
with my mouth; my breath is strange to my wife, though I entreated for the
childrens sake of mine own body; yea young children despised me, I arose and
they spoke against me; all my inward friends abhorred me, and they whom I loved
are turned against me, etc. Job 19.13.20. You see sometimes, how even the
nearest friends fall off with God, and when divine grace is clouded, nature it
self is also clouded: Heman also found this evil to all his evils, Thou have
put away mine acquaintance far from me, thou have made me an abomination to
them, Psalm. 88.6.

worldly comforts, as peace, liberty, estate, etc. this was Jobs case. Now when
the soul is bereft of all comforts from heaven and from earth, it is an heavy
case.

means of grace: God may remove his Candlestick and take away the Shewbread,
the doors of his house may be shut, or a man may be imprisoned by sickness,
so that the clouds above, and the springs beneath failing, breed sore distress.

Degree: Degree: When all this is continued.
When all this is extended and continued, so that a man complains not of
days, but years of affliction; a man may lie long in this miserable plight,
like Paul and his company, to whom neither Sun nor Stars appeared for many
days, Nec mihi dant stellae lucem, nec Cynthia lumen, Causin. aenigm 8.
Acts 27.20. Hence come those mournful sighings, Lord how long! will the Lord
cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more, etc. How many are the days
of thy servant, Psalm. 119.84. I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up,
Psalm. 88.15.

There may be much praying that God would break these dark clouds, and shine
upon the soul, a man may cry with Job, Oh that I knew where I might find him,
that I might come even to his seat, cap. 23.3. and with the Church may call
after him, yet may complain, Behold I go forward, but he is not there, and
backward, but I cannot not perceive him; on the left hand, but I cannot behold
him, he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him, Job^ 23.8, 9.
I sought him but I could not find him, I called him but he gave me no answer,
Cant. 5.5. Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer shall not
pass through: when I cry and shout, he shuts out my prayer, Lament. 3.8.44.

A man may seek him in the Ordinances yet not find him, yea his sorrow may
increase; God may seem angry with his prayer, Oh Lord God of host how long
will thou be angry with the prayer of thy people? Ps. 80.4. And the Word may
seem to be against him, and may make his wounds sorer, so that those words
may well be taken u^ by this afflicted soul; If I go into the field, then
behold the slain with the swor^^ and if I enter into the City, then behold them
that are sick with famine; have th^^ utterly rejected Judah? has thy soul
l^^thed Zion? why have thou smitten us, (...) there is no healing for us? we
looked for peace and there is no good, and for the ti^ of healing, and behold
trouble, Jor. 14.18.19.

CHAP. XXXVI. The effects and consequent of this sad condition.
IN the next place let us view the effects and consequents of Gods withdrawing,
and leaving the soul in this uncomfortable case. The effects are various
according to the quality of the persons thus deserted, which are of two sorts.

1. Sleeping, 2 Awakened.
First for the sleeping Christian; First in the sleeping soul.
when he falls from a comfortable enjoyment of God, as he is senseless in a
great measure, so he is,

Careless, he sets not himself to regaine his lost friend, but lies bound in
chains of sloth and sleep, as it is supposed David did, till Nathan came to
him, to rouse him out of that slumbring state. It is strange to consider how
far a living man may be overtaken with fits of deadness, and how he may be
so infatuated that he may be robbed of his comfort, as Sampson was of his
strength, when he was asleep.

Declining in affection and vigor of an holy walking with God: he now is
hardly drawn to him, and soon drawn from him; he comes unwillingly, and
abides with him unchearefully; he comes slowly, and goes quickly; having lost
his first love, he hangs the wing, and flags in duties.

Aptness to be drawn to evil: having lost his comfort and his ancient
vigor, he is easily persuaded to start from God. God lies lower in his
affection, which is the bond of the soul, and being cooled in love he is more
easily overcome; while the soul is delighted in God, it easily contemns all
vain delights, but now it becomes a prey to Satan in his tentations. Solomon
fell strangely, when he fell from God. The heart will pitch upon something;
and if it have not its contentment in God, it will hunt for it in the world;
hence it is that many descend from heaven to earth, and fall from a glorious
height of comfort in and from God, to a worldly and sensual condition, feeding
upon vanities, and filling themselves with the creature; so that their life is
but a diversion to present contentments.

sleeping persons, In the awakened.
we come next to such as are awakened, to view what operation this mournful
state has in them; Among these, there are different workings, Evil, Good.


evil effects, or consequents. Evil effects.


Heartlesse complaint; this is found in some, Heartlesse complaint.
who though they are in a degree sensible of their loss, yet are not sensible
enough, so that though they complain and grieve, yet their sorrows are not
deep enough, they feel a burden upon their spirits, but they can bear it,
the heart is affected, but not afflicted.

fruitless complaint; Fruitless.
some are of a whining temper, apt to fill the ears of all their familiars,
with sad relations of their mournful case, but there is little else to be
found besides complaints; the soul humbles not himself before God, nor
contends in prayer, nor striveth by the ordinances, and holy walking to find
what it has lost. These men are like the sick man who lies grieving
himself, but no way seeking in earnest to help himself; or like Issachar
crouching under his burdens. Such spirits as these are of a stubborn temper,
and they have cause to expect such multiplied uncomfortablenesse as shall
enforce them to seek after God with more seriousness and strength. David
stuck and came not off to a full endeavor of reconcilement with God; till
night and day the hand of God was heavy upon him so that his moy sture was
turned into the drought of Summer, Psalm. 32.4.

Great unquietness Afflictu^ vitam in tenebris luctuque trahebam. virg Aenead.
2.
, Great unquietness.
in some the apprehension of loss of communion with God, and sight of his
displeasure works to the height indeed, yea so far that it works a Fever or
rather a frenzy in the soul.

Hard thoughts of God; as if God were implacably incensed, and so departed,
Hard thoughts of God.
that he would never more return; that he has forgotten to be gracious, and
has shut up his mercy for ever, so that there is no hope; he will not hear
my prayer, he has passed a doom upon me and it must stand. He is in one
mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does:
and he performs the thing that is appointed for me, therefore am I troubled
at his presence; when I consider, I am afraid of him, for God makes my heart
soft, and the Almighty troubles me, Job 23.13. Sadness and fear cloud the
understanding, and cause monstrous apprehensions (...). Chrysostom. hom. 2. ad
Antioch.
.

Hard thoughts of themselves; reflecting upon the time past as on a course of
hypocrisy; Of themselves.
upon the time present, as a state of death, and looking upon the future, as
without hope: my sins are so mighty, that they will not be subdued; and so
many that they will not be pardoned: God cannot show mercy to me, I shall
surely dye; I am counted with them that go down into the pit, free among the
dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and
they are cut off by thine hand, Psalm. 88.4, 5. Thou have removed my soul far
from peace, and I forgot prosperity. And I said, My strength and my hope is
perished from the Lord, Dreadful passions.
Lamentat. 3.17, 18.

Dreadful passions; as tremblings and shakings; Fear came upon me, and
trembling, which made all my bones to shake, Job 4.14. The hair of my head
stood up Id propterea fit quod in^rorsum refugiunt spiritus, cutemque
destituunt, Becm. de orig. ling. let. obstu^ui ste ^erantque come. Virg.
verse. 15. Mark me, and be astonished: when I remember I am afraid, and
trembling takes hold of my flesh, Job 21.5, 6. sometimes also roarings are
heard from these men; My bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long,
Psalm. 32.3. My sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are poured out
like the waters, Job 3.24. Yea, so great is the anguish, that oftentimes the
body is wasted. I am as a man that has no strength, Psalm. 88.4. Animi
aegri^udo morbus potentissimus, animi dolor corporis languorem parit. Comicus.
Vid Aquin. 1.2 q. 3^. a. 4.
Yea sometimes they are tired, and weary of themselves, and of life. My soul
is weary of my life, Job 10.1. Wherefore is life given to him that is in
misery, and light unto the bitter in soul? which long for death, but it
comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures; which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave. Why is life given to a
man whose way is bid, and whom God has hedged up? Job 3.20, 21, 22, 23. In a
word, they think they can never complain enough, they account their misery
beyond all words. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity
laid in the balance together, for now it would be heavier than the sand of the
Sea, therefore my words are swallowed up, (or I want words to express my
grief) for the arrows of the Almighty are with me, the poison whereof
drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array against
me, Job 6.2, 3, 4. And when the soul has exceeded all eloquence, and past
almost all humane bounds of language and expression; it is not satisfied, but
thinks it falls exceeding short of uttering her misery: My stroke is heavier
than my groaning, Job 23.2.

But all this is not a right carriage of the spirit, such passions would befit
such as have a God without mercy, and distress without a promise, and without
a redeemer. Faith is suspended when these clamours are heard, and the soul
forgets the freeness and fullness of grace, when it is thus transported out of
it self, and from its hopes.

Secondly, Good effects.
The good effects of such uncomfortable eclipses of Gods favor and presence
follow, which are,

Sorrow, great sorrow; thou hidst thy face and I was troubled, Sorrow.
Psalm. 30.6. the heart should not, yea (if it be in due temper) cannot rest
without God; his absence is worthy to be lamented, whose presence is most
worthy to be prized.

Longing desires of Gods gracious return, Desire after God.
the soul thinks delays grievous Etiam celeritas in desiderio est mora. P.
Syri. Desideranti invisa est quaevis mora, desiderium acuit absentis vicinitas,
post spem omne desiderium impatientissimum est. Quamdiu differtur spes
aeternorum, affligitur anima fidelium. i.e. vel pro dilatione bonorum quae
amat, velpro illulion malorum quae tolerat. Beda.
; hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. The Church says she was
sick of love, Cant. 5.8. The heart that has had a sense of Gods sweet
presence, cannot be satisfied without him, but counts all things nothing till
it regaine him, who is to her as the Sun to the world, and the soul to the
body.

Repentance, and humbling of soul, Repentance.
it seeks what unhappy and accursed thing has raised this cloud betwixt God
and her, and falls down at his feet, confessing, weeping, and begging his
favor in Jesus Christ, willingly grieved and ashamed; it counts not this
sorrow bitterness, but has some sweetness in it (...). Arist. Rhet. Lachryma
animae amarae, and dulces sunt; amarae, propter absentiam boni, dulces propter
certitudinem inveniendi, etc. Savanarol. med. in Psalm. Qui Regis Israel.
.

Subjection to all conditions of agreement: It says, Subjection
Lord, impose, demand what thou will, I count nothing too dear for thee, I
count the gain of the whole world loss for thee, and will deny my self for
thee; If my heart draw back, draw it on to thee; as far as I am able to
sacrifice my self to thee, I do it. Thus the soul sets on toward God,
inquires for him in all means, will not be put off; it falls not by despair,
or sleeps in sloth, but faith holds up hope, and hope keeps up endeavors,
and it cannot be quiet without God.

There are two maine Causes of the restlessenesse of the soul without God.
Causes why the soul cannot be quiet in this case.


First, The condition of the subject.

Tender; From the subject.
when he is in a living state, is very sensible of any evil, especially of
the greatest evil; Tender.
a man's sorrow, is as his sight is; therefore where he sees God, and has a
knowledge of him in his excellency, the loss of him is grievous Summi deloris
causa summum gaudium est. Sen.
: all evils on the body are but as the rending of the garment; but grief in
the soul, is as the tearing of the flesh: A wounded spirit who can bear?
Prove. 18.14. outward evils are but as the breaking of the outworks; All sense
in the body is from the soul, therefore the soul must needs be most sensible.

2. It is spiritual: 2. Spiritual
if the body be in misery, external things may help: in sickness, physic
Omnes humanos sanat medicina dolores Propert. Eleg. l. 2.
; in want, relief; in famine, bread; etc. but when the soul is in distress,
all the world is but like a great cipher, it amounts to nothing: Heaven and
earth is but as a shadow, nothing but God can quiet Tranquillus Deus
tranquillat omnia, and quietum aspicere, quiescere est. Bern. in Cant. 23.
. As the body is not satisfied with things spiritual, so the soul is not
contented with things corporal: there must be a fitness in the object, else
it moves not; as the ear is not pleased with light and colors, nor the eye
with sounds. The soul therefore being spiritual must meet with that which is
spiritual and proper for it, else it is not contented; every living creature
has an appetite and sense carried to some things, and out of that compass it
has no quiet: as take a beast, and you shall never satisfy him, but with
pastures and such things as he affects; and take a man, and he must have other
things, things of higher worth, suitable to his nature; and take a spiritual
man, whose soul is illuminated and drawn out to higher and more spiritual
things, and him you cannot quiet with a thousand worlds, without interest in
Christ, and the favor of God; the spiritual man is carried to things
spiritual, as the natural man to things natural. And as a natural man
cannot be quieted without natural accommodations, and enjoyment of such things
as suit with him; so the spiritual man cannot have rest without his spiritual
treasure.

pitched upon God by faith and hope; It has pitched upon God.
it has devolved it self upon him, and that for eternity, and in the
business of life and death. Now if a man were passing over a deep and swift
torrent, and when he is upon these deepes, shall feel the bridge cracking and
sinking, it must needs let in a sea of fears and amazement upon him. And how
can it be that when a man sees the vastness of eternity, the greatness of
sin, the terrors of the wrath that burns like fire, and has in his agony
thrown himself upon God in Christ, and now is doubtful whether Christ will
own him, or take any care of him, I say how can it be but he should be in
great distress? at such a time when God withdrawes his comforts, every thing
that may afflict stands forth in greatest strength, now death is death, and sin
is sin, and the soul feels the weight of every load; comfort lightens all
burdens, and when Christ is present, all evils vanish, and discouragements
scatter as a mist, but when that is gone, then those evils gather like clouds
of fire and blood over the soul, and those miseries which did lie as conquered
men, do rise up with renewed strength; and what a sad time is this, when the
soul sees her danger, and not her refuge; her wounds, but not her cure? nay
to see him that is her only trust, not only not to be with her, but against
him? it has chosen him as her chief treasure, therefore can no more be
without him, than without her self.

It has had hopes of Gods favor: time has been, It has had hopes.
when it saw it self in the arms of Christ, and walked with some assurance
that it had a friend in Heaven; and therefore seeing now her hopes to wither,
and those golden days to pass as a pleasant dream, it cannot but be much
afflicted. This shall be the bitterness of the anguish of unsound hearts at
last, who after they have fed their souls with hope, and have run out their
days in a paradise of imaginary happiness, find when they come to die, all
those joys, and all that confidence to spend themselves like a vapor, and the
lean kine to eat up the fat; sorrow and everlasting perdition coming instead
of joy and salvation which they looked for: oh who can utter this misery! a man
hurled from a pinnacle of high and glorious hopes, into a depth of eternal woe!
By this we may guess what it is for a deserted soul that has reckoned long
upon high things, and now sees such a change, that it is forced to count it
self deceived, and to exchange her living hopes, for killing fears; and
whereas she thought her self a child, to be cast forth as a stranger, yea as
an enemy.

5. It has had much in communion with God and Christ: 5. It did enjoy God
time was when the man was kindly used, when God conversed with him, as a man
with his friend, when he invited him often, and entertained him in love, and
powered in much of heaven upon him: therefore now to see God estranging
himself, yea frowning, chiding, arming against him, cannot but be a cutting
to his soul. David having lost the liberties of the ordinances, which were
better than his kingdom to him, sits down in heaviness, as one taught by the
experience of his former happiness, the deeper to lament his present misery;
When I remember these things, I power out my soul in me, for I had gone with
the multitude, I had gone with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy
and praise, with a multitude that kept holy day. Ps. 42.4. And this was the
affliction of the Church that she lost him, in whose presence she had received
such abundant comfort, Cant. 5. the more the soul has had of God, the more
bitter is her loss of him.

Secondly, 2. From the object, in respect of 1. Quality of it.
the object is such as if you weigh it, you will see that a man cannot be at
rest when God holds back and leaves him in this doleful case.

Consider, first, the quality of the object: there are three things in God
which cause the wound of an afflicted spirit to bleed much:

1. 1. Goodness.
Goodness, because God is good, therefore his disfavour is a great affliction,
this sweet balm the heart in such a day will turn into a sharp corrosive,
and out of this sea of comfort will draw bitter waters, this golden mine which
is a rich treasure unto others, yields that which the heart turns into iron
rods, and sharp swords to wound it self For first if it apprehend his
goodness to be his kindness and gracious disposition to pity and mercy,
then it reason heavily; oh unhappy wretch, that there should be so sweet a
fountain, and I should not drink of it; that streams should flow forth
toward thousands, and none to me; I envy not others happiness, but I lament
mine own misery; that I should die in the midst of life, and perish in the
midst of salvation: God is so good, so ready to show mercy, that sure he is
highly incensed against me, who seek, and call, and cry, yet am not relieved;
if my wickedness were not very great, yea if I were in his heart at all,
surely he that is so good in himself and unto thousands, would not thus reject
me; I am tossed night and day, and carry an hell in my soul continually; and
if I were not as an enemy in his eye, if I were a child, his bowels would not
hold, I should surely be received: who can reckon the heavy conclusions which
the heart will draw against it self? it is so disposed to its own hurt, that
not only against faith, but against reason it will afflict it self; turning
the Sun into darkness and the Moon into blood, setching misery out of mercy,
and hell out of heaven. Or, if secondly, the goodness of God be taken for his
holiness, and perfection, then they reason thus, surely I am very evil whom
goodness rejects; if I had any spark of good in me, God would not cast me
off; but certainly he sees my abundant naughtines, therefore he sets
himself against me. Thus sundry ways the goodness of God makes the hiding of
his face, and the manifestation of his displeasure to be very grievous.

2. Greatness: When a man apprehends the Majesty of God, the fear of his
disfavour, falls heavy upon him; Who knows the power of thine anger? even
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath, Ps. 99.11. The favor of a man of
power, is of much worth, and there is power in his wrath; The wrath of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion, but his favor is as dew upon the grass, Prove.
19.12. The wrath of the God of power is terrible as thunder Fulmen est ubi cum
potentia habitat iracundia. Sen.
; and as Leonis voci tontus naturaliter inest terror, ut multa animantium quae
per celeritatem possent impetum ejus evadere, rugientis ej us sonitu velut
quadam vi attonita atqu^^icta deficiant. Ambr. hexam. lib. 6. cap. 3.
the beasts fall down astonished at the roaring of a Lion; so the soul is
overwhelmed, when so glorious Majesty is incensed.

In God there is a twofold power.

A power, first of Authority, which is that power by which, 1. He despenseth
all things, as having all in his hand, as absolute Lord and Sovereign; And
what a misery is this, that he that has eternal life and death, heaven and
hell in his power, should seem to be against a man? this is the fullness of
all evil, when he upon whose will all things depend, becomes ones enemy: the
loss of a particular comfort and contentment is great, but how much worse is
the loss of all? 2. By which he judges all; God being the Supreme Lord,
holds this royalty, that all men and Angels are accountable to him in all
things: now to apprehend that the Judge of all the world will not show mercy,
but will proceed in strictness of justice, especially when a man knows that
he is guilty many ways, and that God is privy to all his sins, must needs be
a sore shaking to the soul. Though all friends, and ministers, yea though all
Angels come in to comfort, yet it will not satisfy, because they are but
subjects; God is supreme, and his word shall stand; As if you tell a poor
trembling prisoner going to the bar for his life, he need not fear, he
shall sure escape, he will be apt to answer you; alas, except the Judge say
so, all that you say, will not profit me; So will a poor afflicted soul
think, when others come and tell him, surely your case is good, and doubtless
you will find mercy, and heaven will be your portion; Oh that God would say
this to me; except this be my sentence at his bar, your comforts are but as
sou^ding brass, or as a tinckling cymbal.

ability, by which God is able to work what he wills, and to execute his own
purposes; if he pronounce sentence from the throne of Judgment, there is no
way to shun it; if in the word of a King is power, Eccles. 8.4. how much more
in the word of the Almighty? what makes any thing dreadful but its power? and
all that power in the creature, is but derived from him, and limited by him;
but his power has no bounds but his Will; therefore when the soul is not
only in doubt of his good will, but in fear of his ill will, how can it have
any rest?

3. Eternity: God abides for ever: 3. Eternity
this makes his favor and displeasure more considerable, the loss of a
perpetuity we reckon a great loss in our estates; but what is it to lose God
for ever? and not only to lose him, but to bear his displeasure who is
eternal? eternity, oh eternity, how does this swallow up the soul in a day of
fears? this sets on all other terrible things with a redoubled strength, and
causes them to fall with weight more heavy than of mountains upon the spirit:
such a thought as this, he that has all power, and lives for ever, has
forsaken me, batters the soul, as a wall of paper before a Canon.

2. Consider the relation in which God stands to a believer; 2. In respect of
relation.
he is to them in the nearest and dearest relation, a Friend, Father, Husband.

God is all these perfectly; the closest and most active friend, the kindest
and most tender father, the sweetest and most loving husband; the loss
therefore of such a one is grievous; yea the loss of any one is great; as if a
child lose a tender hearted father, or a friend a free-hearted friend, or a
wife a kinde-hearted husband; but if one lose a Friend, a Father, an Husband at
once, this is very grievous; But when the soul is descrted, it apprehends it
self to lose all these, yea the best Friend, Father, and Husband, yea, her
only friend, father, and husband; no wonder if it take up Jeremiah his sad
complaint; When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in
me, Jer. 8.18. nothing can heal but that which did wound Vnde datum est
vulnus, contigit inde salus.
.

operation of God: Gods operation.
he has not only put into the heart, which he renews, a longing and
restless Fecisti nos ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, don^c requiescatin
te. Aug. Conf l. 1. c. 1.
desire after him; but he quickens this desire by sense of misery, and by
manifestation of his greatness and goodness, that so the soul may be carried
with uncessant reachings after him; he is then drawing the soul toward him,
when he seems to be departing; and how can that man rest whom heaven draws?
Gods end in afflicting the soul is not its pain, that it may wast it self in
sighs and groans, but that it may with more eagerness pursue him; so that he
is secretly and strongly working in the darkest night of spiritual sadness,
to a more full and comfortable conjunction and communion with his people:
therefore it is that they seek, and run to and fro to find him, because God
draws them by his power; when David was in the desert, he followed hard after
God; but what set his soul in that constant motion? Thy right hand upholdeth
me, Psalm. 63.8.

Let this suffice for the effects and consequents of Gods hiding his face, and
cutting off the comforts which the soul was wont to enjoy in him.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Causes and Cure of this sad condition.
HAving seen what a woeful case a man is in when God withdraws, let us now
weigh the Causes for which God deals thus with his people.

To put a difference betwixt heaven and earth. God is wont to fit his actions
to times and seasons; Israel was a child as well as we, yea the first borne,
yet that Church had not so much of him, as the Churches of the Christians: It
was not a time forfulnesse, while the Church was in her Infancy; God dealt with
them as with children in minority, he gave them much of the world, and less of
heaven; the Spirit of adoption was poured out more fully when the Church was
grown more full. And as God reserved much till the Gentiles were called, that
when his guests were more fully met, he might set out more abundance of his
provision; so God will keep the rich store of consistent and abiding comforts
till the great day, that when all the family shall come together, he may pour
out the fullness of his hidden treasures upon them. We are now but in the way,
and it is fit the best should come last; we are but yet in the morning of the
day, the feast is to come; in the mean time a running banquet, a breakfast, a
taste shall suffice to stay the stomach, till the time come that the King of
Saints with all his friends, shall sit down together at the Royal Feast.

If you send your son to travel, you give him less than his inheritance, and
you will send them forth by Sea and Land for your ends; so God has sent you
abroad, you are but travelers, therefore must not think it strange if you
meet with storms, and weary days, and if you have not so constant a presence
of God with you. The difference of this life and the next, is not so much in
the kinds of comfort, as in the degrees and continuance of them; this life
has such a presence of God, as is with a kind of absence. We know this, That
while we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6.

This life is but our seed time of comfort, Psalm. 97.11. and the seed will have
a time to be out of our hands, use, and sight, till the harvest come.

Now is working time, and the time of fight, and servants and soldiers must
not expect any settled rest, till their service is done, and the wars cease.
There remains a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4.9.

All the Saints that have gone before us have found ill days and hard times,
yea Jesus Christ himself till his hour came that he should be glorified, had
trouble in the world, yea he drank of this cup, which we have in hand. This
makes heaven sweeter, and puts the soul upon more longings for it, because
there it knows it shall not fear, nor sorrow any more.

Constant joys in such a condition as this is in the world, suit not more than
constant feastings in times of heaviness; we are freed from the power of sin
but in part, so we are but in part freed from afflictions. And it is probable,
except grace were more abundant, that constant peace would have ill
consequents. Paul was tempted after his exaltation that he might not be
exalted. Comfort belongs not to sanctification, but glorification, therefore
the fullness of it is kept till we be set in glory. Comfort is the reward of
holiness, therefore the perfection and stability of it is kept till that time
when holiness shall be perfected; and the perfection both of grace and peace
is deferred, that when Christ shall appear in glory, this may set out the day.
When Christ came in the flesh, God powered out much of his Spirit at his
ascension, and will power it gloriously when all shall be consummate; then
Christ shall shine among all his Saints, and the fullness of their perfections,
as the Sun attended with all the stars in their brightest glory.

Till that time, while you are children under tuition, and at school, you will
meet with frowns as well as smiles, and correction days as well as play
days; and it is well the day is coming that has no night, and joy that has
no sorrow with it.

in Judgment to the world: God might send out his Saints as stars in glory,
that all eyes might gaze on them, but he will not; all things are in a mystery
and hidden to the world, the graces of the Saints hid under many infirmities,
and the comforts of the Saints under many sorrows, in just judgment upon the
world. God is wise and knows how to fit the same things for many ends. Christ
came in a poor estate, and his glory and majesty was covered with a cloud and
mantle of a mean outside; and why was this? It is true, it was for
satisfaction of Justice, for the sin of his people; but it was also in
Judgment to the world; he was a precious one, yet because he came not in
State and pomp, he was a stone refused of the builders, and so a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. And because the Gospel came
not with humane dress and external ornament; The preaching of the cross, is
to them that perish foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18.

God has not stooped in the matters of heaven to sense, as he has in the
matters of the world; he will not send unto men any from the dead, nor yet
shall any walk among men with shining robes of heavenly glory. The things of
this life, are seen, and tasted; but Spiritual things are conveyed most in a
spiritual way. If Adam had continued in his integrity, God would have
manifested himself to the world as a man to his friend, and not only faith
and reason, but the senses should have been blessed in communion with God; but
now he so disposes of all things, that even his people walk by faith, and not
by sight: he will not give such a sensible demonstration of his bounty to the
world, that it may justly perish in its wickedness, if it will not believe
Moses and the Prophets, and if they will not believe the Gospel.

The world is led by sense; though the Scriptures testify of the excellency of
redemption, and adoption, and of the great happiness of the Saints, yet they
foolishly cast away faith and the word, and run to sense; and finding the
heirs of glory to be often sad, beholding not their comforts, but their
sorrows, they conclude that the way is worthless, and that religion is but a
sower grape, and as bitter waters, and as the way of the desert.

To establish them in more full comforts Nube selet pulsa candidus ire Dies.
Ovid.
: there was darkness before light in the world: after the strong wind which
rent the mountains and brake the rocks, came the still voice in which God was,
1 Kings 19.11, 12. And as God often sends great comforts before great
afflictions in the world, (Christ was transfigured in the Mount before his
great agony in the garden) so he often premiseth affliction of the soul
before great comforts, and the soul is settled the more afterward, as the tree
is rooted more by shaking: It is Gods method to bring first to Egypt, and
through the Sea, and wilderness, and then to Canaan. The Apostle prays that
they may be strengthened and established, but when? After ye have suffered a
while, 1 Pet. 5.10.

When the soul has passed through straits, and has seen the wonders of the
Lord in the deepes, it is advantaged much, to further establishment.

1 Because that comfort and evidence which comes so immediately from God is
strongest, when a man has been taken off from all his foundations, and God
has appeared unto him in the desert, it is a strong demonstration of his love,
and wins the heart to much love, and to strong confidence; as if a friend when
he is offended, and has us at an advantage, so that he may in justice, and can
undo us, if then he spare, and not only so, but is as Esau to Jacob, turning
wrath into love, and anger into compassionate kindness, this much knits us to
him to love him and cleave to him, as a good and a fast friend indeed.

2 God gives much proof and evidence of the truth of grace which he has
wrought in them, when he makes them see they had hearts that could love him,
even when it was doubtful to them whether he loved them; when the truth of
grace is evidenced clearly, it brings much comfort, and what greater evidence
of an upright heart, then to follow God when he seems to fly away; and to
love him when he seems to abhor and hate them, to weep upon him in love
when he seems armed with weapons of death Qui nec iratum cessat colere numen.
Sen Diis fruitur iratis, superat and crescit malis.
; and to power out the soul to him, when he seems to be pouring down fire
and brimstone upon them.

3 It gives hope that if dark clouds do arise, yet they shall be scattered
again; the sense of former troubles may help to conclude that such deeps are
passable; and the soul will be apt to say there is hope concerning this O
passi graviora: Daus dabit his quoque finem. Virg.
experience of mercy is a great help to faith, and holds up the soul, that it
will not fall so flat, and lie so long under discouragements again; It will
help and furnish the heart to pray much, because God has been entreated in
such times before; and to say as the Apostle, having delivered us from so great
a death, in him we trust, that he will yet deliver us, 2. Cor. 1.10.

4. It works more closing with Christ: the death of comfort occasions a
greater life and strength toward Christ, both in desire of him, and dependence
upon him; and for this cause God shakes the soul with earthquakes, that it may
stand faster upon its true basis and foundation; that which at first brings the
soul to Christ, is his worth, and our need: and the more we see our selves
necessitous, the more our hearts gather in to Christ; the soul must have some
rest, and if it find none within nor without, it is carried to Christ, as
Noah's Dove to the Arc; That which is the first coard to draw to him, has also
a strength to bind to him; therefore God gives his people sad visions of sin,
and wrath, that by being shaken, they may root themselves more in Christ; this
was Gods great ^ime to set up his Son, as the hope and help of his people, and
as that glorious means, by which he may diffuse the beams of his mercy and
love upon men; and he loves to see the Saints advancing him, by flying to him
and abiding in him.

And the more they go forth to Christ, and seek the Father in the Son, the
more they are blessed; Christ is the rock of the Saints, and when they are knit
to it, they stand fast; the nearer they are to Christ, the nearer are they to
all happiness; God will not look friendly upon the soul but through Christ;
he will not pour out the spirit of comfort but through him; and as comfort
comes by coming, so the oftener the soul comes, and the more it converseth
with Christ, and rests on him, the more comfort it will find at last: Christ
will tell you many secrets, and open his fathers bosom to you, when you stick
close to him.

And this advantage comes by desertions, that the soul is so frighted with
those storms which it met with, that it is afraid to be any more out of its
harbor; but seeks to dwell under the wing of Christ, and to keep closer to
him than ever it did before; and so this affliction brings forth the peaceable
fruit of righteousness in them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11.

correcting and healing of some evil in his people: He does it for their
profit, that they may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. There are many
things in the Saints which are very repugnant to that filial state, in which
they are set by grace; and it is no wonder if God take such courses, wherein he
seems not to be a father to them, that are not as children to him: I will
instance in some particular evils, which God will not bear with, but does
visit in his people, with this and other rods.

1. Deadness, and dullness of heart: Sometimes living men are in a livelesse
state, their hearts are so benumbed that they seem to lie among the dead; the
former vigor and activity of their graces is gone, and they are become barren
and unfruitful; now as in a lethargy, or apoplexy, Physicians use strong and
sharp medicines; so God casts the soul into a fever, to get off this
stupidity, and hangs their souls over the mouth of hell, and makes them to
drink of that cup of red Wine, the dregs whereof the wicked of the earth shall
wring out and drink, Ps. 75.8. that by this strong potion, he may quicken
their dull and sleepie spirits. Deadness is such a state, in which a man is
neither receptive nor active, neither fit to receive good, nor to do good; and
such a case is not tolerable: for in this, Gods ends are stopped; for he
calls out his people to be vessels to receive mercy, to hold forth his name;
but he can do neither that is dead: Nature it self loves not a dead thing, it
is both unusefull and uncomely, for where life fails, there is corruption; as
in the body, a mortified member does putrify, and not only it self, but
others; therefore as a man uses all means to recover the life and spirits in
his body, so God does with his people: David lay in a slumbering drowsiness a
long time, but at last when he lay like Jonah, sleeping by the sides of the
ship, he sent a storm into his soul to awake him, then he revives like
another man.

2. Fearelesnesse of God: this is a temper to which the Saints are apt to grow:
as Children are wont to grow saucy and presumptuously malepert and irreverent,
till the fathers frown and majesticke austerenesse take down their spirit. God
will not be carelessly dealt with, though he allow us confidence and holy
boldness in approach to him and converse with him, yet he expects a due sense
of his Majesty and greatness; Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with
reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29.
Though he be a father, yet he is a terrible, an holy, and an Almighty God; And
therefore to correct the sinful boldness of his people, and to cause them to
stand in awe of him, he sometimes shuts in his favor, and keeps state by
concealing himself, as the Persian Kings shunned familiarity, and were
seldom seen, that they might be more Persona Regis sub specie majestatis
occulitur. Just. l. 1.
honored. The fear of God is one of the maine pillars of his throne, and so
far as he is not our fear he is not our God; therefore he has ever showed
himself, in his power and greatness unto men; when he came to give the Law,
he came in great Majesty, with fire, blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
and the sound of a Trumpet, etc. and so terrible was the sight, that Moses
said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12.18, 19, 21. yea and in the Gospel
it was foretold, that God would show wonders in Heaven above, and signs in the
earth beneath, blood, fire and vapor of smoke; the Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the
Lord come, Joel. 2.31. Romans 10.13. Acts 2.19, 20, 21. When he came to publish
peace to the Gentiles, he came with great terror in judgment upon the Jews,
and struck off the branch natural, that the Gentiles might not be high minded
but fear, Romans 11.20. And in particular persons he so works by intermixtures
of frowns and favors, majesty and mercy, that they may learn to walk as
those Churches did, In the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, Acts 9.31.

It is not a servile sear, or a fear of discouragement which God expects; but
a fear of reverence, a fear intermixed and tempered with love; there is a
great difference in fears; a man fears a beast and runs from him; a man
fears an enemy, but hates him; but a child fears his Father and loves him:
yea therefore he fears, because he loves; they shall fear the Lord and his
goodness, Hos. 3.5.

3. Slightness of heart: there is a certain wantonness and trifling
disposition in the heart, that men are apt to be superficial and imperfect in
their ways, and this God visits upon them.

1. Dallying with sin: they will be playing with snares and baits, and allow
a secret liberty in the heart to sin, conniving and winking at many workings of
it, and not setting upon mortification with earnest endeavors; though they be
convinced, yet they are not persuaded to arise with all their might against the
Lords enemies, but do his work negligently, which is an accursed thing, and
for this cause God casts them upon sore straits. The Israelites should have
done the work perfectly, when they were commanded to root out the Canaanites,
but because they were slack, and did it but by the halfes, therefore God left
them as a scourge, and as briars and thorns to be always an affliction to
them. When you are pressed to fight for Christ, and have taken up arms against
the rebels in your hearts, if you fight not with all your strength, and pursue
the victory to the utmost, till you find your enemies dead before you; God may
give you into their hands, to lead you into captivity, and to hold you in
chains that will eat into your souls, and may in this distress stand afar
off as one that knows you not.

2. Dallying with duties; men do them as if they did them not; without heart,
in a loose, lazy, formal, livelesse manner; and when there is such idleness,
and negligence, and indisposednesse, God comes in a way of anger, to whip up
the slothful and unfaithful spirit; Duties of godliness are not only a debt
to God, but a reward to us, therefore in slightness, there is not only
unfaithfulness, but unthankfulness also; both the Majesty and the Mercy of
God is despised; and can God be well pleased with such things? Remember the
Wisemans counsel, Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might,
Eccles. 9.10. You are in an evil frame of heart, when you can do the weighty
things of God with slightness; and because you serve God so, he therefore
comes with a kind of expulsion and banishment, and throws you out of his
sight, that you see what it is to dally with God.

3 Dallying with Ordinances: Slight and careless attendance upon them; God
comes in a way of gracious condiscension, and stoopes down with offers of
grace and mercy, to poor dust, and sets before them Jesus Christ, the most
precious treasure of heaven and earth, and calls them to a near conjunction,
and communion with himself, and holds forth precious promises of life; but what
is the carriage of the soul? It neither minds these, nor vouchsafes God in
all his goodness, so much as a look; or if it be affected, yet but little; it
makes no great haste, nor uses much sollicitousnesse, or pains about the
matter, but as if the things were of no great importance, it is very moderate,
and easy in making toward them: neither that high hand that holds them forth,
nor that blood that bought them, nor that worth that is in them works much,
but all is slighted; and therefore God comes in the quarrel of these high
things, to vindicate them from our contempt, and teaches the soul by the
sense of misery to value mercy, and by the fear of hell to prize Christ, and
to be more serious in the Ordinances, as means of that good, which they have
learned to esteem, by the want of it. The Apostles rule is to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Salvation is a tender
business, and of great concernment, and therefore will not be dallyed with;
What think you? Shall God set that before you which is better than the world,
for you to abuse? you your selves take away the bread when the child plays
with it; and shall the bread of life be slighted? shall God stand waiting upon
you with calls, and calls, and with gracious offers, and will you dally with
him? Hence is that black cloud which now darkens the heavens over you. You are
grown wanton, and except the Gospel come in a dress to please you, you slight
it, therefore God puts you into straits, and then you will come with a stomach
Number tibi cum sauces urit sitis, aurea quaeris pocula? Hor. Ser. l. 1. Sat. 2.
, and in earnest.

4. Living too much upon the creature.

Quest. When is that?

Ans. 1. When it takes up so much of a man's time, strength, thoughts,
affections, When a man lives too much on the creature.
spirits, that he is unfitted for God; when the soul is sick with a surfeit of
the world, drunk with cares, fears, delights, so that the heart is stolen
away, and an indisposednesse grows upon the soul toward God. This was
Solomon's case, till God fetched him by imbittering his ways to him. The world
is allowed for a way, or Inn in our travells, but not for our home; to be a
staff in our hand, but not to have a throne in our hearts. For this cause God
raines down wrath and bitterness upon our spirits to weane us from the world,
and thrusts out Hagar to give Sarah more full possession.

When a man cannot be without the world; When it gains so much in our opinion,
and affection, that we think there is no life or subsistence without it; this
is that for which God comes and takes off the soul with a storm, and rescueth
the poor captive with violence that was held in chains, and makes him to see
of how little use these things are in an evil day. When the soul falls to
adulterous leagues with the world, that they are so conjoined, that it lives
and dies with the world, God brings his bill of divorce, and turns off as it
were the disloyal soul to her miserable lovers, that it may see the folly and
wickedness of its way.

When a man can live without Christ; the pleasantness and abundance of earthly
contentments have so bewitched him, that he becomes like a Prince that has
such fullness that he can reign without Christ, and says in his heart, as
those, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee, Jer. 2.31. Oh what
unworthy carriage is this? What is Christ shut out, that the world may reign?
Expect God saying and doing to you as he did to them; Can a maid forget her
ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me, days
without number. Thou shall go forth with thine hands upon thine head, for the
Lord has rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them, Jer.
2.32, 37. While the Sun shines, and the Sea is calm, you may sport your selves
in the deep, but when the storm comes, then the harbor will be precious. God
will teach you that your life is in Christ, and in a day of fears, and
affrightments of soul, you will say, None but Christ, none but Christ; God will
bring all the enemies of Christ under his feet, and if there be a treacherous
disposition, like Ioab exalting Adoniah into the throne of David, God will
bring it down; Christ must have his own place, the throne must not be given
to another. If you so set up the world, that you count it happiness, and seek
it more than Christ, and are more careful to leave this then Christ unto your
children, God will arm himself against you to subdue this treacherous
conspiracy and rebellion against his anointed.

5 Intractablenesse and stiffenesse of heart; this is another cause of the
clouding of our comfort. God deals with the heart by coards of mercies, and by
bonds of affliction, but mercies move not, and afflictions prevail not,
therefore God takes another course; as Physicians, when gentle means profit
not, apply sharper. God will not lose any whom he has called; therefore if they
be stubborn, and stand like rocks against all ordinary means, he will come
upon the tenderest part, and use the sharpest way; and when he comes in storms
and clouds, who can abide it? his rebukes are more terrible than thunder. The
spirit of a man may sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can
bear? Now the soul is hard set, and comes upon her knees to submit her self,
and melts like wax, and yields to any thing; it sees an absolute necessity of
agreement with God, when it is beleaguerd with such trouble on every side.
David had enough upon him to have humbled him, but his heart was strong, till
God put the cup of trembling into his hand; and this wrought so, that it
fetched up all, and brought the man in frame.

Clay is easily molded, but the marble must have many blows; the Sun beams
will melt the soft, but brass must be put into the fire. A tender sprig is
easily nipped, but a stiff Oak must be hacked and hewed before it falls. A
stout spirit brings much sorrow upon it; It is a grievous temper, if it be not
bowed to God, it grows worse and worse; if it be bowed, it is often with
great violence; in natural causes resistance increases the vigor and
operation of contraries; when fire and water meet in strong opposition, how
does the stronger rage, till he have got the victory? If a man enter the lists
with a stout and a strong Antagonist, he calls up all his spirits and power
that he may get the conquest: If a King send to deal with rebels, if neither
proffers, nor patience, nor counsels, nor favors can prevail, he arms
himself against them. God will overcome: if fair means do not the work,
then he awakes himself as a Lion, and comes as a man of war, and lets fly
his arrows into the soul, Job 6.4. God tried Ephraim diverse ways, but his
heart yielded not; at last when warning pieces did not bring him, God mounts
his Canons against him, and gives him a broad side; For the iniquity of his
covetousness I was wroth, Isay 57.16.17. and then he strikes sail and
yields, Ierem. 31.19.

6. Rigidnesse and unmercifulness to the spiritual state of others; the
Saints are sometimes much wanting in bowels of pity and tenderness, and apt
by censures, neglects, contempts, and rough dealing to break the bruised reed,
and it is hard to pity much till they have felt much: for this cause Christ
was a man of sorrows that we might be assured of his compassion Haudignara
mali miseris succurrere disco Dido. Virg
. In all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he
might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.17,
18. God chooses broken vessels to power comfort into, that it may diffuse it
self upon others; Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation, 2 Cor.
1.6. Sense of the pains of a wounded spirit, makes the heart tender, and God
loves such a spirit; he abhorres pride, insolence, and unmercifulness in all,
but most in his children; It is very unnatural for fellow members to be
incompassionate one to another. The relation requires love, and love calls for
mercy. Christ is full of meekness, and will not quench the smoking flax, nor
break the bruised reed: and he that abounds in mercy loves mercy.

What if thy brother be low in gifts and grace; yet know you not that the
beauty of Christ's body is made up, as of the summetry and congruity, so of the
inequality of members? and the least infant in grace is as the apple of his
eye: take heed of destroying by your uncharitable carriage, the Temple of
Christ, or causing those to grieve whom he would not have grieved; Is it for
you whom he has spared, to deal so with your fellow servant? your hard
dealing is the way to bring you into prison, and to lay you in chains.

What if he be poor and mean? yet look not over him with disdain, Have not
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons,
James 2.1.

In this you are corrupt Judges, Judges of evil thoughts, ver. 4. these are
chosen of God, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom, ver. 5. If ye despise the
poor, it will occasion men to blaspheme that worthy name by which you are
called, ver. 7. The Law says, If thou love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do
well, ver. 8. You must be judged by this Law, and he shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, ver. 13.

What if thy brother have many failings, or have offended; remember the rule;
Brethren, if a man be overtaken with a fault; restore such a one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Be are ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.1.20. Edoms sin
was great, because he added affliction to Jacobs troubles; Thou should not
have spoken proudly in the day of distress, etc. As thou have done, it shall
be done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. Obad. 12.15.

7. Some great transgression: there are daily infirmities, which have a pardon
in course, but though God be merciful to the weakness of his servants, yet if
they sin willingly, and put out the light of Counsel, he will put out the
light of comfort. If they break the bonds of his government, he will cast them
into bonds of distress. David is a visible and known pattern in this case.
Sometimes the Saints take head and run like the wild ass in the desert, till
her month come, in which she has t^avell and sorrow; and sometimes they wound
the honor of the gospel, and so bring a wound upon themselves; a sword is
sheathed in their souls: and sometimes they will run to their old ways, and
this renews their old fears, and breeds new troubles; sometimes they lie
long unhumbled, till God awake them with rods, and raise them by kindling a
fire about them; rebellion brings many loads; disobedience and impenitence are
springs of bitterness; a fire comes out of this bramble, to burn the Cedar of
Lebanon.

He is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.4. He keeps the cisterne empty, that
we may look to the Clouds above, that the pleasant fruit of peace, has her
roots in Heaven; our own hearts, though they may be planted with pleasant
trees, yet of themselves bring forth nothing but briars. And God loves to show
himself the Lord of these treasures of comfort, that the heart may have no
dependence but in him, and that it may always fear, because he can soon
turn the cleares^ day into the darkest night. Comfort is not given us in
absolute possession, but we are always tenants at will. If God will, he can
in a moment lay our hopes and joys in the dust, and strip us of all our
garments of joy, and turn us into mourning; And as light in the air, but as
water, not in the spring, I but in the vessel, so it may soon be cut off.
God needs not go far to feeke a rod to whip us with: if he do but withdraw
his comforting Spirit, our spirit will soon prove an afflicting spirit. The
peace of the soul, is by virtue of the power and presence of God, but if he
depart, all is in uproare; our own thoughts will be as scourges; the Roman
Emperors, kept Lions to destroy the Christians; and our hearts are grates and
dens of Lions, if God let them loose, on the rendings that are by them! if God
keep not garrison, the enemies will break in; so that all our peace is from
him: the brightest star that shines most with light of comfort, derives it
from the Sun of righteousness. And therefore that they may have a sight of
that dark and dismal nature of their own hearts, he shuts in his light; and
then when the soul lies in a mournful and distressed case, in deepes where
it finds no nottome, and whence none can deliver; when a man sees al
creatures standing as dead pictures, and reckons himself past all hope; then,
I say, God shows himself to be the God of comfort, by commanding light to
shine out of darkness, and quieting the high and raging storms, which did
bear down all before them.

revive their esteem of mercy: When a man is first brought out of Babylon, be
is as those that dream, the heart is full of gladness, and the mouth of
praise; the birds sing sweetly in the spring. When a man is newly brought out
of the pit, and delivered from the sorrows of death which did compass him
about, and from the pains of hell which gate hold of him, while the prints of
the chain are on him, and the scarres of his hurt remain, he says as David,
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplications, Psalm.
116.1. I was brought low and he helped me; Return unto thy rest oh my soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. For thou have delivered my soul
from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. The soul is in a
float at present; but when the days of mercy continue, the remembrance of the
days of sorrow wears off, and the fire of love begins to abate, and Christ is
not of so high account: though at first he was the chiefest of ten thousands,
the joy of their hearts; yet now his love and kindness grows stale,
therefore God sends back the soul into her old prison, to feel the weight of
her ancient irons and chains, and causes her to put on her old cast garments
of mourning, that sackcloth and ashes which she wore in the days of old, that
by laying this rod upon her, as the Prophet spread himself upon the dead
child, a new life comes into the dying love; and now mercy is raised to its
former price, and Christ is advanced on high: now the soul returns with
redoubled strength, and with multiplied and increased thankfulness.

God shows, that comfort and rejoicing is not always the portion of the
Saints; that so in their dark nights when they see no light, they may live in
hope that the Sun will rise: though their way be a dark way, it may be a sure
way.

8. Cause: fit for special service: They that go down into the deepes, see
many wonders which others know not. Experience gives wisdom. Many are kept in
a low way, and have neither strong fears, nor strong joys; these are not as
David's Worthies, but are Christians of the lower rank, common soldiers; many
are carried much aloft in great hopes, and flashes of joy, but they much
overlooke the things below; many infirmities and failings lie undiscovered: But
when God fetches the soul down, and sets it to dig beneath, this man is more
enlarged in true wisdom and holiness, and carries a fuller knowledge of
sin, and Christ, and of hell and heaven, than other do, and so is made a
stronger and more complete man. As he that has been in all conditions, and
has traveled through sea and land, and seen many Countries, gains an
excellency by his experience above others: An bome-bred spirit is a low spirit;
God will not do much with many, but leaves them to this work mainely to save
their own souls; but he will use some as his agents and factors in his great
designs and affairs of mercy, and therefore trains them up to the knowledge
of heights and depths. Some are ordinary passengers, and it is enough for them
to look to themselves being able to do but little for others; but some must
be Pilots, and therefore must be acquainted with winds, and seas, and rocks,
and sands, that they may not only save themselves, but others.

Afflictions come not empty handed, but like a dark cloud bring much after
them; there are many things which a man cannot learn in books, but he must
learn it in himself; a Scholar may read and acquaint himself with the Art
of navigation, but that will not make him a good Mariner; nor will the study
of war make a soldier, but experience makes both.

God does all, as in great freedom, so in great wisdom, and having appointed
men to several ends, he leads them in several ends, and works them in
several moulds; out of the same lump he makes some differing from others in
form, quantity, and excellency; some metal which is for highest use he casts
often into the fire. It may be God may call you out to suffer much for him,
and desertions are great preparations; partly because they give much experience
of the vanity of all creatures; he has showed you, learn how little they
avail in the day of wrath; so that you may see you part not with so great
matters, if you do part with the world. God has showed you that life is not
in them, and that you may live without them; And partly because having felt
greater evils, you are more encouraged to endure the less. You will not fear
to fight with a strippling, after you have encountered with a Goliath. Moreover,
in the greatest deeps, have you not seen how all your fears have vanished,
and all your sorrows passed away by the light of Gods countenance shining
forth upon you? and so you see that the joy of the Lord is strong. It is a
sign of much Afflict'^ dat intellectum: quos Deus diligit castigat. Deu^
optimum quemque out mala valetudine, aut luctu affuit Sen.
love and that you are highly set by with God, when he thus leads you into
several states, for this is to lead you by the hand to see all that may be
seen; and if he did not intend much good, he would not bestow so much work
upon you; you stand in this in the greatest conformity to CHRIST, when through
many tribulations and afflictions you enter into glory.

God keeps you from much soyling by constant rubbing; and uses the sanne so
much to blow away the chafe, and keeps you awake by these stirs; some
troubles ennoble the spirit of a state, which would degenerate into effeminacy
by constant peace: winds fan the air and purge it, and the running and
restless waters are most clear.

This may suffice to have pointed at some Causes of Gods cutting off the
comforts of the Saints.

Having hitherto treated of the Case of the afflicted soul; I now come to the
Cure. The Cure
I shall not need to enlarge my self much here, having been somewhat copious
in the Cure of the first kind of desertions. There are two sorts of men that
walk much without the consolations; In the first, the cause is natural; in
the second, spiritual.

As for the first, Of melancholicall persons.
who are oppressed with melancholy, that dark and dusky humor, which
disturbes both soul and body; their cure belongs rather to the Physician than
to the Divine, and Galen is more proper for them than a Minister of the
Gospel: It is a pestilent humor where it abounds, one calls it the devils
bath. Balneum diaboli.


These men cannot walk clearly; but as a light in a dark Lantern shines
dimly, so is the soul in such a body; the distemper of the body causes
distemper of soul, for the soul follows its temper Mores sequuntur
temperaturam corpovis. Gale^.
; this disease works strange passions and strange imaginations Terribilia de
fide, hurribilia de divinitate.
, and heavy conclusions. It is not possible such a man should be quiet, till he
be cured; the seas rage not more naturally when the winds blow, than this man:
he may sometimes be elevated as it were into the third heavens, but anon he
will be brought as it were into the lowest hell. But I leave such with this
advise, when they find their temper to be naturally or accidentally
melancholic, to use all such ways as God has prepared in a natural way; for
as the soul is not cured by natural causes, so the body is not cured by
spiritual remedies.

But I shall direct my self to those whose heaviness of spirit is from
spiritual causes. Of the sleepie soul.


These persons are of two sorts, 1. Sleeping. These persons are of two sorts,
2. Awakened.
First, there are some slumbering and drowsy spirits who are fallen from their
former comforts, and know it, but make up that want in the creature, in which
they take delight, living in the mean time without God. As it was in the
former kind of desertion, so it is in this, God is departed, and either men
know it not, or mind it not, but bear their doleful loss with a stupid and
a sinful patience, or rather with a stupid dullness. But if you find your
selves in such a case, consider what a contempt of God this is to be willing
to live without him, and to power out your hearts upon the creature: you must
look for a bitter scourge, except you repent; or else God will leave you to
walk on to your graves in a dull and a low way. It is a woeful change, to
descend from communion with God and Christ, to these poor things below; And
how little do you set by all precious promises, the favor of the great and
eternal God, and the blood, and love, and presence of Jesus Christ, that can
be content to live in such a state? Look upon others, how their souls have
melted when God has been estranged from them; where is your love, faith,
fear, hope, life, that you can endure to be so? if these were not all asleep,
you would take up a cry for your former happiness, and sit down and weep
over your present misery. Is the loss of a friend in the earth so grievous,
and is a friend in heaven of no more account? you live in a spiritual
adultery, because your husband is neglected, while other things are
entertained. Awaken your selves, and seek to regaine your former peace and joy
in God.

Secondly, Of the awakened
some are awakened, and see their loss, and are affected with it: this sort,
though it have more sorrow, yet is in a better way than the former.

I will to both these propound some 1. Perswasives. I will to both these
propound some 2. Directives.
For persuasion consider. Motive. 1. Comfort is your strength.


1. That comfort is your strength: The more a man sees and feels the love of
God, the more the heart is established. There are three great assaults and
trials that a man is exposed to.

1. Tentations to sin: He that will walk in the way of God, shall not always
sail in a calm, the great Leviathan will show himself, he whose victories
have been many, even among the highest Saints. Now if your hearts be filled
with comfort, you have a strength greater than the world. For the manifestation
of divine love is the incendiary of love, which is stronger than death. So long
as love to Christ is kept up, the heart is safe, love is a strong garrison, and
makes the soul impregnable. And while you keep a fresh and clear sight of
the love of God and Christ, it feeds love, and keeps it up in strength. Add
to this, that comfortable enjoyment of God, does carry the heart aloft; it
makes the conversation to be in heaven, and while a man's way is above, he is
safe from the snares below. Then the heart is in danger to be ensnared when it
wanders in the creature; as the foul is in danger when she is upon the earth,
but when she is mounted upon the wing then she is safe.

2. Inward accusations: the world may accuse, but that is not so shaking as
when Satan casts in objections; he is a subtle sophister and comes often with
snarling and cunning disputes, and except you be well settled, he will drive
you from your ground: except God clear the state of your souls and give
evidence to your graces, you will not be able to hold up against Satan; I
speak this to such who live with low comforts, and content themselves with
dark evidences; though you may hold out till you be set upon, yet when that
comes, you will find your selves weak.

3 Outward straits: what if a day of trouble come? you may see changes, you
have no sure hold of any thing under the Sun; and what shall support you in
such a time? what an heavy thing will this be that you should find trouble in
the world, and no peace in heaven? Spiritual comfort would make you undaunted
and strong Si fractus illabatur orbis, impavidum serient ruinae. Hor. Preme,
Preme, ego (...). Lyps. Auseret pecunias? at babet in coelis: Patria dejiciet?
at in coeleslem civitatem mittet: vincula injiciet? at habet solutam
conscientiam: carpus interficiet? at iterum resurget: cum umbra pugnat qui cu^
justo pugnat. Chrysostom.
; What need he care whither he goes that sees Jesus Christ with him? you have
heard of the patience of the Martyrs, and of their stoutnesse; such was their
courage, that it could neither be corrupted, nor daunted; water could not
quench it, famine could not starve it, fire could not burn it, wild beasts
could not devour it; and what was that which gave them this strength, but the
sight of him that is invisible, and the sense of his favor and presence? a
spirit of glory did rest upon them. The Apostle acknowledges the force of
peace toward God, and comfortable access to him; We rejoice in hope of the
glory of God, and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, Romans 5.2.3.
This was that which made him say, for which cause we faint not; but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16.

He is well fenced that is environed with salvation, and that has Christ with
him; he reckons not much of the world, when he is sure of heaven Quam sordet
mihi terra cum Coelum intueor?
; therefore seek to get abundance of comfort; labor to recover your loss,
you will have need of all; what will you do when you come to dye? how sad will
death be, when you are going you know not whither Animula vagula, blandula,
quae nunc abibisin loca? A drian Si des paulisper vivere, auri puri mill
talenta me hodie tibi daturum promitto. Megapetus apud Lucian Motive 2. Hurt
done by sadness Motive 3. Recovery is possible.
? but death is but a shadow to him that meets it with assurance of life.

2 Your sadness does hurt to your selves, wasting your strength, and to others
by discouraging them.

3 Your recovery is possible: you may attain to your former comforts.

1 The same way is open still, there is the same mercy in God, the same
Mediator, the same promises.

2 You are not now in farther distance from peace with God, than in former
times; are you not now as capable as then when God found you in your blood Qui
fecit mundum ex mundo. Chrysostom.
, in enmity against him, in darkness, in bondage unto every lust, altogether
without him? did God appear to you when you sought him not, and will he not be
found when you inquire after him? is not his promise to revive the spirit of
the contrite? Esaias 57.

3 Others have recevered: David was in these deepes, yet he was restored; this
testimony God has, that he is the God that comfort those that are cast
down, 2 Cor. 7.6. therefore live in hope Sperate and vosmet rebus servate
secundis.
.

4 He hides his face that you may seek after him: he goes from you, that you
may seek after him; and the promise is, that they that seek shall find, he
will open to them that knock.

5 You have aright to peace and comfort, for it is that which Christ dyed for,
and which he has left as a legacy to his people; Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, John 14.27.

Sit not therefore under discouragements Nemo d^sperct meliora lapsus. Nondum
omnium dierum soles occiderunt. Philip.
, say not there is no hope, take heed of hard thoughts of God, who is a father
of mercies; but encourage your selves in your God Peritus medicus potest omnes
sanare infirmitates, si misericors vult. Fulg. Omn potenti medico nullus
languir insanabilis occurrit, tu tautum doceri te sine, manum ejus ne repelle,
etc. Aug.
; weeping and mourning are good fruits of love, but you must not stay here, but
reach after that which is before you: this shall suffice by way of persuasion.

Now for direction let me propound a few counsels.

I Seek the Father in the Son: Counsel 1. Seek the Father in the Son.
Happily you have not held up Christ in your hearts, and for your strangeness
to the Son, the Father has estranged himself; go and carry Christ in your
arms, for he is dear unto him, and the Father has determined to power out
all his love through the Son; Christ is set before you, stir up your selves
to take hold of him; if you will come to him, you have the Fathers heart. You
make your case to be Christ's case when you come to him, and he cannot be
denied: the Fathers mercies melt at the Sons mediation. You may pray and weep,
and lift up your voice on high, but execpt you come in Christ, all will not
profit. Then a man comes in Christ, when he thankfully accepts of the offer of
Christ, and devolves his cares upon him, desiring in his heart that Christ
would undertake for him, and then believes that he shall be accepted; any one
of these wanting, you come not in Christ. 1 You must entertain the offer of
Christ, counting him worthy of all acceptance. 2 You must cast your selves
upon Christ, else he will not undertake for you; holy dependence engages him,
and makes him your friend. 3 Then you must believe that you shall find God a
friend; for except you believe the promise, Christ will not move for you. But
when you are thus come to him, then he will not fail you; the Son will be fast
to you, him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. this
is a precious word. Christ will not shut the door upon you when you come: when
you cast your selves into his arms, he will not, no, he will not cast you out,
you have a sure hold; when you fall into his arms, you fall into his heart,
and being in his heart, you will be sure, that if he have any power with the
Father, he will work your peace Multo efficacior Christi mors in bonum, quam
peccata nostra in malum. Christus potentior ad salvandum quam Demon ad
perdendum. Bern.
.

Why do you afflict your selves? if you believe, you shall be established;
Christ will carry you in to the Father, and will draw out his kindness toward
you. And know, that if the Father love the Son, he will show favor to his
friends: and who can express that love that Christ bears to a mourning soul
that flies for refuge to him? his love was such that he died for you, and will
he not speak a good word for you?

You sit poring and searching for pillars of hope within you, and bestow much
pains to answer, your own fears, but the ready way to make the business
clear, is by going to Christ; stand not so much upon this quaere, Whether you
have believed in truth or no, but put all out of doubt by a present faith. The
door is open, enter and live, you may more easily build a new house and
fabric of comfort by taking Christ, then repair your old dwelling, and
clear all suits that are brought against your tenure.

Hear, Christ calls you; Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will refresh you, Matthew. 11.28. And, Ho, every one that thirsts come,
etc, Esaias 55.1. Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take
the waters of life freely, Apoc. 22.17. And now will you not go? Oh, that you
would go; how soon would your mourning be turned into joy, and your sadness
into gladness? how would those everlasting arms of mercy embrace you? and you
should have future happiness in a kind of presence Pulchewimam insulam
videmus, etiam cum non videmus. Lyps ep. ad Cambden.
.

Seek peace much: Be not weary, but strengthen your selves in the promise, let
this pillar hold up your trembling hands, for he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry; Seek much
Behold he comes, and his reward is with him. Oh me thinks I see the
fountain opening it self to the thirsty, I see the clouds dissolving; prepare
your vessels, stay a while, for I hear the sound of many waters; you are at
the right door, knock, and knock hard, the Lord is there, there dwells
everlasting mercy; Hark how the Saints sing for joy, look in and see
Paradise, and rivers of joy feeding them; how came they to get in but by lying
at the gate? hold on, for in due time you shall reap if you faint not, Gal. 6.
My friends, these are not dreams, but they are real truths, which Jehovah
will make good to them that believe. You come it may be, but you come not in
faith, and you stay not with patience Futura expect^ns presentibus angor. Sen.
, consult with reason and with the Scriptures; Is there a way to God or no? if
yea, which is that way? If God tell you this is the way, then walk in it, wait
in it; and though you have lost your comfortable enjoyment of Christ, yet I say
to you as the Angels to them, This same Jesus which is taken from you, shall
so come as ye have seen him, Acts 1.11. Therefore keep your eyes upward,
pray much, and the heavens will open; when you believe and pray, you have the
key of heaven in your hand; those everlasting doors will open to you;
therefore hold up your selves in seeking, it may be you may meet with fire,
and a tempest, and storms, but stay, and the still voice will come.

Come in much love to God: come as a friend, Come in love.
then come and welcome: many desire ease, and defire to be delivered from wrath
and hell; but come in love, desire God to be your friend, and be willing to
be his friend; let love show it self in two things.

1 Lament thy sin: that has caused a strangeness betwixt God and you. Come
weeping for sin, and humbled for thy unkindnesse, and all is forgiven. You
think too meancly of God, when you think he has much ado to pardon you; He
is ready to forgive, and he overfloweth in pardoning mercy Magnam injuriam Deo
facit, qui diffidit de ejus misericordia. Aug. Bonitas invicti non vincitur,
infiniti misericordia non si^^tur. Fulgent. Tua quidem malitia mensuram habet,
Dei autem misericordia mensuram non habet; tua malitia cir cumscripta est, etc.
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de poenitent. Si bis, si ter, si centies, millies peccas, coties
p^^^^tentiam age, etc. idem.
. He expects your acknowledgment and repentance, and then you are friends.

2 Come with new and strong engagements of heart: bring your selves as an
offering to him, and sacrifice your selves upon that golden altar, Jesus
Christ; say, Lord if thou will love me, I will love thee; be thou mine, and I
am thine, and will be thine.

Thus two old friends shall renew their friendship, and they that were at a
distance, shall meet in love; he that did depart shall return with kindness,
and he that was forsaken, shall be received with mercy; and the ancient joy
which was in heaven at his first conversion, shall be renewed at his
restoration. Now clap your hands ye heavens and earth, for the son that was
lost is found, and he that was dead is alive: The exile is received, and a
covenant of peace is renewed betwixt a man of sorrows, and the God of peace,
through the Prince of peace; to whom be praise for ever.

FINIS.

