(...)sticall judge meant of (...) great conjunction of the (...) superior
Planets, ^^(...) (...) which shall hap(...) 1583.

The (...) god^^ mind, wat^ing ^ of (...) Savior Christ to judge m(...)

A co(...) most necessary disco(...), (...) miserable and (...) da(...)

1. Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand, be ye (...) and watch
unto prayer.

Luke 21, 36. VVatch continually* and pray, that ye may be woe(...)nger, this
shall come: (...) And (...) before the Son of man.

1583.

To the right Honorable Lord, Frauncis, Earl of Bedforde, one of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, Knight of the noble order of the
Garter, grace and peace with God and man.
I Oftentimes remembering (Right honorable Lord) what accountes I have to make
for the small talent which GOD has delivered me to be employed unto the
best, and so my duty that I do owe unto my native Country, am of force
constrained to diuulgate and set abrod some part of my studies, and travails
in the Sciences Mathematical, trusting thereby, my duti^ toward God and my
Country, sha^^ be somewhat acquitted. And as it is the accustomed manner of all
those that se^^ forth any book worthy reading, to select and choose out
either some person, who by reason of learning, virtue, wisdom, and such other
like ornaments of the mind, is thought a worthy stay in a commo^wealth, or else
such as have well of them deserved, to whom they may yield the first fruits of
their labors, and dedicate their works finished. In like manner, I having
achieved this my simple skill, in the setting forth many reasons and probable
co^iectures from the course of times, of these great co^iunctio^s of the 2.
superior Planets Saturn and Jupiter, in the beginning of waterie Trigon, and
now the same coniu^ctio^s in the end of the same Trigon is like to happen, and
then turned in to fiery Trigon. The which events of the said Planets does
marueilously agree with the famous prophecy of Elias, and many other places of
scriptures, of the latter days of the worlds destruction to be near at hand,
and that the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to judgment, will
not be long. And having respect to your Lordships worthiness in the weal
publik: also being animated with your beneuolent inclination, and the manifold
benefits toward me extended, do boldly present and offer the same unto your
Honor, desiring your beneuolent heart, to vouchsafe to be Patron of this my
little book: and if I shall perceive your good L. heerewith to be pleased, I shall
hereafter (God giving life) be encouraged to set forth the residue of my
studies and labors. Thus I, as one that esteems nothing in this world more
then your prosperous estate, do beseech God to increase you in long life and
perfect prosperity.

Your Lordships most humble to command, Robert Tanner.

The Preface
PLato the Prince of Philosophers who for his excellent doctrine, containing
many things agreeable to the holy Scripture, was called diuinus, among many
other his precepts in Philosophy, gives us this lesson: Omnia amicorum sunt
communia, Amongst friends all things are common. The which also in old time
was taken in custom of the ancient Christians, for I find it written in the
Acts of the Aposcies: Nemo eorum qui nomina Christo dederunt, quicquam suum
esse dicebat, sed erant illis omnia communia: None of those which were named
Christians, did affirm any thing to be their own, but all things were common
amongst them. I therefore, desiring to be esteemed among Christians, do
think it will be a shameful thing for me to hide any thing ielously to my
self: yea, although it be never so simple, wherein I might hope something to
profit the common wealth, For it is evident that all men cannot offer gold,
precious stones, silk or purple, but there are also that do gratify and show
a thing very thankful, if they give but a flower, or some thing of less
value, for this cause therefore I have thought it good (Christian Reader) to
publish this my little book, to the use of all Christians, to behold and
mark Gods omnipotency and goodness, of diverse tokens and warninges, not only
before time sent, but also diverse other tokens by these great conjunctions and
events of the Planets is like to ensue. The consideration whereof, has caused
me for your comfort, by writing to place before your eyes, such undoubted
signs of his coming (although I will not take upon me to tell the very hour,
day, and year, which is known to God alone) that easily you will believe and
persuade your self, that it will not be long before he come. Perhaps there
may be some maliu^lue mocking person yet alive, whose only practice is scoffing
and scorning: yea, whom nothing, be it never so well, can content, that will
find fault with our doings, by reason they have drunk such a deep draught
of despite. I will nothing at al be dismayed, for why should I? considering I
have written nothing, but that which is already tried by the principles of
Astronomy, unless perhaps there be some Midas asininis auribus dignus, which
does judge wrongfully of this notable science, minding the utter subversion of
the same. And here I shall desire the good Reader, that although some man
pricked with pride should put in print some peeuishe piece of work in
dispraise of Astronomy, thou would give no credit unto his foolish
reasons, since this Science has heretofore of the wisest and learnedest men
ben honored. And further thou may gather, that whosoever does attempt the
contempt of any one science, seems to be ignorant, not only of the same, but
also of all good learning. For Cicero lib. 3. de ora. says in this wise, Omnis
ingenuarum and humanarum artium doctrina vno quodam societatis vinculo
continetur: That is to say, All Arts liberal and humane are coupled or linked
together with one hand of society. But Reader, I purpose not now to inueigh
against those kind of persons before spoken of, considering that it requires
more matter than can conveniently be rehearsed in a short Prologue. Wherefore
to conclude, thou shall understand that it is not the taunting toys of
skorners, nor the wresting wits of the arrogant, is able to blemish our art,
as all ancient monuments of Writers: yea, and the orders of the Planets
themselves, (which for man's behoof is the workmanship of God) do manifesty
prove. And thus I make an end, praying thee to take the pains to read this
Book, and learn thereby to amend thy former wicked life. Farewell good
Christian Reader.

By Robert Tanner, student in Astronomy and Cosmography.
The verdit of the Book, made in form of a Dialougue, beetweene the Book
and the Books friend.
F What, do thou think al sorts of men to please?

B Nay, hard it is for one to please each whight.

F What men are those, whom thou sonest disease?

B Al fauting fools, that seek to work their spite
Through taunting tongues and scofs, and do delight
With wresting wits to turn things from the right.

F Why was thou made? what is thy chief intent?

B To please the best of purpose I am sent.

F Go forth therefore, the best will thee embrace.

B Then fear I not abrod to show my face,
Nor for il tongues that would me feign degrace.

FINIS.
Probable Conjectures, from the course of times.
THE holy Scripture every where makes some collation between the first Adam
the sinner, and the Son of God, Christ our savior the second Adam: also
between the flood, and utter overthrow of the world, even as Christ does
signify in these words. Et erit sicut in diebus Noe, etc. And it shall be as
in ye days of Noe, etc. Wherefore I fell first into this consideration, and
afterward from one to an other into these which ensue, whether the times paste
in equality of the same number answered alike: for the Lord God has ordained
all things by a singular and everlasting wisdom: And experience does teach by
a certain concurring of the Stars, that in such things a great likeness of
times is wont often to happen. As in the birth of Isaac, and of his offering,
which is a figure of Christ, there is a great consent of times. For from the
birth of Isaac until Christ, were two thousand years fully expyred. from
the creation of the world was a thousand, six hundred fifty six years: From
this number the years of Christ's birth unto this present year 1583. do
differ 73 years, if truly that number were fulsilled.

But I do not think the world shall continue so long, that the latter time
should in number exceed the former, for many conjectures which follow, but
what may come to pass, the Lord knows.

Likewise Moses is a figure of Christ, That marvelous delyuering of Israel by
Moses out of the hands of Pharao, is a figure of victory of christ, which on
our behalf he has by his death on the Cross and resurrection from the dead,
obtained against the Devil and death: And the whole government of Moses, is a
shadow of Christ's kingdom: the overthrow of the Jews and destruction of
Vierusalem, is no doubt a token of the worlds overthrow. And here we shall
see a wonderful consent and agreeing of times, that so by things paste, we may
look for the event of things to come undoubtedly by the singular providence,
counsel and ordinance of God: for no other reason can I render, since I cannot
persuade my self, that these things can by chance so wonderfully agree
together. First by the true account of years, it is plain that from the
coming out of Aegipt, and publishing of the Law until the Nativity of Christ,
are numbered, a thousand, sieve hundred, and nine years. Now, if the years
from the nativity of Christ, until the time, in which Christ began again to be
borne to the world, and to be brought into the light, as it were through the
preaching of the gospel, by Luther and other famous men, were numbered, they
are in sum a thousand, five hundred, and seventeen. Again, from the departure
out of Egypt, until the death of Christ, the years are accounted to be a
thousand, five hundred, forty and two. And this number also does
meruailouslye agree with that general persecution in Germany, made by Charles
the fifth, and the Pope, which happened in the year, a thousand, five
hundredth, forty and seven: So that these numbers being compared together,
will be found not much to differ in quantity of number. But from these poor
mentions, I will go higher to those things, which especially do agree to our
purpose. It is manifest that Moses government until the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, did stand in all, one thousand, five hundred, eighty and
three years. Neither is it to be doubted of any, but that the destruction and
wasting (of Jerusalem) is a manifest figure of the last ruin of the world:
and therefore does our Lord speak of these things together, and says, Those
days were like the days of Noe, in respect of manners, and the security of
man's life. Now at length, what shall we gather of these things, That the term
of the worlds destruction should agree with former number of years of Moses
government: which, not the son of an Emperor, or chiefest Monarch, as was
Jerusalem: But the son of God, much mightier then al Emperors, an
everlasting king, can bring to naught: which thing, Melancthon seemed plainly
to point at in the life of Velpasian, in his Chronicles. And the like reason is
here, which is in the former comparison of numbers, if things to come may be
gathered by things past already. The figure does altogether in this place
agree, and the chiefest sign of Christ's coming: to wit, the preaching of the
Gospel has gone before, and we do stick in the midst of all the other
foretold calamyties, and every year expect more misery. Finally, also the
Astronomers write (if every skilful man in his own faculty is to be credited)
that the stars in the beginning of the thousand, five hundred, eighty and
four years (which almost together does agree with the number above mentioned)
does threaten very fearful and horrible things of diverse alterations and
other wonderful matters, orels an utter destruction of this world. The words
of Cyprian Leouitius a Bohemian, a most excellent Mathematition, in a certain
book of prognostications, for a twenty years, from the year sixty four, to
the eighty four be these, Anno Domi. 1582. mense Februarii, there shall happen
fifteen coniunctio^s of the Planets in the beginning of Pisces. After which,
straight ways in the year eighty four shall ensue a wonderful mixture of
all the Planets almost in Taurus, about the end of March and beeginning of
April. And which is more, a little after that shall be seen an Eclipse of the
Sunn, in the 18. degree 42. min. of Taurus, about the head of Algol, a most
cruel fixed star, governed by Venus, which shall be lynked to five Planets
in Aries, tending toward the twelfe. Here (says he) must we watch: and I
think it meet that earthly cogitations be cast off, least we be destroyed
being unready, for this great Conjunction is of all, the last which shall
happen in the end of watery Trigon. And watery Trigon shall have an end, and to
be turned into fiery Trigon. Neither any more in the space of eight hundred
years, the end of watery Trigon shall be nighe. But because about the end of watery
Trygon this monarchy shall begin, it is likely, yt the same also in the end of
the same Trigon shall have an end, since the son of god himself Jesus Christ our
lord, even in yt end of watery Trigo^ took upon him the nature of man. For 6.
years before his most glorious natiutie, yt same very conjunction in ye
extremity of Pisces, and in the beginning of Aries, happened: neither came ye
like since yt time, but when Charles ye great held his empire, wc was in the
year of our Lord, seven hundred, eighty, and nine. And now the second time,
such a great and strange Conjunction shall come, which undoubtedly does
foreshew the other coming of the Son of God and man, in majesty of his
glory, at which time we must render account of our life and conversation. And
a little after he says: But under Charles the great, the end of the world
could not be, because at yt time five thousand years were not expyred. But now
the operation of this great conjunction continuing, the number shall tend to six
hundred years, which agrees with the holy Prophet, affirming that this world
should stand six thousand years: from which sum of years the son of God
shall take somewhat, saying: the last time, for the elected of God shall be
shortened. But if there remained yet an other Conjunction of the former Planets
like to the first, then should there be required almost eight hundred years
more, which added to the times of these great Conjunctions, do make the number
of six thousand, and almost four hundred years, which is plain against
the prophecy. These Conjectures, howsoever they they are, I thought good to
recite, which do agree with the learned Prophecies of most ancient
Astrologers. Hitherto Cyprian, which also by certain verses turned into
rythme, by John Stoffler, of the old Prophecy of the destruction of the world*

When from the birth of Virgins son,
a thousand years are past:
And take five hundredth swiftly roune
by just accounting have.
Then shall a season strange appear,
which men shall moan too late:
I mean the eight and four score year
bestead with dolefell fate.
If this year ends not the frame,
that God with cunning wrought,
If now the sea and massy earth
to nothing shalhe brought:
Yet every kingdom with his pride,
shall be defaced quight:
Their glory aye from them shall slide,
and mourn shall every wight.
Now by this it appears how the number of years of Moses government, which
endured a thousand, five hundred, eighty and three years: and of this year,
a thousand, five hundred eighty and four (in whose beginning that prodigius
Conjunction of the planettes in the end of the watery Trigon does happen) agree
together: so that the quantity and number of the times foretold, the signs
and stars seem to agree together, and without al doubt to portende the same
thing. In like manner may we bring forth other comparisons of time, which by
reason of like events agree together wonderfullye. Of which this one is not of
least weight, to wit, the same tune from the nativity of Christ unto the
overthrow of Jerusalem, is almost equal with that, when Luther first of all
set him self against the Popes indulgences, and began to preach the Gospel,
to this year eighty and eight, in which, or about the same, by this
merueilous joining together of Planets, which shall be four years before, by
the singular providence of God, so dreadful destinies of the world shall meet
together. For from the birth of Christ, until the destruction of Jerusalem,
are numbered seuentye and three years, and from the time that Luther and others
first began to preach Christ and his Gospel until the eighty and eight
year, are accounted seue^ty and one year, the number is just with that
before, and speaking allegorically, the^ may Christ be said to be borne
again, when as the doctrine, so long by papisticall dreams darkened, and
fond illusions so deeply buried, is as it were borne a new, and does
clearly shine among us. But if those years from the birth of Christ, until
his preaching and suffering of death, with that general persecution don by
Charles the fifth, and the Pope: And again, those years from the death of
Christ, until the destruction of Jerusalem, with these years which came
since that general persecution, until the eighty eight year, were compared,
we shall see also, that in number of years they do not much differ. For
between Christ's birth and his preaching, there was 30. years, and so to his
death 33. years, and somewhat more. But from that 17. year, when the Gospel
began to shine again, until the 46. year in all, when Charles the Emperor
began to arm himself against the states of the Empire, so to abolishe the
doctrine of Christ, are numbered 29. years. Again, from the death of Christ,
to the overthrow of Hierulalem, there were 40. years. And from the general
persecution, which happened in the 46. year, until eighty and six year, are
accounted fortye years, which is the middle year between the eightye four,
when that exceeding strange uniting together of the Planets shall appear. And
the eighty eight, about which time that Conjunctions shall take their full
force.

Moreover, I find that these times, in which those 2. wonderful Conjunctions
did appear six years before the death of christ, and in the day of Charles
the great, and the third and last, which shall happen before the full
expyring of six thousand years, the thousand, five hundred, eightye, and
four being at hand, do fill the same number. For Cyprian Leouitius does
write, that that other uniting of Planettes in the time of Charles the great,
chanced in the year, seven hundred, eighty and nine, afther the nativity
of christ. If to this number so many more were added, the years would be one
thousand, five hundred, seventy and eight. Now if to these were added those
six* years before Christ was borne, when the first of these three
Conjunctions happened, there shall arise (counting from the nativity of
Christ, as it were from an effect of the former Conjunction) the same number
of years in full quantitye, agreeing with that dreadful year, eighty four,
above a thousand five hundred, only that first, from this last, which is to
come, differing those six years before Christ's birth. I confess my self
not to be the skylfullest in Astronomy, that is, although I do graatly esteem
that art (if it be soberlye used, and not vainly abused:) Which some, because
they are not acquainted therewith (as commonly it happens) do not only
despise, but also with evil words, because it is abused of some, deface. But
if the writing of Leouitius, and which was a great while before his time, John
Stoffler, and other Astronomers judgment of those rare Conjunctions of all the
Planets in the end of waterye Trigon be true: (as certes I believe, and verily
persuade my self) I say plainly, it is a thing greatly to be meruayled at,
that those Collations of times (in which the Lord God either has bestowed
singular benefits upon his church, and also will bestow, or altered kingdoms,
and will alter) by such a certain wonderful equality, and quantity of numbers,
should answer beetweene them selves, even as those reasons of Astronomers in
every respect have done: Of which it is evidently gathered, that the Lord
GOD by a singular providence and eternal council, does guide and govern all
things. And also it is plainly to be seen, that he has made the stars,
and the course of them to be as it were clocks of his eternal counsel, and
gouernmentes of such things in his Church, and commonweals, even as the Lord
God also does witness himself, that those lights in the firmament of heaven,
should be fore signs of times, and days, and years. And therefore from these
things do cunning Astronomers fetch their conjectures, because through a
certain order which the stars do keep, they have by long use observed very
many things: yt so from a true observation of principles, they may bring forth
general conjectures, whose events do meruailously agree together. And yt there
is a certain order, or a true course of ye stars, yt wonderful agreeing
together of years, continually in alteration of kingdo^s, and religion, wc has
bin marked is a great proof, as by that which is already spoken, may and
hereafter shall more plainly appear. Truly, as often as I consider these
things, I am not only exceedingly troubled in mind, but as it were compelled
to believe, that that especial time of the end of this world is nigh at hand,
because the Lord among other things also has given us certain tokens, to wit:
that before his coming there shall be a darkening of the sun and moon, that
the qualities of ye heavens shall be troubled. By which words no doubt he would
signify, that the whole sirmament of Stars should be altered, and as it were
threaten a destruction. We have a notable example hereof in Noes preaching, by
whom the Lord GOD did first accuse the world of disobedience, before he
drowned the same for lack of repentance: wherefore let us cast from us, both
our careless security and mistruste of the promyses of GOD: let us renounce
the devil and the works of the flesh, which are not sufferable by the word
of god, and let us listen to the friendly admonition of our Savior Christ,
warning us in these words: Take heed, least at any time your minds be Luke 21.
over laden with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so the
sudden day of the Lord take you unawares, for even as a snare it shall come
upon all which sit upon the face of the earth: be ye watchful therefore at all
times. (And as Matthew adds) Because ye know not the hour in which Mat. 25.
your Lord will come: praying, that ye may escape all these things which are
to come, and may stand before the son of man.

O God and most merciful father, illuminate our minds with thy holy spirit,
by which we may be prepared to all good works, in the holiness and newness
of life, that so with Paul, we may desire to leave this world, and to be
with Christ, and so in the coming of the Lord being found ready with oil in
our lamps, and adorned with our wedding garments, we may find entrance to
the Lords marriage: which, thou for thy son, and his beloved spouse the
Church, have prepared and appointed from the beginning of ye world. To thee
therefore, O heavenly father, to the only begotten son, and to the holy ghost
our comforter, be all praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Whereas before I have declared of many reasons and probable conjectures, from
the course of times: now I will proceed by the Art of Astronomy, to show
and set forth in what manner and form the faces of the heavens are at the time
of these great conjunctions of the Planets, which shall happen in the end of
waterie Trigone, in Anno Domini. 1582. in the month of February, the 12. day,
about the hour of 7. of the clock in the morning, the, Moon then ready to
change, in the second degree and 40. minutes in Pisces, in conjunction with all
the Planets, as by a figure hereafter calculated to the learned and skillful
in this Art may appear. The like conjunctions, have never bin seen in these
our days, nor yet in many years before: for this great conjunction is of all,
the last which shall happen in the end of waterie Trigon, and waterie Trigon
shall have an end. And about the eight day of April, in Anno, 1584. a little
before that the Sun enters into Taurus, then turned into fiery Trigon, neither
any more in the space of eight hundred years the end of waterie Trigon shall be
nigh.

Here follows the figure expressing the same lights of the conjunctions of
the Planets in.
astrological chart Anno. Dom. 1583. The 12. day of February, hora 7. in the
morning, a new Moon at the Sun rising in conjunction. with 5. Planetes in
the Ascendent, in 2. degrees and four minutes in.


AT the time of this entrance, ye cuspis of the East is in 7. degrees of
Pisces. The 2, house, 9. degrees, and 4. minutes of Taurus. The 3. house, 6.
degrees and 23. min. of Gemi. The 4. house 20. degrees in Gemin. The 5. house,
2. degrees, and 58. min. of Cancer. The 6. house 22. degrees, and 50. minutes of
Cancer. The 7. house 7. degrees in Virg. The 8. house 9. degrees and four min.
of Scorpius. The 9. house 6. degrees 23. minutes of Sagittarius. The 10. house
20. degrees of Sagittari. The 11. house 2. degrees and 58. minutes of Capricor.
The 12. house 22. and 50. minutes of Capricor. The Moon is in 2. degrees and 4
minutes of Pisces, pars fortunae is in the 27. degrees, and 0. minutes of
Pisces. Saturn is in the 12. degrees and 23. minutes of Pisces. Jupiter is in
the 4. degree and 19. minutes of Pisces. Mars is in the 9. degrees and 5.
minutes of Pisces: The Sun is in the 2. degrees and 4. minutes of Pisces.
Venus is in the 29. degrees and 18. minutes of Aquarius. Mercury is in the
first degree and 0. minutes of Pisces. Caput Draconis is in the 27. degree and
30. minutes of Sagittarius. Cauda Draconis, is in ye 27. degrees and 30. minutes
of Gemini.

In viewing of the starrie sky
it plainly does appear,
Great waters, yea, of sundry sorts
shall reign this present year:
Like as therefore by certain signs
the same were showed to me:
So I the same, lo here do show
good Reader unto thee.
Sixteen Conjunctions shall be made with the Moon and other planets,
between the 12. day of February, and the 26. day of the same month in
Pisces: the like number in the space of 15. days, in one sign has never
been seen in these our days, nor yet in many other years before. The 12.
The number (...) 6..
day of February next, there shall be these many conjunctions in one day.

The first is a conjunction of the Sun and the Moon in Pisces. A conjunction
of the Moon and Mercury in. A conjunction of Venus and the Moon in pisces. A
conjunction of Jupiter, and the Moon in Pisces. A conjunction of Saturn, and
the Moon in Pisces. A conjunction of Venus, and the Moon in Pisces. The 13.
day of February a coniu^ction of the Sun and Jupiter in Pisces. The 13. day
again, a conjunction of the Sun and Mercury in Pisces. The 14. day of
February, a conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury in Pisces. The 16. day of
February a conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in Pisces. The 18. day of February
a conjunction of Saturn and Mercury in Pisces. The 21. day of February a
conjunction of Mars and the Moon in Canc. The 22. day of February a
conjunction of Saturn and the Sun in Pisces. The 23. day of February a
conjunction of Saturn and Venus in Pisces. The 25. day of February a
conjunction of the Sun and Venus in Pisces.

This great conjunction does threaten strange and wonderful things to happen.
For first after the mighty Conjunction of the two highest planets, Saturn and
Jupiter in Cancer, which is reckoned the first sign of the aforesaid
waterie triplicitie, which conjunction happened in the fourth house, in the
month of November, at which time the world was ouerflowed with water, which
to this day does, and shall ever bear the name of Noah's flood, such a flood
as the world shall never see again. The next conjunction of the Superior
Planets happened in Scorpio, the second sign of the same Triplicitie 47.
years before ye glorious Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, and five years
before ye destruction of the most valerous and puissant captain, Julius
Caesar, and Pompey was very hot yt violent. The end of yt which Civil wars
between the said Julius and Pom pey, was a little after the same conjunction.
Whereupon Julius Caesar having oppressed the contrary force, and valiantly
subdued his enemies, which defended their ancient state, and common liberty:
did first establishe this fourth most Noble Monarchy. Thirdly, not long after
this, namely, six years, before the happy birth of our Redeemer, there
happened a conjunction of these mighty superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter,
in the last face of Pisces, which is the last sign of waterie Trigon, and the
beginning of Aries, which is the first sign of the fiery Trigon, which
conjunction happened never since, but only in the days of the worthy
Christian Emperor, Carolus Magnus. Anno 789. which is almost 800. years ago.
But is now to happen once again in this year 1583. Touching which co^iu^ctio^
this year now ensuing is the last coniunctio^ yt ever shall happen in the end
of yt waterie Trigon. And hereafter ensues the figure Astronomically of the
said great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the 8. house in Pisces.

astrological chart Anno Domini. 1583. The 28. day of April, hora 12. of the
clock at noone,.. and. Polus Claudiocestrensis, De. M. 51. 32.

AT the time of this entrance, the Cuspis of the East is the 27. degrees, and
24. minutes of Leo. The 2. house is the 17. degrees, and 49. minutes of Virgo.
The 3. house is the 11. degrees and 34. minutes of Libra. The 4. house is the
16. degrees and 00. min. of Scorpio. The 5 house is the 29. degrees, and 27.
min. of. Sagitra. The 6. house is the 30. degrees, and 55. minutes of Aquar.
The 7. house is the 27. degrees and 24. min. of Aquar. The 8. house is the 17.
degrees and 49. min. of Pisces. The 9. house is the 11. degrees and 34. minutes
of Aries. The 10. house is the 16. degrees and 00. mi. of Taurus. The 11. house
is the 29. degrees and 2^. minutes of Gem. The 12. house is the 3. degrees. and
45. minutes of Leo. The Move in 4. degrees and 54. min. of Sag. Pars fortunae
15. degrees and 34. min. of Pisces. Saturn is in 21. degrees and 00. min. of
Pisces. Jupiter is in 21. degrees and 00. minutes of Pisces. Mars is in 4.
degrees and 6. min. of Leo. The Sun is in 16. degrees and 48. minutes of
Taurus. Venus is in 4. degrees and 6. min. of Gemin. Mercury is in 21. degrees
and 20. minutes of Aries. Saturn is Oriental, is Orie^tall. Mars is
Occidentall, Mercury Occidentall.

Considering that this fourth monarchy began first about the end of watery
Trigo^, and was afterward weakened and decayed under the same, as appears by
the premises, may it now seem likely and probable enough that it shall also
finally be ended and destroyed under the same Trigon. And for as much as our
Lord and Savior took our humane nature upon him, being borne of the Virgin
Marie in Bethlem, at the end of the waterie Trigon, and beginning of the fiery
Trigon: the same now happening again, may it not also signify and portende
some wonderful and marvelous alteration shortly after to ensue: yea, why not
even yt great and dreadful time, wherein ye same Jesus Christ shall come again
in unspeakable majesty, to judge both the quick and the dead, consuming the
whole world by fire. For now shall the fiery Trigon reign, and all the
conjunctions of the superior Planets, which hereafter shall happen, shall
continually be in fiery signs till the accomplishme^t almost of 200. years.
The ancient famous prophecy of Elias, concerning the worlds continuance,
foretelling that the same should stand 6000. years: 2000. vain: 2000. the
law: 2000. Christ: which together make in all, the final number of numbers
456. years more to come do make up the just number of 6000. years, the full
time, which Elias speaks of. But I cannot think that the full computation
of the number shall be filled.
6000. years, whereof it has already contained 5544. So that not so much as
500. years do now remain, of which also, some even of those that are yet
behind shall be shortened in respect of our infinite sins, and exceeding
wickedness, as it follows in the same prophecy: yea our Savior Christ
himself has promised in his Gospel written by Saint Matthew yt 24. chapter,
that he will detract somewhat of the appointed time: saying, except those days
be shortened, there shall no flesh be saved, but for the elects sake, they shall be
shortened. what doubt is there but that we may persuade with our selves that
the coming of Christ to judgment will not be long.

Of the sicknesses and infirmities this year of our Lord 1583. in general
throughout the year, which are like to happen.
ACcording to the doctrine of the ancient Princes, and diverse other famous
learned in the Sciences Mathematical: It manifestly appears, that this year
shall reign, many painful and dangerous Fevers, the blooddy Flyxe, black
Iaundies, Opilation of the Liver, obstruction of the Spleen, Apostumes coming
of Phlegm, pains in ye eyes and teeth, Epilepsia, Stitches, Collicke and
stone, Laxes, pain in the bowels, Plurisies, ye Dropsy, Cathares, Rewmes,
small Pockes and Measles, pains of the belly: many maidens and women shall be
vexed with diverse diseases: and in the So^mer quarter these diseases shall most
reign, bleeding at the nose, pains in the back and belly, Dissenteria and
Strangurion. In Autumn the Winter quarter, pains in the throat, Agina,
Apoplexia, pains of the breast, tremblyng of the heart, the quartaine and
quotidian Ague, the Palsy, Rewmes, Plurisie, ye Gout, and many women shall
peryshe in their travel of child, many people speechless in their
sicknesses, and sudden death: From the which, and all other evils, the Lord
in his mercy deliver us. Amen.

Our sins (alas) do still procure,
these plagues and many more:
Yet if we will ropentance show,
our Lord has grace in store.
Let us do as the Ninevites did,
when Jonas did them warn;
Then shall no plagues of Pestilence,
or sickness do us harm.
Thus ends the eighty three year, and now to proceed with eighty four
year.

astrological chart Anno Dom. 1584 the 8. day of April, one in hours, and 44.
minutes at noone, at what time the figure of the heavens is such, at what time
the Planets do enter into fiery triplicities.

LEo ascendent in the 15. degree and 12 min. The 2. house 4. degrees 54. min.
of Virgo. The 3. house 26. degrees 34. mi. of Virgo. the 4. house 28. degrees
and no mi. of Libra. The 5. house 12. degrees and 30. min. of Sagittarius. The
6. house 20. degrees and 26. min. of Capric. The 7. house 15. degrees and 12.
mi. of Aquar. ye 8. house 4. degrees and 54. min of Pisces. The 9. house 26.
degrees and 34. min. of Pisces. The 10. house 28. degrees and no min. of Aries.
The 11. house 12. degrees and 30. min. of Gem. The 12. house 20. degrees and
26. min of Cancer. The Moon is in 11. degrees and 4 min. of Leo. Pars fortunae
in 28. degrees and 8. min. of Sagit. Saturn is in no degree and 14. min. of
Aries. Mercury is in one degree and 22. min. of Aries. Mars is in 3. degrees
and 26. minutes of Aries. Jupiter is in 15. degrees and 20. min. of Aries. The
Sun is in 28. degrees and 8. min. of Aries. Venus is in the 16. degree and
52. min. of Pisces. Saturn is Oriental. Jupiter is Oriental. Mars is
oriental. Venus is Occidentall. Mercury is Oriental *. These Planets
conjoined together in fiery triplicities, is a great token to be marked of the
worlds destruction and that the latter day is at hand. Therefore let us
watch and be mindful of the Lords coming.

The servant which diligently watches at all hours for his masters coming,
Mat. 24.
and does in yt mean season such things as his master has appointed him, is
blessed: For he shall enter into his masters joy. But the servant, that
lives without care, is idle, watches not, looks not diligently upon his
office, thinks not of his masters coming, smites his fellows, cateth and
drinks with the drunken, that servant I say, shall have his part with
hypocrites, and shall be cast into utter darkness, where weeping and gnashing of
teeth shall be, etc.

Wake, because ye know not what hour Mat. 24.
your master will come, of this be ye sure, that if the householder knew what
hour the thief would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to
be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready, for in an hour as ye think not, the
son of man comes.

Watch and pray, that ye fall not into Mat. 26.
temptation.

Let your loins be gyrte about, and Luke. 21.
your lights burning, and your selves like men that wait for their master,
when he will return from the wedding, that as soon as he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him: Blessed are those servants, which the Lord
when he comes shall find waking, etc.

Take heed, watch and pray, for ye Mark. 13.
know not when the time is, And I say to al watch.

Take heed to your selves, least your hearts be grieved with surfeiting and
drunkenness, Luke 21
and cares of the world, when the day shall come suddenly on you. For as a snare
shall it come on all them that sit on the face of the earth. etc.

Philip. 4. The Lord is at hand.

The day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in the night: when they
shall say 1 These. 5.
peace and no danger, than comes there on them sudden destruction, as the
trayuailing woman with child, and they shall not escape. etc.

Let us not sleep as other do: but let us watch and be sober.

Be pacient, and settle your hearts, for Jacob. 5.
the coming of the Lord draws nygh: Beeholde, the Judge stands before the
door.

Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion walks
about, 1. Pet. 5.
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith.

The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. 2. Pet. 3.


Little children, even now is the last 1. John. 2
time.

Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
Heb. 10.


The five wise Virgins prepared both lamps and oil, tarying and watching for
the coming of the bridgroome: Therefore when he came, they being in a
readiness, went in with him into the wedding: But the five foolish Virgins
slumbred and slept, so that when the Bridegoome came, they were unprepared, and
had no oil in their lamps, and therefore were they shut out of the door.
Watch, for we know neither the day nor the hour when the Sun of man shall
come, etc.

Domus Diei, hora 4. min 56. ante Merid. astrological chart This figure
expressing the faces of the heavens, of the Eclipses of the sun in the east
angle, about the time of the change of the moon. Anno Dom. 1584. the last day
of April, about the hour of 5. of the clock in the morning a little after the
sun rising

AT the time of this entrance, ye cuspis of the East is the 29. degrees and 25.
min of Taurus. The 2. house, 28. degres, and 34. minutes of Geminie. The 3.
house 14. degrees, and 12. minutes of Cancer. The 4. house is 28 degrees, 0.
minutes of Cancer. The 5. house is 17. deegrees, and 30. min. of Leo. The 6.
house is 0. degree, and 30. min. of Libra. The 7. house is 29. degrees, and 54.
min. of Scorpio. The 8. house is 20. degrees, and 34. minutes of Sugittarius.
The 9. house is 14. degree, and 12. min. of Capricorn. The 10. house is 28.
degrees, 0. min of Capricorn. The 11. house is 17. degrees, and 30. min. of
Aquarius. The 12. house is 0. degree, and 13. min. of Aries. The Sun in the
east Angle, 18. degrees, 42. min. in Taurus.

The Moon 17. and 49. min. applying to a Conjunction of the Sun in the 18.
degree, and 42. minutes of Taurus.

Pars fortunae in the 26. degrees, and 10. m. of Gemini, in the second house.

Saturn is in 2. degrees 41. min. of Aries, in the 12. house.

Venus in the 12. house in 11 degrees, and 44. min of Aries.

Mars in the 12. house, and 20. degrees, and 24. min. of Aries.

Jupiter in the 12 house, 20. degrees, and 25 min. of Aries.

Mercury in the 12. house, 1. degree, and 48. min. of Taurus.

Caput Draconis is 4. degrees of Sagitarius.

Cauda Draconis is 4. degrees of Gemini in the Ascendent.

Plenilunium Eclipticum. 1. Nouembris Die 7. hora. 12. 17. lunar eclipse Luna
orientis Solis orbem a Part Septentri onali perstringet, idque tenuissimo
Vestigio die. 29. Aprilis.

Digiti Ecliptid. 17 14

Te^pus incidentiae. 1 45

Mora dimidia. 0. 45.


astrological chart This figure calculated shows the faces of the heavens, of
the Eclipse of the 1584. the 7. day of November, a little after 12. of the
clock, at midnight.


THe time of this entrance the Cuspis of the estate is the 5. degree, and 51.
minutes of Libra. The 2. house, 26. degree, and 51. min. of Virgo. The 3.
house, 21. degree, and 51. min. of Libra. The 4. house 28. degrees, and 00.
minutes of Scorpio. The 5. house 10. degrees, and 24. minutes of Capricorn. The
6. house, 12. degres, and 48. min. of Aquarius. The 7. house, 5. degrees, and
55. min. of Pisces. The 8. house 26. degrees, and 51. min. of Pisces. The 9.
house 21. degrees, and 58. min of Aries. The 10. house, 28. degrees, and 00.
min. of Taurus. The 11. house, 10. degrees, and 24. min. of Cancer. The 12.
house, 12. degrees, and 42. min. of Leo. The Moon in 21. degrees, and 16.
minutes of Taurus. Pars Fortunae 5. degrees, and 55. min. of Aquarius. Saturn
in 29. degrees, and 27. min. of Pisces. Iupitur is in 26. degrees, and 43. min.
of Aries. Mars is in 21. degrees, and 59. min of Leo. The Sun is in 25.
degrees, and 30. min. of Scorpio. Venus is in 60. degrees, and 24. min. of
Scorpio. Mercury is in 28. degrees, and 10. min. of Scorpio. Caput Draconis is
in 23. degrees, and 40. minutes of Scorpio. Cauda Draconis is in 23. degrees and
40. minutes of Taurus. Saturn is Occidentall. Jupiter Occidentall. Mars is
Oriental. Venus is Occidentall, Mercury is Occidentall.

THe Lord God amongst other things has given us certain tokens, to wit: that
before his coming, there shall be a darkning of the Sun and Moon, that the
qualities of the heavens shall be troubled: By which words no doubt he would
signify, that the whole firmament of stars should be altered, and as it were
threaten a destruction, etc.

Anno Dom. 1586. mensis Aprilis.
The effects of these meetinges shall evidently appear: at which time, there
shall fall out 12. Conjunctions in Aries, a fierye Triplicitie.

At the hour of Noone.
The 2. day of April Sol in 21. degree, and 46. min. in Aries, applies to a
Conjunction of. in the 22. degrees, and 8. min of Aries. The 7. day of April
the Moon in 10. degrees, 37. min of Aries, and applies to Venus in ye 18.
degrees. 16. minutes in the same sign. The 7. day of April ye Moon in Aries
10. degrees, and 37. mi. in aplication, to a co^iunctio^ of Mercury, and
Mercury is 17. degres, and 33. min. in the same sign. The 7. day of April ye
Moon in Aries, 10. degrees, 37. min. in application to a Conjunction of Mars,
and Mars is 18. degrees, and 5. minutes in the same sign. The 8 day of April,
the moon in 22. degrees, and 25. min. in application to a Conjunction of
Saturn, and Saturn is 22. degrees, 56. minutes in the same sign. The 8. day
of April again Venus in Aries 19. degrees, and 30. minutes, in Conjunction with
in the same degrees of full. The 8. day of April, the Moon in 22. degrees,
and 25. minutes of Aries, in application to a Conjunction of the Sun, in 27.
degrees, and 38. min. in the same sign. The 8. day of April again, a
Conjunction of Mars and Mercury in Aries. The 9. day of April, Mercury in
Aries 21. degres, and 21. minutes, in applycation to a Conjunction of Saturn,
and is 23. degres, and 40. minutes in the same sign. The 13. day of April, a
Conjunction of Saturn and Venus in Aries. The 14. day of April Mars in Aries
23. degrees, and 23. minutes, in applycation to a Conjunction of Saturn, in
23. degrees, and 43. minutes in the same sign. The 14. day of April, a
Coniunctio^ of Mars and Venus in Aries.


Anno Reparatae Salutis. 1588. intercalari.
Aurcus Numerus. 12 Cyclus Solaris. 1 Litera Dominicalis. G. F. Indictio
Romana. 1 Interuallum. Hebd. 7. di. 6. Septuagesima. 4. Februarii.
Quadragesima. 25. Februarii. Pasca verum. 7. Aprilis. Rogationes. 12. Maii.
Ascentio Domini. 16. Maii Pentecoste. 26. Maii. Aduentus domini. 1. decembris.

two lunar eclipses Plenilunia duo Ecliptica. Die 2. Mar. hora 13. 42. Die. 25.
Aug. hora. 16. scr. 49.
Digiti Ecliptici. 17.

Tempus incidentiae. 1. ho. ^.

Mora dimidia. o. 46.



Digiti Ecliptici. 18. 17.

Te^pus incidentiae ho ra 16.

Moradimidia. o. 51.



The two fearful Eclipses of the Moon. Regressus Planetarum.


a penultima Augusti vsque in anni finem retrocedet. regreditur vsque in 25.
Martii: inde progreditur vsque in 24 dece^. hoc anno semper progreditur. post
5. Septembris regredietur vsque in 17. Octobris. ab initio anni vsque in 22.
Ianuarii. Iterum a 25. Aprilis vsque in 18. Aprilis. Tertium a 20. Augusti in
12. Septembris. Quartum post 14. Decembris vltra sinem anni regreditur.
The full Eclipse shall be at one of the clock, and 42. minutes after midnight.

astrological chart The 1. of these 2. Eclipses of the moon, this year 1588.
shall be the 2. day of March 13. in hours 42. minutes. Figura. Erected for the
meridian of the city of London, the Polus Article being raised 51. degrees. 44. 32.


THe color of the Moon in this Eclipse shall not be redd, but declyning to a
dark brown color: the other Conjectures of yt influe^ce or effects thereof, I
leave them till such time as I write my Prognostication for this year, if it
please God so long to continue my life, in the mean time good gentle reader
take this in good pare, and bear with me in this my simple skill. In this
Eclipse setting forth, the Ascende^t is the 22. degree, and 12. min. of
Sagitarius. The 2. house, 28. degree, and 57. min. of Capricornus. The 3.
house, 22. degree, and 35. min. of Aquarius. The 4. house, the 27. of Aries.
The 5. house, the 16. degree, and 33. min. of Taurus. The 6. house, 2. degree,
and 43 min. of Geminie The 7 house the 22. degree, and 4^. min. of Geminie. The
8. house, the 28 degree, and 57. minu. of Cancer. The 9. house, the 22. degree,
and 35. min. of Leo. The 10. house, the 27. degree of Libra. The 11. house, the
16. degree, and 33 mi. of Scorpio. The 12. house, ye 2. de. and 43 mi. of Sagit.
The sun in the 22. de. and 14 min of Pisces. Venus in the 12. degree, and 26
mi. of Aries. Mercury in ye 13. de. and 2. mi. of Pisces. Saturn in the 12.
degrees. and 23. min. of Taurus. Jupiter in the 7. degrees. and 52 mi. of Leo. Mars in
the 7. degrees. and 3. min. of Aries. The Moon in the 21. degrees., and 13. mi. of
Virgo. Pars Fortunae in ye 23. de. and 14. m. of Geminie. Caput Draconis in the
9. degree and 43. min of Virgo. Canda Draconis in the 9. degree, and 43. min.
of Pisces.

This Eclipse of the Moon shall be at 6. of the clock, and 49. min. at night,
the color of the Moon white, and shall appear a little after the sun is set.
astrological chart An other celestial Schea^e of the 2. Eclipses of the Moon
this present year 1588. the 25. day of August, hora 16. scrip. 49. Calculated
for the Meridian of the city of London. Polus 51. degrees. 24. 32.


The Ascendent is ye 21. degree, and 20 mi. of Aquarius. The 2. house 25. and
28. min of Aries. The 3. house the 27. degree and 59. min. of Taur. The 4.
house the 14. degree of Gemini. The 5. house the 27. degree and 1. min. of
Gemini. The 6. house 14. degree and 11. min of Cancer. The 7. house the 21.
degrees and 20. mi. of Leo. The 8. house the 25. degree and 28 min. of Libra.
The 9. house is the 27. degree and 59. min. of Scorp. The 10. house 14. degrees
of Sagit. The 11. house the 27. degree and 1. min. of Sagit. The 12 house is
the 14. degree and 11. min. of Capric. The Sun in the 12. degree and 4 min. of
Virgo. Venus in the 17. degree and 40. min. of Libra. Mercury in the 26.
degree and 50. min. of Virgo. Saturn in 0 degree and 27. min of Gem. Jupiter
in the 1. degree and 6. min. of Virg. Mars in the 9. degree and 45. min. of
Leo. The Moon in the 6. degree and 19. min. of Pisces. Pars fortunae in 15.
degrees and 31 min. of Cancer. Caput Draconis in the 10. degree. and 25. min.
of Virgo, Cauda Dra conis in the 10. degree and 25. mi. of Pisces.

Here is the tune that Cipryan in his verses turned in ryme makes mention of,
The time waxes short, and the day of the Lords coming to judgment by all
signs and tokens cannot be far off. Therefore good brethren in Christ be
mindful of the Lords coming: let us call upon his holy name by devout prayers
and supplications: Let us make our submission unto his glorious majesty: Let
us acknowledge our offenses, and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness:
Let us be heartily sorry for these our misdoings, whose heavy burdens are
intolerable: let us crave mercy and forgiveness at the Lords hand: Let us
frame a new and godly life: Let us always have the Lords coming in our
remembrance: Let us meditate unto him by devout prayers, and most humble
supplications ask all things of him, praise him, trust in him, and give him
the honor and worship belonging to his glorious Majesty: Let us not neglect
holy meditations and prayers, but continually pray. It is written (Gentle
Reader) that in the beginning, in the days of Seth the son of Adam, the
people first began to invoke and call upon the name of God by devout prayer,
and this manner of praying was used among ye fathers from Noah until the coming
of Christ, and they did frequent the same as a special mean and way to crave
of God his mercy, his grace, and his assistance. By prayer also, they did set
forth the glory of God, appeased his wrath and displeasure, and rendered him
thanks for his benefits received. Christ our Savior after his coming,
taught it also as a most necessary and comfortable doctrine, whereby we might
crave of our heavenly father, not only all things necessary and requisite
for us (as appears in the prayer which he taught his Disciples:) but also
forgiveness of sins to the attainement of everlasting life. And therefore may
we well say, that as the use thereof is worthy praise, so the want thereof is
to be blamed. For where prayer is not frequented, there God is not served and
called upon for his grace and assistance, neither is he thanked for his
gracious benefits, the free gift of his mercy is not desired, neither is the
horrible punishmente of his justice feared. But who may not now (think thou
Gentle Reader) rightly say to ye world as Jonas said to the Niniuits: There
are yet 40. days, and Niniuie shall be destroyed. The people no sooner heard the
Prophet denounce destruction to come on them, for their sins, but
immediately, even at the first crying of him, with trembling and fear, turned
to God, believed in him, feared his justice, confessed their sins, and with
penitent hearts craved his mercy. But good Christian brother whom it has
pleased God to call, not by the mouth of one man, as he did the Ninevites (for
he has called us by sundry means) therefore do thou not regard his
calling? wherefore to thee it may be thus said: The more God seeks thee, the
more thou shunnest him: the more he loves thee, the less thou regardest him:
the more thou need him, the less thou think on him: So that by thy great
unkindnesse, God is compelled to say unto thee, as he said to the Israelites, I
am ouerwearied with bearing and long suffering of thy wicked and sinful
living. If thou therefore desire to be freed from the horrible plagues and
threatenings of God, thou must (like a true Niniuite) with a broken and penitent
heart, call upon God with continual prayer, and craving of him his mercy,
grace, and assistance, which if thou ask with a true faith, he will grant it
thee. Finally, if thou covet to be happy and blessed, let no day pass thee,
but that thou once at the least present thy self before God by prayer, and
falling down before him, with an humble disposition of devout mind (not from
the mouth, but from the heart inwardly:) cry with the Prophet David, O Lord,
the offenses of my youth, and mine ignorances remember not: but after thy mercy
and goodness O Lord remember me. Psalm. 25. 5.

A prayer for true repentance, and for the coming of the kingdom of Christ.
O Lord, and our God Jesus Christ, the Scripture testifies of thee, that when
thou wast in the world, thou did preach repentance, and the coming of the
kingdom of heaven, and after thou wast risen again, thou saydest, yt it
behooved thee so to suffer, and on the third day to rise again from the dead,
and that both repentance and remission of sins should be preached to every
creature in thy name, and that whosoever believed and were baptized, should be
saved. Again, then full lovingly did bid them that labor and are laden to
com unto thee, and promisedst that thou would unlade and refresh them:
verily it is no small company of wicked spirits cleaves, which are also as
roaring Lio^s, and earnest accusers of ye sons of god, yea, and such enemies
of God, and of the^ that appertain unto him, as by no means neither will nor
may be reconciled. Therefore we, and all of us, which through thy grace are
bound and given over to serve God: Most humbly beseech thee O holy spirit
that thou will defend us against all the wicked temptations and pernicious
breathings of this most wicked spirit, that all vice excluded, all virtue and
godliness may spring, grow, and increase in us until we be made perfect and
ancient in Christ Jesus our Lord, and his holy law. Take aaway infidelity,
and ingraft in our breasts a true and unfeigned faith, take away pride, wrath,
envy, debate, whoredom, gluttony, drunkenness, covetousness, error,
hypocrisy, with all kind of ungodliness, and priute in our hearts humility,
love, chastity, and concord, purity of life, temperance, sobriety, mercy,
liberality toward the poor, truth, pure holiness, with all kind of virtue:
take away from us all that ever is of Satan, the flesh, and the world, and
give us that which only comes from thee O heavenly father, and from thy only
begotten son, and from the holy spirit: Teach us all truth, enarme us with
the shield of true faith, that we may so watch and show such diligence, that
we may perceive his crafty assaults and dangers, unto the end that we live
not hereafin the flesh, but rather that we abhor al filthiness, and
impuritie thereof, and that we being brought into thy kingdom, through thy
precious blood, may obtain daily more and more perfect remission of our
sins. So be it.

Imp^^nted at London by Thomas Dawson, at the three Cranes in the Viniree, at
the assignement of R. W. 1583.


