An Epistle or exhortacion, to unity and peace, sent from the Lord Protector,
and others the kings most honorable counsel of England To the Nobility,
Gentlemen, and Commons, and al others the inhabitauntes of the Realm of
Scotland.

Edward, by the grace of God Duke of Somersett, Earl of Hertforde, Viscount
Beauchamp, lord Seimour, uncle to the kings highness of England, Governor of
his most royal person, and Protector of all his Realms, dominions and
Subjects, Lieuetenaunt general of all his Majesty's Armies, both by land
and sea, Threasauror and Earl Marshall of England, Governor of the Isles of
Gernesey and Iersey, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, with
others the Counsel of the said most high and noble Prince EDWARD, by the
grace of God of England, France and Irelande, king, defender of the Faith,
and in earth under Christ the supreme hedde of the Church of England and
Irelande: To the nobility, and counsailors, gentlemen and the commons, and all
others the inhabitauntes of the realm of Scotland: Gretyng and Peace.
Considering with our selfs the present state of things, and weiyng more
depelye the manner and terms, wherein we and you do stand: It makes us to
merueile what evil and fatal chance does so disseuer your hearts, and makes
them so blind and unmindful of your profit and to still conciliate and
heap to your self most extreme mischiefs: the which, we (who^ you will
needs have your enemies) go about to take away from you and perpetually to
ease you thereof. And although by all reasone and order of necessity, it should
be rather more convenient for you to seek and require, moderate agrementes of
us (who^ god has hitherto, according unto our most just, true, and Godly
meanynges and inte^tes, prospered and set forward, with your affliccion and
misery) then that we, being superiors in the feld Masters of a great part of
your realm, should seek upon you: Yet to the intent that our charitable mind
and brotherly love, should not cease by all means possible, to provoke and call
you to your own commodity and profit, even as the father to the son, or
thelder brother would do to the yo^ger brother: And as the loving Physician,
would do to the mistrustfull and ignorant pacient, we are content to call and
cry upon you, to look on your state, to avoid the great calamity your
Country is in: To have us rather brothers, then enemies, rather Countreymenne,
then Conquerours. And if your Governor or Capitaines, shall reteigne and keep
from you this our exhortacion, as heretofore they have done: our Proclamacio^
tendyng to the like effect, for their own private wealth and commodity, not
regardyng though you be still in misery, so they have profit and governance
over you, and shall still abuse you, with feyned and forged tales: Yet this
shall be a witness before God, and all Christian people, betwixt you and us,
that we professyng the Gospel of Christ according to the doctrine thereof,
do not cease to call and provoke you, from theffusio^ of your own blood, from
the destruccio^ of the realm of Scotland, from perpetual enemitie and hatred,
from the final eradicacion of your nation, and from servitude to foreyne
nations: to liberty, to amity, to equality with us, to that, which your
writers has always wisshed, might once come to pass. WHO that hathred
thistories of time paste, and does mark and note the great battles, fought
betwixt England and Scotland, thincursions, roades, and spoils, which has
been done on both the parties: The realm of Scotland five times won by one
king of England: The Scottishe kings, some taken prisoners, some slain in
battaill, some for very sorrow and discomforte upon loss, diyng and departing
the world: and shall perceive again, that of all nations in the world, that
nation only beside England, speaks the same language: and as you and we be
annexed and joined in one Islande, so no people so like in manner, form,
language, and all conditions as we are: Shall not he think it a thing very
unmeet, unnatural, and vnchristia^ that there should be betwixt us so mortal
war, who in respect of al other nations, be, and should be, like as two
brethren of one Islande of great Britayn? And though he were a straungier to
both, what would he think more mete, then if it were possible one kingdom be
made in rule, which is one in language, and not to be divided in rulers,
which is all one in Country. And for somuche as two successions cannot
concur and fall into one, by no manner of other means, then by marriage,
whereby one blood, one lignage and parentage, is made of two, and an
indefecible right given of both to one, without the destruction and abolishing
of either: If god should grant that whatsoever you would wish, should be done
what could you wish, other then that, which now, not by fortune has chanced,
but by his infinite mercy and most inscrutable providence, as careful for
you, he has given unto you. The which thing, that you should also think to
come of his disposicion, and not by blind fortune how unlikely has it been,
and how suddenly has it turned, that the power of God might be showed: Your
last King being a Prince of much excellency and young, (who^ you know, after
a promise broken contrary to his honor: And a misfortune by just judgment of
GOD following upon it, GOD either by sorrow, or by some other wise at his
inscrutable pleasure, did take away from you) had three children. Did not
almighty GOD, as it were to show his will and pleasure to be, that the long
continued war and ennemitie, of both the nations should be taken away, and
knit in perpetual love and amity, take the two men children of those babies,
being distaunt the one from the other, and in diverse places, both as it were
at one time, and within the space of xxiiii. hours, leauyng but one maiden
child and Princess?

When the most wise and victorious Prince, late our King and Master, king
Henry theight in other of his marriages not most fortunate, had by his most
lawful and most verteous wife Queen Jane, his other two wifes before that
marriage departed this world, and never surmise nor question made of that
marriage, fithe that time to this day, nor so much as all her life time, name
or mocion, to, or of any other wife, one Prince of so high expectacion, of so
great gifts of God, the right and undoubted heir of the Realm of England,
and his majesty only of male issue, left behynd him to succeed the imperial
Croune. If nothing else had been dooen, what can any wise or any Christian
manne, that thinks the world to be governed by Gods providence, and not by
fortune, think otherwise, but that it was Gods pleasure it should be so, that
these two realms should join in marriage, and by a godly Sacrament, make a
Godly, perpetual, and most friendly unity and concord. whereby such
benefits, as of unity and concord comes, may through his infinite grace,
come unto these realms. Or if any man of you, or of any other nation doubts
hereof, except that you look for miracles to be done herein, and yet if ye
mark all the possibilities of the natures of the two princes, the children
already had, the doubtful chance, least each of them should have a son, or
both daughters, or not of mete ages, with other circumstau^ces both of the
party of this realm of England, and that of Scotland, which has not
chanced in viii. C. years, it must needs be reconed a great meruaill and a
miracle. But let it be no miracle seeing that God does not now speak in
oracles as emo^ges the Jews he did: And present prophesies now a days, be
but either not certain, or else not plain, What more certainty can be had of
Gods will in this case, then the before rehearsed does bring? But if GOD
himself should speak, what could he speak more then he speaks in these: call
you them prouidences or chances? If you be still afflicted and punished, may
he not say: I of my infinite mercy and love to your nation, had provided a
right heir and a prince to the one, and a right heir and princes to the
other, to be joined in my holy laws, and by the law of nature, and the world
to have made an unity, concord, and peace, in the whole Isle of both the
realms, you refused it, you loved better dissencion then unity, discord then
agremente, war then peace, hatered then Love and Charity. If you do then
therefore smart for it, whom can you blame, but your own eleccion? BUT because
some of those, who makes hereto impedimentes, who cannot but confess, that
there appears Gods providence herein, and opportunity and occasion given, to
unite both the realms: yet may hereafter say, and heretofore has said, that
the fault herein is, that we seek not equality, nor the marriage, but a
conquest, we would not be fre^des, but be lords. Although our Proclamacions
at the last wars, does enough declare the contrary, yet here we proteste
and declare to you, and all Christian people, to be the kings Majesty's mind,
our Masters, by our advise and counsel, not to conquer, but to have an
amity, not to win by force, but to conciliate by love, not to spoil and
kill, but to save and keep, not to disseuer and divorce, but to join in marriage
from high to low, both the realms, to make of one Isle one realm, in love,
amity, concord, peace, and Charity. Which if you refuse, and drive us to
conquer, who is guilty of the blood shed? Who is the occasion of the war?
Who makes the battles, the brennyng of houses, and the deuastacion which
shall follow? CAN it be denied, but that we have the great seal of Scotland,
granted by the Parliament of Scotland, for the marriage which should be
made, with assuraunces and pledges, until the performau^ce? And this in the
time that the late king of most famous memory, our sovereign Lord king
Henry the eight did reign, and in the time of the same your Governor, who now
is the earl of Arreigne, who then being a chief dooer and laborer therein, for
the high and inestimable benefit of that realm. So sone as he was by the late
Cardinal of S. Andrews and others, with certain vain fears and hopes, and
gredines of dignity perverted, revolted from his first agreement, and put all the realm to the loss of such holds and fortresses, as be now taken from
you: and to the loss of a foughten feld, for the which we are sorry, if
otherwise peace could have been concluded, for his own private lucre, and
rechelesnes of that noble Realm. And what end can you look of this manner of
procedynges, but such success as heretofore has been experime^ted and
assaied: we offer love, we offer equality and amity, we overcome in war, and
offer peace, we win holds, and offer no conquest, we get in your land
and offer England: What can be more offered and more proffered, then
intercourse of merchau^dises, enterchaunge of marriages the abholishyng of all
such our laws, as prohibiteth the same, or might be impediment to the mutual
amity. We have offered not only to leave thaucthoritie, name, title, right, or
challenge of conquerours: but to receive that which is the shame of me^
ouercomed, to leave the name of the nation, and the glory of any victory if
any we have had, or should have of you, and to take the indifferent old name
of Britaynes again, because nothing should be left, of our part vnoffered,
nothing of your part vnrefused, whereby you might be inexcusable: And all the
world might testify, all other means not being able to do any thing, after
many other ways and remedies attempted: Battaill of us to be taken, as an
extreme refuge, to atteigne right and reason, emonges Christian men. IF any
man may rightfully make battaill, for his espouse and wife: the daughter of
Scotland, was by the great seal of Scotland, promised to the son and heir
of England. If it be lawful by Gods Law, to fight in a good querell, and
for to make peace: This is to make an end of all wars, to conclude an
eternal and perpetual peace, which to confirm, we shall fight, and you to
break, is it not easy to decerne who has the better part? GOD and the
sword, has all ready, and shall hereafter, if there be no remedy try it.
Who so wills the marriage to goo forward, who myndeth the peace and
tranquillity of both the Realms, who wills no conquest to be had, but
amity and love to be established betwixt us, we refuse no man: let him
bring his name and his pledge, of good service in this querell, he shall not
only be received to ye amity, but shall have sufficient defense against the
adversaries: WE neither do nor intend, to put any man from his takkes or
offices, unless he will needs resist, and so compel us thereunto. what face
has this of conquest? We intend not to disherit your Queen, but to make her
heirs, inheritors also to England. What greater honor can you seek unto your
Queen, then the marriage offered? What more meter marriage then this, with the
kings highness of England? What more sure defense, in the noneage of your
Queen, for the Realm of Scotland, then to have England patron and garrison?
We seek not to take from you your laws nor customs: But we seek to redress
your oppressions, which of diverse, you do sustein. IN the realm of England,
diverse laws and customs be, according to the ancient usage of the parties
thereof. And likewise in France, Normandy, and Gascoigne, has sundery kind of
ordres: Has all the realms and dominions which the Emperor now has, one and
one sort of laws? These vain fears and fantasies, of expulsion of your
nation, of chaungyng the laws, of making a conquest, be driven into your
heddes, of those who in deed, had rather you were all conquered, spoiled, and
slain, then they would lose any point of their will, of their desire of rule,
of their existimacion, which they know in quietness would be seen what it
were, as it were in a calm water. Now in this tumulte of discord when the
realm is tossed up and down, with waves and sourges of battaill, famyne, and
other mischief, which the war brings, they think they cannot be espied.
But look on the^, you that have wit and prudence, and consider the state of
your Queen and realm: YOU will not keep her sole and unmarried, the which were
to you great dishonor. If you mary her within the realm, that cannot
extynguish the title which we have to the Croune of Scotland: and what
dissencio^, envy, grudge, and malice, that shall bread emonges you, it is easy
to perceive. You will mary her out of the Realm: our title remains, you be
subjects to a foreign Prince of other Country, another language: and us ye
have your enemies, even at your elbowe, your succors far of from you. And
be we not in ye bowels now of the realm? Have we not a great part thereof
either in subieccio^, or in amity and love? Who shall come into your Realm,
but he shall be met with, and fought with, if need be, even of your own
nation, who be faithefull and true to the realm of England, in ye way of this
most Godly vnio^ by marriage. And if any foreign power, Prince or pote^tate,
whosoever be your aider, to norishe still discord, send you an army also: how
shall they oppress you, fill your houses, wast your grounds, spend and
consume your vitaill, hold you in subieccion, and regard you as slaves, which
without the^ could not live, take your Queen to bestow as they list, and leave
your realm, especially if their King or ruler (as perchance he may be) in
other wars, be otherwise occupied, to be a pray to us and a true conquest.
Then it shall be to late to say, we will have a marriage and no conquest, we
wish peace and amity, we are weary of battaill and misery. The stubborn
ouercomed must suffer the victours pleasure, and pertinacitie will make the
victory more insolent, whereof you your self have given the cause. If they
se^d money and Capitaines, but no soldiers: First if they be Capitaines, who
rules and who does obey, who shall have the honor of the enterprise, if it
be well achieued? But whether it be well achieued or no, which number is
that, that shall be slain, whose bloodde shall be shed? Their money peradventure
shall be consumed, and their commandments obeyed: But whose bodies shall
smarte for it? Whose lands shall be wasted? Whose houses burned? What realm
made desolate? Remember what it is to have a foreign power within you a strong
power of your enemies upon you, you as it were the ca^pe and plain, betwixt
them to fight on, and to be trodden upon, both of the victor and the ouercomed.
And imagine you se before your iyes, your wifes and daughters in daungier of
the wantonness and insole^cie of the soldiers, the proud looks of the
Capitaines and soldiers, who^ you call to help you, the contempt you shall
bring your nation in: And then take heed lest in deed that follow, which you
fear, that is that you shall be by them conquered, that you shall be by them put
from your holds, lands, tackes, and offices: that your laws by them shall be
altered: That your nacio^ shall be by them destroyed. Consider in this realm:
Did not the Britaynes call in the Saxons for help, and by them were put out?
Where be the Pictes, once a great nation betwixt you and us? How did the
nation of France put out the Galls out of all France? How got the Turk
first all Grecia, and now a late Hu^garie, but being called in for to aid and
help? And did not the Goths by like means get all Italy? And the Lombardes
one part thereof, now called Lombardy? What look you for more? Nedy soldiers
and having the weapons in their hands, and knowing that you cannot live
without them, what will they not command you to do? What will they not encroche
upon you? What will they not think they may do? And what will they think
that you dare do? This foreign help is your confusion, that succor is your
detriment, the victory so had, is your servitude, what is then to be thought of
loss taken with them? The strangers and foreign soldiers shall oppress you
within, our power and strength without: And of your own nation, so many as
loves quietness, Godliness, and the wealth of your realm, shall help also to
scourge and afflicte you. Is it not better to compose and acquiete all this
calamity and trouble by marriage? To end al sorrows and battles, by such
and so honorable a peace? How has the Emperor Spain and Burgondy, not by
title of marriage? How holds the French king Briteigne, now lately adnexed
to that Croune, not by title of marriage? How has all the great princes of the
world happily, and with quiet made of two kingdoms one, of diverse
lordshippes one? of nations always at war with the^ self, or else in doubtful
peace, one well governed Kingdom, rule and dominion, but by that most Godly,
most quiet, most amicable composicion of marriage? Two means there is of
making one rule, whereto title is pretended, and perfect agreement betwixt two
nations: Either by force and superiority which is conquest, or by equality
and love, which is parentage and marryng: ye hate the one, that is conquest,
and by refusyng the other, you enforce it upon you: you will not have peace, you
will not have aliaunce, you will not have concord: and conquest comes upon
you whether you will or no: And yet if all things were considered, we fear
it will appear, that it were better for you to be conquered of us, then
succored of straungiers, less loss to your gooddes, less hurt to your
land, less dishonor to your realm: This nation which is one in tongue, one
in Country and birthe, having so little diversity to occupy ye whole, the^
other powers to come into you, neither like in language, ne yet like in
behauior, who should rule over you, and take you to be but their slaves. But we
eftesones and finally declare, and protest unto you, that although for the
better furtheraunce of this godly purpose, of uniting the realms, and for the
sure defense of them, which favors the marriage, we are compelled for the
time, to keep holds, to make fortificacio^s in your Realm: Yet the Kings
Majesty's mind, and determinate pleasure, with our advise and counsel, to
be as before is declared, where favor may be showed, not to use rigor, if
by conditions you will receive this amity offered, not to follow conquest, we
desire love, unity, concord, peace and equality: let neither your Governor,
nor your Kirkmen, nor those who so often has falsefied their faith and
promise, and by treachery and falshed, be accustomed to prolo^g the time, feed
you further with fair words, and bring you into the snare, from whence they
cannoe deliver you. They will peradventure provide for themselves, with pencions
in some other Realm, and set soldiers straungiers in your holds, to keep
you in subieccion, under pretense to defend them against us. But who provides
pe^cions for you? How are you defended, when they be fled away? Who
co^quereth you when the strange soldiers or Capitaines has your holds?
When your land is wasted, and the realm destroyed, and the more part kept from
you? Who will set by the marriage of the Queen, to buy a title with the war of
England, to mary the name, another mighty King holdyng the land? If we two
being made one by amity, be most hable to defend us against all nations:
and having the sea for wall, the mutual love for garrison, and God for
defense, should make so noble and well agreyng Monarchy, that neither in peace
we may be ashamed, nor in war affraied, of any worldely or foreign power:
why should not you be as desirous of the same, and have as much cause to
rejoice at it as we? If this honor of so noble a monarchy, do not move you to
take and accept amity, let the grief and the daungier of the before named
losses, fear you to attempt that thing which shall displease God, increase
war, daungier your Realm, destroy your lands, undo your children, waste
your grounds, desolatey our Countries, and bring all Scotla^de either to
famyne and misery, or to subieccio^ and servitude of another nacio^. We
require but your promised Queen, your offered agreement of vntiie, the ioynyng of
both the nacitons: which God of his infinite clemency and tender love that
he has declared, to bear to both the nations, has offered unto us both,
and in manner called us both unto it: WHOSE calling and prouocacion, we have
and will follow, to the best of our powers, and in his name, and with his
aid, admonicion, exhortacion, requests, and Embassaides, not being hable to
do it, and to find stablenes in promises: We shall not willing, but
constreined, pursue the battaill chastise the wicked and malicious, by the
angry Angels of GOD, the Fire and Sword. Wherefore, we require and exhort
all you, who has love to your Country, pity of that realm, a true heart to
your queen and Maistresse, regard of your honors and promises, made by ye
great Seal of Scotland: And who favors the peace, love, unity, and
concord, and that most profitable marriage, to enter and to come to us, and
declaryng your true and godly hearts thereunto, to aid us in this most Godly
purpose and enterprise: be witness of our doings, we refuse no man temporal
ne spiritual, lord ne larde, gentilman, ne other, who will aid this our
purpose, and minishe the occasion of slaughter and destruction, to whom we
shall keep the promises heretofore declared, and further see reward and
recompense made according to deserte. And for a more sure proof, and playner
token of the good mind and will which we bear unto you: that which never yet
before was granted to Scotland, in any league, truce or peace, betwixt
England and Scotland, because you shall have proof of the beginning, of love
and amity of both the realms: the kings highness, considering the multitude
of them, which is come to his majesty's devotion, and of them that be well
willers and ayders, of this Godly enterprise, has by our advise and counsel
granted, and by these presents does grant, that from hencefurthe, all manner
of merchau^tes, and other Scottishmen, who will enter their names, with one of
the lieuetenau^tes or wardens of the Marchies or any other of the Kings
majesty's officers having authority, and there profess to take part with
us, in this before named godly purpose, to his own commodity, and to serve
all such as be of the same agreement: may lawfully, and without any trouble and
vexacion, enter into any Port, Creek, or Haven of England, and use their
trafique of merchaundise, either by land or sea, bye and sell, bring in the
commodity of Scotland, and take and carry forth the commodities of England, as
liberally and as freely, and with the same, and no other custom or paimentes
therefore, then Englishmen, and the Kings subjects does at these presents
myndyng further upon the success hereof, to gratify so ye furtherers of this
most Godly enterprise and union, that all the world may be witness of ye great
zeal and love, which his highness does bear, toward you and your nacio^.
And all this the Kings highness by our advise and counsel, has willed to be
declared unto you, and given in commandment to us, and all his
Lieuetenauntes, Wardens, Rulers, and other head officers, ministers and
subjects, to see executed and done, according to the true purporte, effect
and meaning thereof. Fare you well.

At London the v. of Februarij in the second year of the reign of the most
noble Prince and our sovereign Lord, Edward the.VI. by the grace of God of
England, France and Ireland, king, defender of the faith, and in yearthe
under Christ the supreme hedde of the Church of England and Irelande.

EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AEDIBVS RICHARDI GRAFTONI, TYPOGRAPHI REGII.

Anno salutis humanae. M.D.XLVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM


