GODFREY of Bulloigne, or The Recovery of Jerusalem.

Done into English Heroical verse, by EDWARD FAIREFAX Gent.

Imprinted at London by Ar. Hatfield, for I. Iaggard and M. Lownes.

1600

To her High Majesty.
WIts rich triumph, Wisdoms glory,
Arts chronicle, Learnings story,
Tower of goodness, virtue, beauty:
Forgive me, that presume to lay
My labors in your clear eyes ray:
This boldness springs from faith, zeal, dewtie.
Her hand, her lap, her vestures hem,
Muse touch not for polluting them,
All that is hers is pure, clear, holy,
Before her footstool humble lie,
So may she bless thee with her eye,
The sun shines not on good things solie.
Olive of peace, Angel of pleasure,
What line of praise can your worth measure?
Calm sea of bliss which no shore boundeth,
Fame fills the world no more with lies,
But busied in your histories
Her trumpet those true wonders sounds:
O Fame, say all the good thou may,
Too little is that all thou say,
What if her self her self commended?
Should we then know nere known before,
Whether her wit, or worth were more?
Ah no! that book would nere be ended.
Your Majesty's humble subject, EDWARD FAIREFAX.

The Allegory of the Poem.
Heroical Poetry (as a living Creature, wherein two natures are conioined) is
compounded of Imitation and Allegory: with the one she allureth unto her the
minds and ears of men, and maruellously delights them; with the other,
either in virtue or knowledge, she instructs them. And as the heroically
written Imitation of an Other, is nothing else, but the pattern and image of
humane action: so the Allegory of an Heroical Poem is none other than the
glass and figure of humane life. But Imitation regards the Actions of man
subjected to the outward senses, and about them being principally employed,
seeks to represent them with effectual and expressiue phrases, such as
lively set before our corporal eyes the things represented: It does not
consider the customs, affections, or discourses of the Mind, as they be
inward, but only as they come forth thence, and being manifested in words, in
deeds, or working, do accompany the Action. On the other side, Allegory
respects the passions, the opinions and customs, not only as they do
appear, but principally in their being hidden and inward; and more obscurely
does express them with notes (as a man may say) mystical, such as only the
understanders of the nature of things can fully comprehend. Now leaving
Imitation apart, we will according to our purpose speak of Allegory: which,
as the life of man is compound, so it represents to us, sometime the figure of
the one, sometime the figure of the other: yet because that commonly by Man, we
understand this compound of the body, soul, or mind, and then man's life, is
said to be that, which of such compound is proper, in the operations whereof
every part thereof concurres, and by working gets that perfection, of the
which by her nature she is capable: sometime (although more seldom) by Man is
understood, not the compound, but the most noble part, namely the Mind;
According to this last signification, it may be said, that the life of man is
Contemplative, and to work simply with the Understanding, forasmuch as this
life does seem much to participate of heaven, and as it were changde from
humanity, to become angelical. Of the life of the Contemplative Man, the
Comedy of Dantes and the Odyssees are (as it were) in every part thereof a
figure: but the civil life is seen to be shadowed throughout the Iliads, and
Aeneids also, although in this there be rather set out a mixture of Action and
Contemplation. But since the Contemplative Man is solitary; and the Man of
Action lives in civil company, thence it comes that Dantes and Ulysses in
their departure from Calipse are fained not to be accompanied of the army, or
of a multitude of soldiers, but to depart alone; whereas Agamemnon and Achilles
are described, the one General of the Grecian Army, the other leader of many
troops of Mirmidons, and Aeneas is seen to be accompanied when he fights,
or does other civil acts; but when he goes to hell and the Elisian fields,
he leaves his followers, accompanied only with his most faithful friend
Achates, who never departed from his side. Neither does the Poet at randon
feign that he went alone, for that in his voyage there is signified this only
Contemplation of these pains and rewards which in another world are reserved
for good or guilty souls. Moreover, the operation of the Understanding
speculatiue, which is the working of one only power, is commodiously figured
unto us by the action of one alone: but the Operation Political, which
proceeds together from the other powers of the mind (which are as citizens
united in one commonwealth) cannot so commodiously be shadowed of Action,
wherein many together and to one end working, do not concur. To these
reasons, and to these examples I having regard, have made the Allegory of my
Poem such, as now shall be manifested.

The Army compounded of diverse Princes, and of other Christian soldiers,
signifies Man, compounded of soul and body, and of a soul not simple, but
divided into many and diverse powers. Jerusalem the strong city placed in a
rough and hilly country, whereunto as to the last end, are directed all the
enterprises of the faithful army, does here signify the Civil happiness,
which may come to a Christian man (as hereafter shall be declared) which is a
good, very difficult to attain unto, and situated upon the top of the Alpine
and wearisome hill of virtue; and unto this are turned (as unto the last mark)
all the Actions of the politic man. Godfrey, which of all the assembly is
chosen Chieftaine, stands for Understanding, and particularly for that
understanding, which considers not the things necessary, but the mutable and
which may diversely happen, and those by the will of God. And of Princes he is
chose Captain of this enterprise, because understanding is of God, and of
Nature made Lord over the other virtues of the soul and body, and commands
these, one with civil power, the other with royal command. Rinaldo,
Tancredie, and the other Princes are in liew of the other powers of the soul;
and the Body here becomes notified by the soldiers less noble. And because
that through the imperfection of human nature, and by the deceits of his
enemy, man attaines not this felicity without many inward difficulties, and
without finding by the way many outward impediments, all these are noted unto
us by Poetical figures. As the death of Syrenus, and his companions, not being
joined to the camp, but slain far off, may here show the losses, which a
civil man has of his friends, followers, and other external goods,
instruments of virtue, and aids to the attaining of true felicity. The armies
of Affricke, Asia, and vnluckly battles, are none other than his enemies, his
losses, and the accidents of contrary fortune. But coming to the inward
impediments, love, which makes Tancredie and the other woorthies to dote, and
disioine them from Godfrey, and the disdain which entiseth Rinaldo from the
enterprise, do signify the conflict and rebellion which the Concupiscent and
Irefull powers, do make with the Reasonable. The Devils which do consult to
hinder the conquest of Jerusalem, are both a figure, and a thing figured, and
do here represent the very same evils, which do oppose themselves against
our civil happiness, so that it may not be to us a ladder of Christian
blessedness. The two Magitians Ismen and Armida, servants of the devil, which
endeavor to remove the Christians from making war, are two deuilish
temptations which do lay snares for two powers of the soul, from whence all
other sins do proceed. Ismen does signify that temptation, which seeks to
deceive with false belief the virtue (as a man may call it) Opinatiue: Armida
is that temptation which lays siege to the power of our desires, so from that
proceed the errors of Opinion; from this, those of the Appetite. The
enchantments of Ismen in the wood, deceiving with illusions, signify no other
thing than the falsitie of the reasons and persuasions which are engendered in
the wood; that is, in the variety and multitude of opinions and discourses of
men. And since that man follows vice and flies virtue, either thinking that
travels and dangers are evils most grievous and insupportable, or judging (as
did the Epicure and his followers) that in pleasure and idleness consisted
chiefest felicity; by this, double is the enchantment and illusion. The Fire,
the Whirlewinde, the Darkness, the Monsters, and other feigned semblances, are
the deceiving allurements which do show us honest travels and honorable danger
under the shape of Evil. The Flowers, the Fountains, the Rivers, the Musical
instruments, the Nymphs, are the deceitful inticeme^ts, which do here set
down before us the pleasures and delights of the sense, under the show of
Good. So let it suffice to have said thus much of the impediments which a man
finds as well within as without himself: yet if the Allegory of any thing be
not well expressed, with these beginnings every man by himself may easily
find it out. Now let us pass to the outward and inward helps; with which the
Civil man ouercomming all difficulty, is brought to this desired happiness.
The target of Diamond which Raimond recouereth, and afterward is showed ready
in the defense of Godfrey, ought to be understood for the special safeguard of
the Lord God. The Angels do signify sometime Heavenly help, and sometime
Inspiration, the which are here shadowed in the dream of Godfrey, and in the
records of the Hermit. The Hermit, who for the deliverance of Rinaldo did
send the two messengers to the wiseman, does show unto us the supernatural
knowledge received by Gods grace, as the wise man does humane wisdom,
forasmuch as of humane wisdom and of the knowledge of the works of Nature,
and the mysteries thereof, is bred and established in our minds, Justice,
temperance, despising of death and mortal pleasures, magnanimity, and every
other moral virtue. And great aid may a civil man receive in every action he
attempteth, by contemplation. It is fained, that this wise man was by birth a
Pagan, but being by the Hermit converted to the true faith, becomes a
Christian, and despising his first arrogancy, he does not much presume of his
own wisdom, but yields himself to the judgment of his master, albeit that
Philosophy be borne and nourished amongst the Gentiles in Egypt and Greece,
and from thence has passed over unto us, presumptious of her self, a
miscreant bold and proud above measure: but of Saint Thomas and the other holy
Doctors she is made the disciple and handmaid of Divinity, and is become by
their endeavor more modest, and more religious, nothing daring rashly to
affirm against that which is revealed to her Maistres. Neither in vain is the
person of the wise man brought in, Rinaldo being able by the only counsel of
the Hermit to be found and brought back again) for that, it is brought in
show, that the grace of God does not work always in men immediately, or by
extraordinary ways, but many times works by natural means. And it is
very reasonable that Godfrey which in holiness and religion does excel all
other, and is (as has bin said) the figure of Understanding, be specially
graced and privileged with favors not communicated to any other. This humane
wisdom, when it is directed of the superior or more high virtue, does deliver
the sensible soul from vice, and therein places moral virtue. But because
this suffices not, Peter the Hermit first confesses Godfrey and Rinaldo, and
converted Tancredie. Godfrey and Rinaldo being two persons, which in our Poem
do hold the principal place, it can not be but pleasing to the Reader, that I
repeating some of the already spoken things, do particularly lay open the
allegorical sense, which under the veil of their actions, lie hidden. Godfrey
which holds the principal place in this story, is no other in the Allegory
but the Understanding, which is signified in many places of the Poem as in
that verse, By thee the counsel given is, by thee the scepter ruled.
And more plainly in that other: Thy soul is of the camp both mind and life.
And Life is added, because in the powers more noble, the less noble are
contained: therefore Rinaldo, which in action is in the second degree of
honor, ought also to be placed in the Allegory in the answerable degree: but
what this power of the mind, holding the second degree of dignity is, shall be
now manifested. The Irefull virtue is that, which amongst all the powers of
the mind, is less estra^ged from the nobility of the soul, insomuch that
Plato (doubting) seeks whether it differs from reason or no. And such is it
in the mind, as the chiefetaine in an assembly of soldiers: for as of these
the office is to obey their princes, which do give directions and commandments
to fight against their enemies: so is it the duty of the irefull, warlike, and
sovereign part of the mind, to be armed with reason against concupiscence,
and with that vehemency and fiercenes (which is proper unto it) to resist and
drive away whatsoever impediment to felicity. But when it does not obey
Reason, but suffers it self to be carried of her own violence, it falls
out, that it fights not against concupiscence, but by concupiscence, like a
dog that biteth not the thieves, but the cattle committed to his keeping.
This violent, fierce, and unbridled fury, as it can not be fully noted by one
man of war, is nevertheless principally signified by Rinaldo, where it is said
of him, that being -- Aright warrelike knight
Did scorn by reasons rule to fight.
Wherein (whilst fighting against Gernando, he did pass the bounds of civil
revenge, and whilst he served Armida) may be noted unto us, Anger, not
governed by reason: whilst he disinchanteth the wood, enters the city,
breaks the enemies array, Anger, directed by reason. His return and
reconciliation to Godfrey, notes Obedience, causing the Irefull power to
yield to the Reasonable. In these Reconciliations two things are signified,
first, Godfrey with civil moderation is acknowledged to be superior to
Rinaldo, teaching us, that Reason commands Anger, not imperiously, but
courteously and ciuillie: contrariwise in that, by imprisoning Argillanus
imperiously, the sedition is quieted; it is given us to understand, the power
of the Mind, to be over the body, regal and predominate: Secondly, that as
the reasonable part ought not (for herein the Stoiks were very much deceived)
to exclude the Irefull from actions, nor usurp the offices thereof, for this
usurpation should be against nature and justice, but it ought to make her her
companion and handmaid: So ought not Godfrey to attempt the adventure of the
wood himself, thereby arrogating to himself the other offices belonging to
Reinaldo. Less skill should then be showed, and less regard had to the
profit, which the Poet, as subjected to policy, ought to have for his aim,
if it had been fained, that by Godfrey only, all was wrought, which was
necessary for the conquering of Jerusalem. Neither is there contrariety or
difference from that which has been said, in putting down Rinaldo and Godfrey
for that figure of the Reasonable and of the Irefull virtue, which Hugo speaks
of in his dream, whereas he compares the one to the Head, the other to the
right Hand of the army, because the Head (if we believe Plato) is the seat of
Reason, and the right Hand, if it be not the seat of wrath, it is at least her
most principal instrument. Finally, to come to the conclusion, the army
wherein Rinaldo and the other Woorthies by the grace of God and advise of Man,
are returned and obedient to their chieftaine, signifies man brought again
into the state of natural Justice and heavenly obedience: where the superior
powers do command, as they ought, and the inferior do obey, as they should.
Then the wood is easily disinchanted, the city vanquished, the enemies army
discomfited, that is, all external impediments being easily overcome, man
attaineth the politic happiness. But for that this Politic blessedness, ought
not to be the last mark of a Christian man, but he ought to look more high,
that is, to Everlasting felicity, for this cause Godfrey does not desire to
win the earthly Jerusalem, to have therein only temporal dominion, but
because herein may be celebrated the worship of God, and that the Holy
sepulcher may be the more freely visited of godly strangers and devout
Pilgrims; and the Poem is shut up in the prayers of Godfrey, it is showed unto
us, that the Understanding being traveled and wearied in civil actions ought
in the end to rest in devotion and in the contemplation of the eternal
blessedness of the other most happy and immortal life.

FINIS.
The first Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
God sends his Angel to Tortosa down,
Godfrey unites the Christianpeeres and knights,
And all the Lords and Princes of renown
Choose him their Duke, to rule the wars and fights,
He mustreth all his host, whose number known,
He sends them to the fort that Sion hights,
The aged Tyrant Iudaes land that guides
In fear and trouble to resist prouides.
1
THE sacred armies and the godly knight
That the great sepulcher of Christ did free,
I sing; much wrought his valor and foresight,
And in that glorious war much suffered he:
In vain against him did Hell oppose her might,
In vain the Turks and Morians armed be,
His soldiers wild (to braules and mutines pressed)
Reduced he to peace, so heaven him blessed.
2
O heavenly muse, that not with fading baies
Deckest thy brow by th'Heliconian spring,
But sit crowned with stars immortal rays,
In heaven where legions of bright Angels sing,
Inspire life in my wit, my thoughts vpraise,
My verse ennoble, and forgive the thing,
If fictions light I mix with truth divine,
And fill these lines with others praise then thine.
3
Thither thouknow'st the world is best inclinde
Where luring Parnase most his sweet imparts,
And truth conuay'd in verse of gentle kind,
To read perhaps will move the dullest hearts:
So we (if children young diseased we find)
Anoint with sweets the vessels foremost parts,
To make them taste the potions sharp we give;
They drink deceived; and so deceived, they live.
4
Ye noble Princes, that protect and save
The pilgrim muses, and their ship defend
From rock of ignorance, and errors wave,
Your gracious eyes upon this labor bend:
To you these tales of love and conquests brave
I dedicate, to you this work I send,
My muse hereafter shall perhaps unfold
Your fights, your battles, and your combats bold.
5
For if the Christian Princes ever strive
To win fair Greece out of the tyrants hands,
And those usurping Ismalites deprive
Of woeful Thrace, which now captiued stands,
You must from realms and seas the Turks forth drive,
As Godfrey chased them from Iudais lands,
And in this legend, all that glorious deed
Read, whilst you arm you; arm you, whilst you reed.
6
Six years were run since first in martial guize
The Christian Lords warraid the eastren land,
Nice by assault, and Antioch by surprise,
Both fair, both rich, both won, both conquered stand,
And this defended they in noblest wize
Against Persian knights and many a valiant band,
Tottosa won, (least winter might them shend)
They drew to holds, and coming spring attend.
7
The sullen season now was come and gone,
That forced them late cease from their noble war,
When God almighty from his lofty throne,
Set in those parts of heaven that purest ar,
(As far above the clear stars every one,
As it is hence up to the highest star)
Looked down, and all at once this world behield,
Each land, each city, country, town and field:
8
All things he viewed, at last in Syria stayed
Upon the Christian Lords, his gracious eye,
That wondrous look wherewith he often suruai'd
Men's secret thoughts that most concealed lie,
He cast on puissant Godfrey, that assai'd
To drive the Turks from Sions bulwarks hie,
And (full of zeal and faith) esteemed light
All worldly honor, empire, treasure, might.
9
In Baldwine next, he spide another thought,
Whom spirits proud to vain ambition move,
Tancred he saw his lives joy set at naught,
So woe begone was he with pains of love:
Boemond the conquered folk of Antioch brought
The gentle yoke of Christian rule to prove,
He taught them laws, statutes, and customs new,
Arts, crafts, obedience, and religion true.
10
And with such care his busy work he plied
That to naught else his acting thoughts he bent,
In young Rinaldo fierce desires he spied,
And noble heart, of rest impatient,
To wealth or sovereign power he naught applied
His wits, but all to virtue excellent,
Patterns and rules of skill and courage bold
He took from Guelpho, and his fathers old.
11
Thus, when the Lord discovered had and seen
The hidden secrets of each worthies breast,
Out of the Hierarchies of Angels sheene
The gentle Gabriell called he from the rest,
Twixt God and souls of men that righteous been
Ambassador is he, for ever blessed,
The just commands of heavens eternal king
Twixt skies and earth, he up and down does bring.
12
To whom the Lord thus spoke, Godfredo find
And in my name ask him, why does he rest?
Why be his arms to ease and peace resignde?
Why frees he not Jerusalem distressed?
His Peers to counsel call, each baser mind
Let him stir up; for, chieftaine of the rest
I chose him here, the earth shall him allow,
His fellows late, shall be his subjects now.
13
This said, the Angel swift himself preparde
To execute the charge imposed aright,
In form of airie members fair imbarde,
His spirits pure were subject to our sight,
Like to a man in show and shape he farde,
But full of heavenly majesty and might,
A stripling seemed he thrice five winters old,
And radiant beams adorned his locks of gold.
14
Of silver wings he took a shining pair,
Fringed with gold, unwearied, nimble, swift,
With these he parts the winds, the clouds, the air,
And over seas and earth himself does lift,
Thus clad he cut the spheres and circles fair
And the pure skies with sacred feathers clift,
On Libanon at first his foot he set,
And shook his wings with roarie May-dewes wet.
15
Then to Tortosas confines swiftly sped
The sacred messenger, with headlong flight;
Above the eastern wave appeered red
The rising sun, yet scantly half in sight,
Godfrey even then his morn devotions sed,
(As was his custom) when with Titan bright
Appeer'd the Angel, in his shape divine,
Whose glory far obscured Phoebus shine.
16
Godfrey (quoth he) behold the season fit
To war, for which thou waited have so long,
Now serves the time (if thou oreslip not it)
To free Jerusalem, from thrall and wrong:
Thou with thy Lords in counsel quickly sit,
Comfort the feeble and confirm the strong,
The Lord of hosts their General does make thee,
And for their chiestaine they shall gladly take thee.
17
I messenger from everlasting Jove
In his great name thus his behests do tell,
Oh what sure hope of conquest ought thee move?
What zeal, what love should in thy bosom dwell?
This said, he vanished to those seats above,
In height and cleerenes which the rest excel,
Down fell the Duke, his ioints dissolved asunder,
Blind with the light, and stricken dead with wonder.
18
But when recou'red, he consid'red more
The man, his manner, and his message, said,
If erst he wished, now he longed sore
To end that war, whereof he Lord was made,
Nor sweld his breast with uncouth pride therefore,
That heaven on him above this charge had laid,
But for his great Creator would the same,
His will encreast; so fire augmenteth flame.
19
The captains called forthwith from every tent,
Unto the Rende-vous he them inuites,
Letter on letter, post on post he sent,
Entreatance fair with counsel he unites,
All, what a noble courage could augment,
The sleeping spark of valor what incites,
He used, that all their thoughts to honor reased,
Some praised, some prayed, some counseled, all pleased.
20
The captains, soldiers, all, (save Boemound) came,
And pitched their tents, some in the fields without,
Some of green boughs their slender cabbins frame,
Some lodged were Tortosas streets about,
Of all the host the chief of worth and name
Assembled been, a senate grave and stout;
Then Godfrey (after silencekept a space)
Lift up his voice, and spoke with princely grace.
21
Warriors (whom God himself elected has
His worship true in Sion to restore,
And still preserved from danger, harm and scath,
By many a sea and many an unknown shore)
You have subjected lately to his faith
Some provinces rebellious long before:
And after conquests great, have in the same
Erected trophies to his cross and name,
22
But not for this, our homes we first forsook,
And from our native soil have marched so far:
Nor us to dangrous seas have we betook,
Exposed to hazard of so far sought war,
Of glory vain to gain an idle smooke,
And lands possess that wild and barbrous ar:
That for our conquests were too mean a pray,
To shed our bloods, to work our souls decay.
23
But this the scope was of our former thought,
Of Sions fort to scale the noble wall,
The Christian folk from bondage to have brought,
Wherein alas, they long have lived thrall,
In Palestine an empire to have wrought
Where godliness might reign perpetual,
And none be left, that pilgrims might denay
To see Christ's tomb, and promised vows to pay.
24
What to this hour successively is done
Was full of peril, to our honor small,
Naught to our first designment, if we shonne
The purposed end, or here lie fixed all,
What boots it us these wars to have begone?
Or Europe raised to make proud Asia thrall?
If our beginnings have this ending known,
Notkingdoms raised, but armies overthrown.
25
Not as we list erect we empires new
On frail foundations, laid in earthly molde,
Whereof our faith and country be but few,
Among the thousands stout of Pagans bold,
Where no ught behooues us trust to Greece untrue,
And westren aid we far removed behold,
Who builds thus, me thinks, so builds he,
As if his work should his sepulcher be.
26
Turks, Persians conquered, Antiochia won,
Be glorious acts, and full of glorious praise,
By heavens mere grace, not by our prowess, done:
Those conquests were atchieu'd by wondrous ways,
If now from that directed course we run,
The God of battles thus before us lays,
His loving kindness shall we loose I dout,
And be a byword to the lands about.
27
Let not these blessings then sent from above
Abused be, or spilt in profane wise,
But let the issue correspondent prove
To good beginnings of each enterprise,
The gentle season might our courage move,
Now every passage plain and open lies:
What lets us than the great Jerusalem
With valiant squadrons round about to hem?
28
Lords, I protest, and harken all to it
Ye times and ages, future, present, past,
Hear all ye blessed in the heavens that sit,
The time for this atchieument hastneth fast:
The longer rest worse will the season fit,
Our surety shall with doubts be ouercast,
If we foreslowe the siege I well foresee
From Egypt will the Pagans succored be.
29
This said, the hermit Peter rose and spoke,
(Who sat in counsel those great Lords among)
At my request this war was undertake,
In private cell who erst lived closed long,
What Godfrey wills, of that no question make,
There cast no doubts where truth is plain and strong,
Your acts I trust will correspond his speech,
Yet one thing more I would you gladly teach.
30
These strives (unless I far mistake the thing)
And discords raised, oftin disordred sort,
Your disobedience, and ill menaging
Of actions, lost, for want of due support,
Refer I justly to a further spring,
Spring of sedition, strife, oppression, tort,
I mean commanding power to sundry given,
In thought, opinion, worth, estate, uneven.
31
Where diverse Lords divided empire hold,
Where causes be by gifts not justice tried,
Where offices be falsely bought and sold,
Needs must the lordship there from virtue slide.
Of friendly parts one body then uphold,
Create one head the rest to rule and guide,
To one the regal power and scepter give,
That henceforth may your king and sovereign live.
32
And therewith staide his speech. O gracious muse,
What kindling motions in their breasts do fry?
With grace divine the hermits talk infuse
That in their hearts his words may fructify;
By this a virtuous concord they did choose,
And all contentious then began to die;
The princes with the multitude agree,
That Godfrey ruler of those wars should be.
33
This power they gave him, by his princely right
All to command, to judge all, good and ill,
Laws to impose to lands subdew'd by might,
To maken war both when and where he will,
To hold in due subjection every wight
Their valors to be guided by his skill;
This done, report displaies her teltale wings,
And to each care the news and tidings brings.
34
She told the soldiers, who allowd him meet
And well deserving of that sovereign place,
Their first salutes and acclamations sweet
Received he, with love and gentle grace:
After their reverence done with kind regreet
Requited was, with mild and cheerful face,
He bids his armies should the following day
On those fair plains, their standards proud display.
35
The golden sun rose from the silver wave,
And with his beams ennameld every green,
When up arose each warrior bold and brave,
Glistring in field steel and armours sheene,
With jolly plumes their crests adorned they have,
And all tofore their chieftaine mustred been:
He from a mountain, cast his curious sight
On every footeman, and on every knight.
36
My mind, times enemy, obliuions foe,
Disposer true of each note-worthie thing,
O let thy virtuous might avail me so,
That I each troop and captain great may sing
That in this glorious war did famous groe,
Forgot till now, by times evil handling:
This work (derived from thy treasures dear)
Let all times harken, never age outweare.
37
The French came foremost battailous and bold,
Late led by Hugo brother to their king,
From France the isle that rivers four enfold
With rolling streams descending from their spring,
But Hugo dead, the Lilly fair of gold
Their wonted ensign, they tofore them bring
Under Clotharius great, a captain good,
And hardy knight, isprong of princes blood,
38
A thousand were they in strong armours clad,
Next whom there marched forth another band,
That number, nature and instruction had
Like them, to fight far off, or charge at hand,
All valiant Normans, by Lord Robert lad,
The native Duke of that renowned land,
Two Bishops next their standards proud vpbare
Called reverend William, and good Ademare.
39
Their iollie notes they chanted loud and clear,
On merry mornings, at the mass divine,
And horrid helmes high on their heads they bear,
When their fierce courage they to war incline,
The first four hundredth horsemen gathred near
To Orange town, and lands that it confine:
But Ademare the Poggian youth brought out,
In number like, in hard assaies, as stout.
40
Baldwine his ensign fair did next despreed
Among his Bulloyners of noble fame,
His brother gave him all his troops to leed
When he commander of the field became,
The Count Carinto did him straight succeed,
Grave in advise, well skild in Mars his game,
Four hundredth brought he, but so many thrice
Led Baldwine, clad in gilden arms of price:
41
Guelpho next them the land and place possessed,
Whose fortunes good with his great acts agree,
By his Italian Sire, fro the house of Est
Well could he bring his noble pedigree,
A German borne, with rich possessions blessed,
A worthy branch sprung from the Guelphian tree.
Twixt Rhene and Danubie the land contained
He ruled, where Swaues and Rhetians whilome reigned,
42
His mothers heritage was this and right,
To which he added more by conquest got,
From thence approved men of passing might
He brought, that death or danger feared not;
It was their wont in feasts to spend the night,
And pass cold days in bathes and houses hot,
Five thousand late, of which now scantly ar
The third part left, such is the change of war.
43
The nation than with crisped locks and fair,
That dwell between the seas and Arden wood,
Where Mosell streams and Rhene the meadows wear,
A battle soil for grain, for pasture good,
Their Islanders with them, who often repair
Their earthen bulwarks against the Ocean flood,
The flood, elsewhere that ships and barks deuowres,
But there drownes cities, countries, towns and towers.
44
Both in one troop, and but a thousand all,
Under another Robert fierce they run,
Then The English squadron, soldiers stout and tall,
By William led their Sovereigns younger son,
These Archers be, and with them come withal,
A people near the northern pole that won,
Whom Ireland sent from loughes and forests hoar,
Divided far by sea from Europes shore.
45
Tancredie next, nor among them all was one
Rinald except, a prince of greater might,
With majesty his noble countenance shone,
Hie were his thoughts, his heart was bold in fight,
No shameful vice his worth had ouergone,
His fault was love, by unadvised sight
Bred in the dangers of aduentrous arms,
And nursed with grieves, with sorrows, woes and harms.
46
Fame tells, that on that euer-blessed day,
When Christian swords with Persian blood were did,
The furious prince Tancredie from that fray
His coward foes chased through forests wide,
Till tired with the fight, the heat, the way,
He sought some place to rest his weary side,
And drew him near a silver stream, that plade
Among wild herbs, under the greene-wood shade.
47
A Pagan damsel there unawares he met,
In shining steel, all save her visage fair,
Her hair unbound she made a wanton net
To catch sweet breathing, from the cooling air.
On her at gaze his longing looks he set,
Sight, wonder; wonder, love; love bred his caire,
O love, O wonder; love newborn, new bred,
Now grown, now armed, this champion captive led.
48
Her helm the virgin don'd, and but some wight
She feared might come to aid him as they fought,
Her courage earned to have assailed the knight,
Yet thence she fled, vncompaned, unsought,
And left her image in his heart ipight,
Her sweet Idea wandered through his thought.
Her shape, her gesture and her place in mind
He kept, and blew loves fire with that wind.
49
Well might you read his sickness in his eyes,
Their banks were full, their tide was at the flow,
His help far off, his hurt within him lies,
His hopes vnsprong, his cares were fit to mow,
Eight hundredth horse (from Champaine came) he guies,
Champaine a land where wealth, ease, pleasure grow,
Rich natures pomp and pride, the Tirrhenemaine
There wowes the hills, hills wowe the valleis plain.
50
Two hundred Greeks came next, in fight well tried,
Not surely armed, in steel or iron strong,
But each a glaue had pendant by his side,
Their bows and quiuers at their shoulders hong,
Their horses well enured to chase and ride,
In dietspare, vntir'd with labor long,
Ready to charge and to retire at will,
Though broken, scattred, fled, they skirmish still.
51
Tatine their guide, and except Tatine, none
Of all the Greeks went with the Christian host,
O sin, O shame, O Greece accursed alone!
Did not this fatal war affront thy coast?
Yet sattest thou an idle looker on,
And glad attendest which side won or lost:
Now if thou be a bondslaue vile become
No wrong is that, but Gods most righteous dome.
52
In order last, but first in worth and fame,
Vnfear'd in fight, vntir'd with hurt or wound,
The noble squadron of aduentrers came,
Terrors to all that tread on Asian ground,
Cease Orpheus of thy Minois, Arthur shame
To boast of Lancelot, or thy table round,
Kor these whom antique times with laurel dressed,
These far exceed, them, thee, and all the rest.
53
Dudon of Consa was their guide and Lord,
And for of worth and birth alike they been,
They chose him captain, by their free accord,
For he most acts had done, most battails seen,
Grave was the man in years, in looks, in word,
His locks were gray, yet was his courage green,
Of worth and might the noble badge he bore,
Old scarres of grievous wounds, received of yore.
54
After came Eustace, well ysteemed man
For Godfreyes sake his brother, and his own,
The king of Norwaies heir Gernando than,
Proud of his fathers titles, scepter, crown,
Roger of Balnauill, and Engerlan
For hardy knights approved were and known,
Besides were numbered in that warlike train
Rambald, Gentonio, and the Gerards twain.
55
Vbaldo than, and puissant Rosimond
Of Lancaster the heir, in rank succeed,
Let none forget Obizo of Tuscaine land,
Well worthy praise for many a worthy deed,
Nor those three brethren, Lombards fierce and yond,
Achilles, Sforza, and stern Palameed,
Nor Ottons shield he conqu'red in those stowres,
In which a snake a naked child deuoures.
56
Guascher and Raiphe in valor like there was,
The one and other Guido, famous both,
Germer and Eberard to ouerpas
In foul oblivion would my muse be loath,
With his Gildippes dear, Edward alas,
A loving pair, to war among them go'th
In bond of virtuous love together tied,
Together served they and together died.
57
In school of love are all things taught we see,
There learned this maid of arms the irefull guise,
Still by his side a faithful guard went she,
One trueloue knot their lives together ties,
No wound to one alone could dangerous be,
But each the smart of others anguish tries,
If one were hurt, the other felt the sore,
She lost her blood, he spent his life therefore.
58
But these and all, Rinaldo far exceedes,
Star of this sphere, the dimond of this ring,
The nest, where courage with sweet mercy breeds:
A comet, worthy each eyes wondering,
His years are fewer than his noble deeds,
His fruit is ripe soon as his blossoms spring,
Armed, a Mars, might coyest Venus move,
And if disarmed, then God himself of love.
59
Sophia by Adige flowrie bank him bore,
Sophia the fair, spouse to Bertoldo great,
Fit mother for that pearl, and before
The tender impe was wained from the teat,
The Princess Maud him took, in virtues lore
She brought him up, fit for each worthy feat,
Till of these wars the golden trumpe he hears
That sounds glory, fame, praise in his ears.
60
And then (though scantly three times five years old)
He fled alone, by many an unknown coast,
Ore Aegean seas, by many a Greekish hold,
Till he arrived at the Christian host;
A noble flight, aduentrous, brave and bold,
Whereon a valiant Prince might justly boast,
Three years he served in field, when scant begin
Few golden hairs to deck his Iuorie chin.
61
The horsemen past, their void left stations fill
The bands on foot, and Reymond them beforne,
Of Toulouse Lord, from lands near Piraene hill,
By Garound streams and salt sea billows worn,
Four thousand foot he brought, well armed, and skill
Had they all pains and travel to have borne,
Stout men of arms, and with their guide of power
Like Troyes old town, defenst with Ilions tower.
62
Next Stephen of Amboise did five thousand leed,
The men he pressed from Toures and Blois but late,
To hard assaies unfit, unsure at need,
Yet armed to point in well attempted plate,
The land did like it self the people breed,
The soil is gentle, smooth, soft, delicate;
Boldly they charge, but soon retire for dout,
Like fire of straw soon kindled, soon burnt out.
63
The third Alcasto marched, and with him
The Boaster brought six thousand Switzers bold,
Audacious were their looks, their faces grim,
Strong castles on the Alpine clifts they hold,
Their shares and culters broke, to armours trim
They change that metal, cast in warlike mold,
And with this band late herds and flocks that guied,
Now kings and realms he threat'ned and defied.
64
The glorious standard last to heaven they sprad,
With Peter's keys ennobled, and his crown,
With it seven thousand stout Camillo had,
Embattailed in walls of iron brown,
In this adventure and occasion, glad
So to revive the Romans old renown,
Or prove at least to all of wiser thought
Their hearts were fertile land, although unwrought.
65
But now was passed every regiment,
Each band, each troop, each person worth regard,
When Godfrey with his Lords to counsel went,
And thus the Duke his princely will declared:
I will when day next cleeres the firmament,
Our ready host in haste be all prepared,
Closely to march to Sions noble wall,
Unseen, unheard; or vndescride at all.
66
Prepare you then, for travail strong and light,
Fierce to the combat, glad to victory:
And with that word and warning soon was dight
Each soldier, longing for near coming glory,
Impatient be they of the morning bright,
Of honor so them pricked the memory.
But yet their chieftaine had conceau'd a fear
Within his heart, but kept it secret theare:
67
For he by faithful spiall was assured,
That Egypts king was forward on his way,
And to arrive at Gaza old procured,
A fort, that on the Sirian fronters lay,
Nor thinks he that a man to wars enured
Will ought forslow, or in his journey stay,
For well he knew him for a dangerous foe,
An herald called he then, and spoke him so.
68
A pinnesse take thee swift as shaft from bow,
And speed thee (Henry) to the Greekish maine,
There should arrive (as I by letters know
From one that never ought reports in vain)
A valiant youth, in whom all virtues flow,
To help us this great conquest to obtain,
The Prince of Danes he is, and brings to war
A troop with him from under the Artick star.
69
And for I doubt the Greekish monarch sly,
Will use with him some of his woonted craft,
To stay his passage, or divert awrie
Elsewhere his forces, his first iournay laft,
My herald good, and messenger well try,
See that these succors be not us beraft,
But send him thence with such convenient speed,
As with his honor stands, and with our need.
70
Return not thou, but legier stay behind,
And move the Greekish Prince to send us aid,
Tell him his kingly promise does him bind
To give us succors, by his covenant maid;
This said, and thus instruct, his letters signde
The trusty herald took, nor longer staid,
But sped him thence to done his Lords behest,
And thus the Duke redus'd his thoughts to rest.
71
Aurora bright her cristall gates vnbard,
And bride-groome-like forth stepped the glorious sun,
When trumpets loud and clarious shrill were hard,
And every one to rowse him fierce begun,
Sweet music to each heart for war prepared,
The soldiers glad by heaps to harness run;
So if with drought endang'red be their grain,
Poor plowmen joy, when thunders promise rain.
72
Some shirts of maile, some coats of plate put on,
Some dond a curace, some a corslet bright,
An hawberke some, and some a haberion,
So every one in arms was quickly dight,
His woonted guide each soldiers tends upon,
Loose in the wind waued their banners light,
Their standard royal toward heaven they spread,
The cross triumphant on the Pagans dead.
73
Meanewhile the carre that bears the lightning brand,
Upon the eastren hill was mounted hie,
And smote the glistring armies as they stand,
With quiu'ring beams which daz'd the wondering eye,
That Phaeton-like it fiered sea and land,
The sparkles seemed up to the skies to fly,
The horses ney, and clattring armours sown,
Pursue the Echo over dale and down.
84
For nations twain inhabit there and dwell
Of sundry faith, together in that town,
The lesser part on Christ believed well,
On Termagant the more and on Mahowne,
But when this king had made his conquest fell,
And brought that region subject to his crown,
Of burdens all he set the Paynims large,
And on poor Christians laid the double charge.
85
His native wrath revived with this new thought,
With age and years that weak'ned was of yore,
Such madness in his cruel bosom wrought,
That now than ever, blood he thirsts more;
So stings a snake that to the fire is brought,
Which harmless lay benumbed with cold before,
A lion so his rage renewed has
(Though tame before) if he be moved to wrath.
86
I see (quoth he) some expectation vain
In these false Christians, and some new content,
Our common loss they trust will be their gain,
They laugh, we weep; they joy while we lament,
And more, perchance by treason or by train
To murder us they secretly consent,
Or otherwise to work us harm and woe,
To open the gates, and so let in our foe.
87
But least they should effect their cursed will,
Let us destroy this serpent on his nest,
Both young and old let us this people kill,
The tender infants at their mothers breast,
Their houses burn, their holy temples fill
With bodies slain, of those that loved them best,
And on that tomb they hold so much in price,
Lets offer up their priests in sacrifice.
88
Thus thought the tyrant in his traitorous mind,
But durst not follow what he had decreed,
Yet if the innocents some mercy find,
From cowardice, not ruth, did that proceed.
His noble foes durst not his crauen kind
Exasperate, by such a bloody deed,
For if he need what grace could then be got,
If thus of peace he broke or loosed the knot?
89
His villain heart his cursed rage restrained,
To other thoughts he bent his fierce desire,
The suburbs first flat with the earth he plained,
And burnt their buildings with devouring fire,
Loath was the wretch the Frenchmen should have gained
Or help or ease, by finding ought entire,
Cedron, Bethsaida, and each watring else
Empoison'd he, both fountains, springs and wels.
90
So wary wise, this child of darkness was,
The cities self he strongly fortifies,
Three sides by site it well defensed has,
That Is only weak that to the northward lies,
With mighty bars of long enduring bras,
The steele-bound doors, and iron gates he ties,
And lastly legions armed well, prouides
Of subjects borne, and hired aid besides.
The second Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Ismeno conlures, but his charms are vain:
Aladine will kill the Christians in his ire:
Sophronia and Olindo would be slain
To save the rest, the king grants their desire;
Clorinda hears their fact and fortunes plain
Their pardon gets and keeps them from the fire:
Argantes, when Aletes speeches ar
Despised, defies the Duke to mortal war.
1
WHile thus the Tyrant bends his thoughts to arms,
Ismeno began tofore his sight appear,
Ismen dead bones laid in cold graves that warmes
And makes them speak, smell, taste, touch, see and here;
Ismen (with terror of his mighty charms)
That makes great Dis in deepest hell to fear,
That binds and loses souls condemned to woe,
And sends the devils on errands to and froe.
2
A Christian once, Macon he now adores,
Nor could he quite his wonted faith forsake,
But in his wicked arts both often implores
Help from the Lord, and aid from Pluto blake;
He, from deep caves by Acherons dark shores,
(Where circles vain and spells he used to make)
T'aduise his king in these extremes is come,
Achitophell so counseled Absalome,
3
My liege (he says) the camp fast hither mooues,
The axe is laid unto this Cedars rout,
But let us work as valiant men behooues,
For boldest hearts good fortune helps out:
Your princely care your kingly wisdom proves,
Well have you labored, well foreseen about,
If each perform his charge and duty so,
Naught but his grave here conquer shall your foe:
4
From surest castle of my secret cell
I come, partaker of your good and ill,
What counsel sage or magikes sacred spell
May profit us, all that perform I will:
The sprites impure from bliss that whilome fell
Shall to your service bow, constrained by skill;
But how we must begin this enterprise,
I will your highness thus in brief advise.
5
Within the Christians Church, from light of skies,
An hidden Altar stands, far out of sight,
On which the image consecrated lies
Of Christ's dear mother, called a virgin bright,
An hundredth lamps aie burn before her eyes,
She in a slender veil of tinsell dight,
On every side great plenty does behold
Of offerings brought, myrrh, frankincense and gold.
6
This idol would I have remoou'd away
From thence, and by your princely hand transport
In Macons sacred temple safe it lay,
Which then I will enchant in wondrous sort,
That while the image in that church does stay,
No strength of arms shall win this noble sort,
Or shake this puissant wall, such passing might
Have spells and charms, if they be said aright.
7
Advised thus, the king impatient
Flew in his fury to the house of God,
The image took, with words vnreuerent
Abused the prelates, who that deed forbod,
Swift with his pray away the tyrant went,
Of Gods sharp justice naught he feared the rod,
But in his chapel vile the image laid,
On which th'enchanter charms and witchcrafts said.
8
When Phoebus next vnclos'd his wakefull eye,
Vprose the Sexten of that place prophaine,
And mist the image where it used to lie,
Each where he sought in grief, in fear, in vain;
Then to the king his loss he began descrie,
Who sore enraged killed him for his pain,
And straight conceived in his malicious wit,
Some Christian bad this great offense commit.
9
But whether this were act of mortal hand,
Or else the Prince of heavens eternal pleasure,
That of his mercy would this wretch withstand,
Nor let so vile a chest, hold such a treasure,
As yet conjecture has not fully scand;
By godliness let us this action measure,
And truth of purest faith will fitly prove,
That this rare grace came down from heaven above.
10
With busy search the tyrant began invade
Each house, each hold, each temple and each tent,
To them the fault or faulty one bewrai'd
Or hid, he promised gifts or punishment,
His idle charms the false enchanter said,
But in this maze still wandered and miswent,
For heaven decreed to conceal the same,
To make the miscreant more to feel his shame.
11
But when the angry king discovered not
What guilty hand this sacrilege had wrought,
His irefull courage boild in vengeance hot
Against the Christians, whom he faulters thought,
All ruth, compassion, mercy he forgot,
A staff to beat that dog he long had sought,
Let them all die, quoth he, kill great and small,
So shall the offender perish sure withal.
12
To spill the wine with poison mixed who spares?
Slay then the righteous, with the faulty one,
Destroy this field, that yields naught but tares,
With thorns this vineyard all is ouergone,
Among these wretches is not one, that cares
For us, our laws, or our religion,
Up, up, dear subjects, fire and weapon take,
Burn, murder, kill, these traitors, for my sake.
13
This Herod thus would Bethlems infants kill,
The Christians soon these direful news recaue,
The trumpe of death sounds in their hearing shrill,
Their weapon, faith; their fortress, was the grave;
They had no courage, time, devise, or will,
To fight, to fly, excuse, or pardon crave,
But stood prepared to die, yet help they find
Whence least they hope, such knots can heaven unbind,
14
Among them dwelt (her parents joy and pleasure)
A maid, whose fruit was ripe, not oueryeared,
Her beauty was her not esteemed, treasure;
The field of love, with plow of virtue eared,
Her labor goodness; godliness her leisure,
Her house the heaven by this full moon aye cleared,
For there, from lovers eyes withdrawn, alone
With virgin beams this spotless Cinthia shone.
15
But what availed her resolution chaste,
Whose sobrest looks were whetstones to desire?
Nor love consents that beauties field lie waste,
Her visage set Olindoes heart on fire,
O subtle love, a thousand wiles thou have
By humble suit, by service, or by hire,
To win a maidens hold, a thing soon done,
For nature framed all women to be won.
16
Sophronia she, Olindo hight the yuth,
Both of one town, both in one faith were taught,
She fair, he full of bashfulnes and truth,
Loved much, hoped little, and desired naught,
He durst not speak, by suit to purchase ruth,
She saw not, marked not, wist not what he sought,
Thus loved, thus served he long, but not regarded,
Unseen, vnmarkt, unpitied, unrewarded.
17
To her came message of the murderment,
Wherein her guiltless friends, should hopeless sterue,
She that was noble wise, as fair and gent,
Cast how she might their harmless lives preserve,
Zeal was the spring whence flowed her hardiment,
From maidens shame yet was she loath to swerue:
Yet had her courage taken so sure a hold,
That boldness, shamefast; shame had made her bold.
18
And forth she went, a shop for merchandise
Full of rich stuff, but none for sale exposed,
A veil obscured the sunshine of her eyes,
The rose within her self her sweetness closed,
Each ornament about her seemly lies,
By curious chance, or careless art, composed;
For what the most neglects, most curious prove,
So beautie's helped by nature, heaven and love.
19
Admired of all on went this noble maid
Until the presence of the king she gained,
Nor for he sweld with ire was she afraid,
But his fierce wrath with fearlesse grace sustained,
I come, quoth she, (but be thine anger staid,
And causeless rage against faultlesse souls restrained)
I come to show thee and to bring thee both
The wight, whose fact has made thy heart so wroth.
20
Her modest boldness, and that lightning ray
Which her sweet beauty streamed on his face,
Had struck the Prince with wonder and dismay,
Changed his cheer and cleared his moodie grace,
That had her eyes disposed their looks to play,
The king had snared been in loves strong lace,
But wayward beauty does not fancy move,
A frown forbids, a smile engenders love.
21
It was amazement, wonder and delight,
(Although not love) that moved his cruel sense,
Tell on, quoth he, unfold the chance aright,
Thy peoples lives I grant for recompense.
Then she, behold the faulter here in sight,
This hand committed that supposed offense,
I took the image, mine that fault, that fact,
Mine be the glory of that virtuous act.
22
This spotless lamb thus offered up her blood
To save the rest of Christ's selected fold,
O noble lie! was ever truth so good?
Blessed be the lips that such a leasing told,
Thoughtfull awhile remained the tyrant wood,
His native wrath he began a space withhold
And said, that thou discover soon I will,
What aid? what counsel had thou in that ill?
23
My lofty thoughts (she answered him) enuide
Another hand should work my high desire,
The thirst of glory can no partner bide,
With mine own self I did alone conspire.
On thee alone (the tyrant then replide)
Shall fall the vengeance of my wrath and ire.
It Is just and right (quoth she) I yield consent,
Mine be the honor, mine the punishment.
24
The wretch of new enraged at the same,
Asked where she hid the image so conuai'd:
Not hid (quoth she) but quite consumed with flame,
The idol is of that eternal maid,
For so at least I have preserved the same
With hands profane from being eft betrayed.
My Lord, the thing thus stolen demand no more;
Here see the thief, that scorneth death therefore.
25
And yet no theft was this, yours was the sin,
I brought again what you unjustly took;
This heard, the tyrant did for rage begin
To whet his teeth, and bend his frowning look,
No pity, youth; fairness, no grace could win;
Joy, comfort, hope, the virgin all forsook;
Wrath killed remorse, vengeance stopped mercies breath,
Love's thrall to hate, and beauty slave to death.
26
Taken was the damsel, and without remorse,
The king condemned her (guiltless) to the fire,
Her veil and mantle plucked they off by force,
And bound her tender arms in twisted wire:
Dumb was this silver dove, while from her corse
These hungry kites plucked off her rich attire,
And for some-deale perplexed was her sprite,
Her damask late, now changed to purest white.
27
The news of this mishap spread far and near,
The people ran, both young and old, to gace;
Olindo also ran, and began to fear
His, Lady was some partner in this case;
But when he found her bound, stripped from her gear,
And vile tormentors ready saw in place,
He broke the throng, and into presence brast,
And thus bespake the king in rage and haste.
28
Not so, not so this girl shall bear away
From me the honor of so noble feat,
She durst not, did not, could not so convey
The massy substance of that Idol great,
What slight had she the wardens to betray?
What strength to heave the goddess from her seat?
No, no, my Lord, she sails, but with my wind,
(Ah thus he loved, yet was his love unkind.)
29
He added further, where the shining glass
Lets in the light amid your temples side,
By broken by-waies did I inward pass,
And in that window made a postren wide,
Nor shall therefore this ill-aduised less
Usurp the glory should this fact betide,
Mine be these bonds, mine be these flames so pure,
O glorious death, more glorious sepulture.
30
Sophronia raised her modest looks from ground,
And on her lover bent her eie-sight mild,
Tell me, what fury? what conceit unsound
Presents here to death so sweet a child?
Is not in me sufficient courage found
To bear the anger of this tyrant wild?
Or has fond love thy heart so ouergone?
Would thou not live, nor let me die alone?
31
Thus spoke the Nymph, yet spoke but to the wind,
She could not alter his well settled thought:
O miracle! O strife of wondrous kind!
Where love and virtue such contention wrought,
Where death the victor had for meed assignde,
Their own neglect, each others safety sought;
But thus the king was more prouoakt to ire,
Their strife for bellows served to angers fire.
32
He thinks (such thoughts selfe-guiltinesse finds out)
They scorned his power, and therefore scorned the pain:
Nay, nay, quoth he, let be your strife and dout,
You both shall win, and fit reward obtain.
With that the sargeants hent the young man stout,
And bound him likewise in a worthless chain;
Then back to back fast to a stake both ties,
Two harmless turtles, dight for sacrifies.
33
About the pile of fagots, sticks and hay,
The bellows raised the newly kindled flame,
When thus Olindo, in a doleful lay,
Begun too late his bootlesse plaints to frame:
Be these the bonds? Is this the hopt-for day
Should join me to this long desired dame?
Is this the fire alike should burn our hearts?
Ah hard reward for lovers kind deserts!
34
Far other flames and bonds kind lovers prove,
But thus our fortune casts the hapless die,
Death has exchanged again his shafts with love,
And Cupid thus lets borrowed arrows fly.
O Hymen say, what fury does thee move
To lend thy lamps to light a tragedy?
Yet this contents me that I die for thee,
Thy flames, not mine, my death and torment be.
35
Yet happy were my death, mine ending blessed,
My torments easy, full of sweet delight,
If this I could obtain, that breast to breast
Thy bosom might receive my yielded spright;
And thine with it in heavens pure clothing dressed,
Through cleerest skies might take united flight.
Thus he complained, whom gently she reproved,
And sweetly spoke him thus, that so her loved.
36
Far other plaints (dear friend) tears and laments
The time, the place, and our estates require,
Think on thy sins, which man's old foe presents
Before that judge that quites each soul his hire,
For his name suffer, for no pain torments
Him, whose just prayers to his throne aspire:
Behold the heavens, thither thine eie-sight bend,
Thy looks, sighs, tears, for intercessors send:
37
The Pagans loud cride out to God and man,
The Christians mourned in silent lamentation,
The tyrants self (a thing vnus'd) began
To feel his heart relent, with mere compassion,
But not disposed to ruth or mercy than,
He sped him thence, home to his habitation:
Sophronia stood not grieved, nor discontented,
By all that saw her (but her self) lamented.
38
The lovers standing in this doleful wise,
A warrior bold unawares approached near,
In uncouth arms yclad and strange disguise,
From countries far but new arrived theare,
A savage tygresse on her helmet lies,
The famous badge Clorinda used to bear,
That woonts in every warlike stowre to win,
By which bright sign well known was that fair Inn.
39
She scorned the arts these seely women use,
Another thought her nobler humor fed,
Her lofty hand would of it self refuse
To touch the dainty needle, or nice thread,
She hated chambers, closets, secret mewes,
And in broad fields preserved her maidenhed:
Proud were her looks, yet sweet, though stern and stout,
Her dame a dove, thus brought an eagle out.
40
While she was young, she used with tender hand
The foming steed with froarie bit to steare,
To tilt and tournay, wrestle in the sand,
To leave with speed Atlanta swift arreare,
Through forests wild and unfrequented land
To chase the Lion, boar or rugged bear,
The Satyrs rough, the Fawnes and Fairies wild,
She chased often, often took, and often beguilde.
41
This lusty Lady came from Persia late,
She with the Christians had encountered eft,
And in their flesh had opened many a gate
By which their faithful souls their bodies left,
Her eye at first presented her the state
Of these poor souls, of hope and help bereft,
Greedy to know (as is the mind of man:)
Their cause of death, swift to the fire she ran.
42
The people made her room, and on them twain
Her pearcing eyes their fiery weapons dart,
Silent she saw the one, the other plain,
The weaker body lodged the nobler heart:
Yet him she saw lament, as if his pain
Were grief and sorrow for another smart,
And her keep silence so, as if her eyes
Dumb orators were to entreat the skies.
43
Clorinda changed to ruth her warlike mood,
Few silver drops her vermile cheeks depaint,
Her sorrow was for her that speechless stood,
Her silence more prevailed then his complaint,
She asked an aged man, seemed grave and good,
Come say me sire (quoth she) what hard constraint
Would murder here loves queen, and beauties king?
What fault or fate does to this death them bring?
44
Thus she inquired, and answer short he gave,
But such as all the chance at large disclosed,
She wondered at the case, the virgin brave
That both were guiltless of the fault supposed,
Her noble thought cast how she might them save,
The means on suit or battle she reposed,
Quick to the fire she ran, and quenched it out,
And thus bespake the sargeants and the rout:
45
Be there not one among you all that dare
In this your hateful office ought proceed,
Till I return from court, nor take you care
To reap displeasure for not making speed:
To do her will the men themselves prepare,
In their faint hearts her looks such terror breed,
To court she went, their pardon would she get,
But on the way the courteous king she met.
46
Sir king, quoth she, my name Clorinda hight,
My fame perchance has pearst your ears ere now,
I come to try my woonted power and might,
And will defend this land, this town, and you,
All hard assaies esteem I eath and light,
Great acts I reach to, to small things I bow,
To fight in field, or to defend this wall,
Point what you list, I naught refuse at all.
47
To whom the king, what land so far remot
From Asias coasts, or Phoebus glistring rays,
(O glorious virgin) that records not
Thy fame, thine honor, worth, renown and praise?
Since on my side I have thy succors got,
I need not fear in these mine aged days,
For in thine aid more hope, more trust I have,
Than in whole armies of these soldiers brave.
48
Now Godfrey stays too long, he fears I ween,
Thy courage great keeps all our foes in awe,
For thee all actions far unworthy been
But such as greatest danger with them draw,
Be you commaundresse therefore, Princess, queen
Of all our forces, be thy word a law.
This said, the virgin began her beauoir vale,
And thankt him first, and thus began her tale.
49
A thing vnus'd (great monarch) may it seem,
To ask reward for service, yet to come;
But so your virtuous bounty I esteem,
That I presume for to entreat, this grome
And seely maid from danger to redeem,
Condemned to burn by your impartial dome,
I not excuse, but pity much their yuth,
And come to you for mercy and for ruth.
50
Yet give me leave to tell your highness this,
You blame the Christians, them my thoughts acquit,
Nor be displeased, I say you judge amiss,
At every shot look not to hit the white,
All what th'enchantour did persuade you, is
Against the lore of Macons sacred rite,
For us commands mighty Mahomet
No idols in his temples pure to set.
51
To him therefore this wonder done refar,
Give him the praise and honor of the thing,
Of us the Gods benign so careful ar
Least customs strange into their church we bring,
Let Ismen with his squares and trigons war,
His weapons be the staff, the glass, the ring;
But let us menage war with blows, like knights,
Our praise in arms, our honor lies in fights.
52
The virgin held her peace when this was said:
And though to pity never framed his thought,
Yet for the king admired the noble maid,
His purpose was not to deny her ought,
I grant them life (quoth he) your promised aid
Against these Frenchmen, has their pardon bought:
Nor further seek what their offenses be,
Guiltless I quite; guilty, I set them free.
53
Thus were they loosed, happiest of humane kind
Olindo, blessed be this act of thine,
True witness of thy great and heavenly mind,
Where sun, moon, stars, of love, faith, virtue, shine.
So forth they went and left pale death behind,
To joy the bliss of marriage rites divine,
With her he would have did, with him content
Was she to live, that would with her have brent.
54
The king (as wicked thoughts are most suspicious)
Supposed too fast this tree of virtue grew,
O blessed Lord! why should this Pharoe vicious,
Thus tyrannize upon thy Hebrews true?
Who to perform his will, vile and malicious,
Exiled these, and all the faithful crew,
All that were strong of body, stout of mind,
But kept their wives and children pledge behind.
55
A hard division, when the harmless sheep
Must leave their lambs to hungry wolves in charge,
But labor's virtues watching, ease her sleep,
Trouble best wind that drives saluations barge,
The Christians fled, whither they took no keep,
Some straied wild among the forests large,
Some to Emmaus to the Christian host,
And conquer would again their houses lost.
56
Emmaus is a city small, that lies
From Sions walls distant a little way,
A man that early on the morn does rise,
May thither walk ere third hour of the day.
Oh, when the Christian Lords this town espies
How merry were their hearts? how fresh? how gay?
But for the sun inclined fast to west,
That night there would their chieftaine take his rest.
57
Their canuas castles up they quickly rear,
And build a city in an hours space,
When lo (disguised in unusual gear)
Two Barons bold approchen began the place,
Their semblance kind, and mild their gestures wear,
Peace in their hands and friendship in their face,
From Egypts king ambassadors they come,
Them many a squire attends, and many a grome.
58
The first Aletes, borne in lowly shed
Of parents base, a rose, sprung from a brier,
That now his branches over Egypt spread,
No plant in Pharoes garden prospred hier,
With pleasing tales his Lords vain ears he fed,
A flatterer, a pickthanke, and a lier,
Cursed be estate got with so many a crime,
Yet this is often the staire by which men clime.
59
Argantes called is that other knight,
A stranger came he late to Egypt land,
And there advanced was to honors hight,
For he was stout of courage, strong of hand,
Bold was his heart, and restless was his spright,
Fierce, stern, outrageous, keen as sharp'ned brand,
Scorner of God, scant to himself a friend,
And pricked his reason on his weapons end,
60
These two entreatance made they might be hard,
Nor was their just petition long denide;
The gallants quickly made their court of guard,
And brought them in where sat their famous guide,
Whose kingly look his princely mind declared,
Where noblesse, virtue, troth and valor bide,
A slender courtsie made Argantes bold,
So as one prince salute another would.
61
Aletes laid his right hand on his heart,
Bent down his head, and cast his eyes full low,
And reu'rence made with courtly grace and art,
For all that humble lore to him was know,
His sober lips then did he softly part,
Whence of pure rhetorike, whole streams out flow,
And thus he said, (while on the Christian Lords
Down fell the mildew of his sugared words.)
62
O only worthy, whom the earth all fears,
High God defend thee, with his heavenly sheeld,
And humble so the hearts of all thy pears,
That their stiff necks to thy sweet yoke may yield:
These be the sheaues that honors harvest bears,
The seed thy valiant acts, the world the feeld,
Egypt the headland is, where heaped lies
Thy fame, worth, justice, wisdom, victories.
63
These all together, does our sovereign hide
In secret storehouse of his princely thought,
And prays he may in long accordance bide
With that great Worthy, which such wonders wrought,
Nor that oppose against the coming tide
Of profred love, for that he is not tought
Your Christian faith, for though of diverse kind,
The loving vine about her elm is twined.
64
Receive therefore in that unconquered hand
The precious handle of this cup of love,
If not religion, virtue be the band
Twixt you to fasten friendship, not to move:
But for our mighty king does understand,
You mean your power against Judah land to prove,
He would, before this threat'ned tempest fell,
I should his mind and princely will first tell.
65
His mind is this, he prays thee be contented
To joy in peace, the conquests thou have got,
Be not thy death, or Sions fall lamented,
Forbear this land, Judea trouble not,
Things done in haste at leisure be repented:
Withdraw thine arms, trust not uncertain lot,
For often we see what least we think betide,
He is thy friend against all the world beside.
66
True labor in the vineyard of thy Lord,
Ere prime thou have th'imposed day-worke done,
What armies conquered, perished with thy sword?
What cities sacked? what kingdoms have thou won?
All ears are maz'de, while toongs thine acts record,
Hands quake for fear, all feet for dread do run,
And though no realms you may to thraldom bring,
No higher can your praise, your glory spring.
67
Thy sin is in his Apogaeon placed,
And when it moves next, must needs descend,
Chance is uncertain, fortune double faced,
Smiling at first, she frowneth in the end,
Beware thine honor be not then disgraced,
Take heed thou mar not, when thou think to mend,
For this the folly is of fortunes play,
Against doubtful, certain; much, against small, to lay.
68
Yet still we sail while prosperous blows the wind,
Till on some secret rock unawares we light,
The sea of glory has no banks assignde,
They who are wont to win in every fight,
Still feed the fire, that so enflames thy mind
To bring mo nations subject to thy might;
This makes thee blessed peace so light to hold,
Like summers flies that fear not winters cold.
69
They bid thee follow on the path, now made
So plain and easy, enter fortunes gate,
Nor in thy scabberd sheath that famous blade
Till settled be thy kingdom, and estate,
Till Macons sacred doctrine fall and fade,
Till woeful Asia, all lie desolate.
Sweet words I grant, baits and allurements sweet,
But greatest hopes often greatest crosses meet.
70
For, if thy courage do not blind thine eyes,
If clouds of fury hide not reasons beams,
Then may thou see this desperate enterpries,
The field of death, watered with dangers streams,
High state the bed is where misfortune lies,
Mars most unfriendly, when most kind he seames,
Who climeth hie, on earth he hardest lights,
And lowest falls, attend the highest flights.
71
Tell me, if great in counsel, arms and gold,
The Prince of Egypt, war against you prepare?
What if the valiant Turks and Persians bold,
Unite their forces with Cassan^es hair?
O then, what marble pillar shall uphold
The falling trophies of your conquests fair?
Trust you the monarch of the Greekish land?
That reed will break; and breaking, wound your hand.
72
The Greekish faith is like that half cut tree,
By which men take wild Elephants in Inde,
A thousand times it has beguiled thee,
As firm as waves in seas, or leaves in wind.
Will they, who erst denide you passage free,
(Passage to all men free, by use and kind)
Fight for your sake? or on them do you trust
To spend their blood, that could fearce spare their dust?
73
But all your hope and trust perchance is laid
In these strong troops, which thee enuiron round;
Yet foes unite are not so soon dismayed,
As when their strength you erst divided found:
Besides, each hour thy bands are weaker maid
With hunger, slaughter, lodging on cold ground,
Meane-while the Turks seek succors from our king,
Thus fade thy helps, and thus thy cumbers spring,
74
Suppose no weapon can thy valors pride
Subdue, that by no force thou may be won,
Admit no steel can hurt or wound thy side,
And be it heaven has thee such fauout done;
Against famine yet what shield can thou provide?
What strength resist? what slight her wrath can shonne?
Go shake thy spear, and draw thy flaming blade,
And try if hunger so be weaker made.
75
The Inhabitants each pasture and each plain
Destroyed have, each field to waste is lade,
In fensed towers bestowed is their grain,
Before thou came this kingdom to invade,
These horse and foot, how can thou then sustain?
Whence comes thy store? whence thy provision made?
Thy ships to bring it are (perchance) assignde,
O that you live so long as please the wind!
76
Perhaps thy fortune does controull the wind,
Does loose or bind their blastes in secret cave,
The sea (pardie) cruel and deaf by kind,
Will hear thy call, and still her raging wave:
But if our armed galleys be assignde
To aid those ships, which Turks and Persians have,
Say then, what hope is left thy slender fleet?
Dare flocks of crows, a flight of Eagles meet?
77
My Lord, a double conquest must you make,
If you atchieue renown by this empries:
For if our fleet your navy chase or take,
For want of victails all your camp then dies;
Or if by land the field you once forsake,
Then vain by sea were hope of victories.
Nor could your ships restore your lost estate:
For steed once stolen, we shut the door too late.
78
In this estate, if thou esteemest light
The profred kindness of The Egyptian king,
Then give me leave to say, this oversight
Beseemes thee not, in whom such virtues spring:
But heavens vouchsafe to guide thy mind aright
To gentle thoughts, that peace and quiet bring,
So that poor Asia her complaints may ceace,
And you enjoy your conquest got, in peace.
79
Nor ye that part in these adventures have,
Part in his glory, partners in his harms,
Let not blind fortune so your minds desaue,
To stir him more to try these fierce alarmes,
But like the failer (escaped from the wave)
From further peril, that his person arms,
By staying safe at home, so stay you all,
Better fit still (men say) than rise to fall.
80
This said Aletes: and a murmur rose
That showed dislike among the Christian Pears,
Their angry gestures with mislike disclose,
How much his speech offends their noble ears.
Lord Godfreyes eye three times enuiron goes,
To view what countenance every warrior bears,
And lastly on The Egyptian Baron staid,
To whom the Duke thus (for his answer) said.
81
Ambassador, full both of threats and praise,
Thy doubtful message have thou wisely told,
And if thy sovereign love us (as he says)
Tell him he sowes, to reap an hundredth fold,
But where thy talk the coming storm displaies
Of threat'ned warfare, from the Pagans bold:
To that I answer (as my custom is)
In plainest phrase, least mine intent thou mis.
82
Know, that till now we suffered have much pain,
By lands and seas, where storms and tempests fall,
To make the passage easy, safe and plain
That leads us to this venerable wall,
That so we might reward from heaven obtain,
And free this town, from being longer thrall;
Nor is it grievous to so good an end
Our honors, kingdoms, lives and goods to spend.
83
Not hope of praise, nor thirst of worldly good,
Entised us to follow this emprise,
The heavenly father keep his sacred brood
From foul infection of so great a vice:
But by our zeal aye be that plague withstood,
Let not those pleasures us to sin entise.
His grace, his mercy, and his powerful hand
Will keep us safe from hurt, by sea and land.
84
This is the spur, that makes our coursers run;
This is our harbor, safe from dangers floods:
This is our beild, the blustering winds to shun:
This is our guide, through deserts, forests, woods,
This is our summers shade, our winters sun:
This is our wealth, our treasure, and our goods:
This is our engine, towers that ouerthroes,
Our spear that hurts, our sword that wounds our foes.
85
Our courage hence, our hope, our valor springs,
Not from the trust we have in shield or spear,
Not from the succors France or Grecia brings,
On such weak posts we list no buildings rear:
He can defend us from the power of kings,
From chance of war, that makes weak hearts to fear,
He can these hungry troops, with Manna feed,
And make the seas, land; if we passage need.
86
But if our sins us of his help deprive,
Or his high justice let no mercy fall;
Yet should our deaths us some contentment give,
To die, where Christ received his burial,
So might we die, not envying them that live;
So would we die, not unrevenged all:
Nor Turks, nor Christians (if we perish such)
Have cause to joy, or to complain too much.
87
Think not that wars we love, and strife affect,
Or that we hate sweet peace, or rest denay,
Think not your sovereigns friendship we reject,
Because we list not in our conquests stay:
But for it seems he would the Jews protect,
Pray him from us that thought aside to lay,
Nor us forbid this town and realm to gain,
And he in peace, rest, joy, long mote he rain.
88
This answer given, Argantes wild drew nar,
Trembling for ire, and waxing pale for rage,
Nor could he hold, his wrath encreast so far,
But thus (enflamed) bespake the captain sage:
Who scorneth peace, shall have his fill of war,
I thought thy wisdom should thy fury swage,
But well you show what joy you take in fight,
Which makes you prise our love and friendship light.
89
This said, he took his mantles foremost part,
And began the same together fold and wrap;
Then spoke again with fell and spiteful heart,
(So lions rore enclosed in train or trap)
Thou proud despiser of inconstant Mart,
I bring thee war and peace closed in this lap,
Take quickly one, thou have no time to muse;
If peace, we rest; we fight, if war thou choose.
90
His semblant fierce and speeches proud, provoke
The soldiers all, war, at once to cry,
Nor could they tarry till their chieftaine spoke,
But for the knight was more enflamed hereby,
His lap he opened and spread forth his cloak:
To mortal wars (he says) I you defy;
And this he vttred with fell rage and hate,
And seemed of Ianus church t'vndoe the gate.
91
It seemed fury, discord, madness fell
Flew from his lap, when he unfolds the same,
His glaring eyes with angers venom swell,
And like the brand of foul Alecto flame,
He looked like huge Tiphoius loosed from hell
Again to shake heavens everlasting frame,
Or him that built the tower on Shinaar,
Which threat'neth battle against the morning star.
92
Godfredo than; depart, and bid your king
Haste hitherward, or else within short while,
(For gladly we accept the war you bring)
Let him expect us on the banks of Nile.
He entertained them then with banketting,
And gifts presented to those Pagans vile;
Aletes had a helmet, rich and gay,
Late found at Nice, among the conqu'red pray;
93
Argant a sword, whereof the web was steel,
Pommell, rich stone; hilts, gold, approved by tuch,
With rarest workmanship all forged we will,
The curious art excelled the substance much:
Thus fair, rich, sharp; to see, to have, to feel,
Glad was the Painim to enjoy it such,
And said, how I this gift can use and weild,
Soon shall you see, when first we meet in field.
94
Thus took they congee, and the angry knight
Thus to his fellow parled on their way,
Go thou by day, but let me walk by night,
Go thou to Egypt, I at Sion stay,
The answer given thou can unfold aright,
No need of me what I can do or say,
Among these arms I will go wreake my spite,
Let Paris court it, Hector loved to fight.
95
Thus he, who late arrived a messengar,
Departs a foe, in act, in word, in thought,
The law of nations, or the lore of war,
If he transgress, or no, he reaketh naught.
Thus parted they, and ere he wandered far
The friendly starlight to the walls him brought:
Yet his fell heart thought long that little way,
Grieved with each stop, tormented with each stay.
96
Now spread the night her spangled canopie,
And sommon'd every restless eye to sleep:
On beds of tender grass the beasts down lie,
The fishes slumbred in the silent deep,
Unheard was serpents hiss, and dragons cry,
Birds left to sing, and Philomene to weep,
Only that noice heavens rolling circles kest,
Sung lullabie, to bring the world to rest.
97
Yet neither sleep, nor ease, nor shadows dark,
Could make the faithful camp or captain rest,
They longed to see the day, to hear the lark
Record her hymns and chant her carols blessed,
They earnd to view the walls, the wished mark
To which their iourneies long they had addressed,
Each heart attends, each longing eye beholds
What beam the eastren window first unfolds.
The third Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The camp at great Jerusalem arriues:
Clorinda gives them battle, in the breast
Of fair Erminia Tancreds love reuiues,
He iusts with her unknown whom he loved best,
Argant the aduentrers of their guide depriues,
With stately pomp they lay their Lord in chest:
Godfrey commands to cut the forest down,
And make strong engines to assault the town.
1
THe purple morning left her crimsen bed,
And dond her robes of pure vermilion hew,
Her amber locks she crowned with roses red,
In Edens flowrie gardens gathred new.
When through the camp a murmur shrill was spread,
Arm, arm, they cride; arm, arm, the trumpets blew,
Their merry noise preuents the joyful blast,
So humme small bees, before their swarms they cast.
2
Their captain rules their courage, guides their heat,
Their forwardnes he staid with gentle rain;
And yet more easy (happily) were the feat
To stop the current near Charybdis maine,
Or calm the blustering winds on mountains great,
Than fierce desires of warlike hearts restrain;
He rules them yet, and ranks them in their haste,
For well he knows disordred speed, makes waste.
3
Feath'red their thoughts, their feet in wings were dight,
Swiftly they marched, yet were not tired thereby,
For willing minds make heauiest burdens light.
But when the gliding sun was mounted hie,
Jerusalem (behold) appeer'd in sight,
Jerusalem they view, they see, they spy,
Jerusalem with merry noise they greet,
With joyful shouts, and acclamations sweet.
4
As when a troop of jolly sailers row
Some newfound land, and country to descrie,
Through dangerous seas and under stars unknow,
Thrall to the faithless waves, and trothlesse sky,
If once the wished shore begin to show,
They all salute it with a joyful cry,
And each to other show the land in have,
Forgetting quite their pains and perils past.
5
To that delight which their first sight did breed,
That pleased so the secret of their thought,
A deep repentance did forthwith succeed,
That reu'rend fear and trembling with it brought.
Scantly they durst their feeble eyes despreed
Upon that town, where Christ was sold and bought,
Where for our sins he faultlesse suffered pain,
There where he did and where he lived again:
6
Softwords, low speech, deep sobs, sweet sighs, salt tears
Rose from their breasts, with joy and pleasure mixed;
For thus fares he the Lord aright that fears,
Fear on devotion, joy on faith is fixed:
Such noice their passions make, as when one hears
The hoarse sea waves, rore hollow rocks betwixt;
Or as the wind in houltes and shadie greaues
A murmur makes, among the boughs and leaves.
7
Their naked feet troad on the dustie way,
Following th'ensample of their zealous guide,
Their searffes, their crests, their plumes, and feathers gay,
They quickly doft, and willing laid aside,
Their moulten hearts their woonted pride alay,
Along their watrie cheeks warm tears down slide,
And then such secret speech as this, they used,
While to himself, each one himself accused.
8
Flower of goodness, root of lasting bliss,
Thou well of life, whose streams were purple blood
That flowed here, to cleanse the foul amiss
Of sinful man, behold this brinish flood,
That from my melting heart distilled is,
Receive in gree these tears (O Lord so good)
For never wretch with sin so ouergone,
Had fitter time, or greater cause to moan.
9
This while the wary watchman looked over
(From tops of Sions towers) the hills and dales,
And saw the dust the fields and pastures cover,
As when thick mistes arise from moorie vales.
At last the sun-bright shieldes he began discover,
And glistring helmes for violence none that fales,
The metal shone like lightning bright in skies,
And man and horse amid the dust descries.
10
Then loud he cries, O what a dust arises?
Oh how it shines with shields and targets clear?
Up, up, to arms, for valiant heart despises
The threat'ned storm of death, and danger near,
Behold your foes; then further thus deuiseth,
Haste, haste, for vain delay increases fear,
These horrid clouds of dust that yonder fly,
Your coming foes does hide, and hide the sky.
11
The tender children, and the fathers old,
The aged matrons, and the virgin chaste,
That durst not shake the spear, nor target hold,
Themselves devoutly in their temples plast,
The rest, of members strong and courage bold;
On hardy breasts their harness dond in haste,
Some to the walls, some to the gates them dight,
Their king meane-while directs them all aright.
12
All things well ordered, he withdrew with speed
Up to a turret high, two ports between,
That so he might be near at every need,
And ouerlooke the lands and furrows green,
Thither he did the sweet Erminia leed,
That in his court had entertained been
Since Christians Antioch did to bondage bring,
And slew her father, who thereof was king.
13
Against their foes Clorinda sallied out,
And many a Baron bold was by her side,
Within the postern stood Argantes stout
To rescue her, if ill mote her betide:
With speeches brave she cheered her warlike rout,
And with bold words them hart'ned as they ride,
Let us by some brave act (quoth she) this day
Of Asias hopes the groundwork found and lay.
14
While to her folk thus spoke the virgin brave,
Thereby behold forth past a Christian band,
Toward the camp that herds of cattle drove,
For they that morn had forraid all the land,
The fierce Virago would that booty save,
Whom their commander singled hand for hand,
A mighty man at arms, who Guardo hight,
But far too weak to match with her in fight.
15
They met, and low in dust was Guardo laid,
Twixt either army, from his cell down kest,
The Pagans shout for joy, and hopeful said,
Those good beginnings would have endings blessed:
Against the rest on went the noble maid,
She broke the helm, and pearst the armed breast,
Her men the paths rode through made by her sword,
They pass the stream where she had found the ford.
16
Soon was the pray out of their hands recou'red,
By step and step the Frenchmen began retire,
Till on a little hill at last they hou'red,
Whose strength preserved them from Clorindas ire:
When, as a tempest that has long been cou'red
In watrie clouds, breaks out with sparkling fire.
With his strong squadron Lord Tancredie came,
His heart with rage, his eyes with courage flame:
17
Mast great the spear was which the gallant bore,
That in his warlike pride he made to shake,
As winds tall Cedars toss on mountains hoar;
The king, that wondered at his brau'rie, spoke
To her, that near him seated was before,
Who felt her heart with loves hot fever quake,
Well should thouknow (quoth he) each Christian (knight
By long acquaintance, though in armor dight.
18
Say, who is he shows so great worthiness,
That rides so rank, and bends his lance so fell?
To this the Princess said nor more nor less,
Her heart, with sighs; her eyes, with tears did swell;
But sighs and tears she wisely could suppress,
Her love and passion she dissembled well,
And strove her love and hot desire to cover,
Till heart with sighs, and eyes with tears ron over.
19
At last she spoke, and with a crafty slight
Her secret love disguised in clothes of hate,
Alas too well (she says) I know that knight,
I saw his force and courage proved late,
Too late I viewed when his power and might
Shook down the pillar of Cassanoes state,
Alas what wounds he gives? how fierce, how fell?
No physic helps them cure, nor magicks spell.
20
Tancred he hight, O Macon would he wear
My thrall, ere fates him of this life deprive,
For to his hateful head such spite I bear,
I would him reaue his cruel heart on live.
Thus said she, they that her complainings hear
In other sense her wishes credit give.
She sighed withal, they constred all amiss,
And thought she wished to kill, who longed to kiss.
71
This while forth pricked Clorinda from the throng,
And against Tancredie set her spear in rest,
Upon their helmes they cracked their lances long,
And from her head her guilden caske he kest,
For every lace he broke and every thong,
And in the dust threw down her plumed crest,
About her shoulders shone her golden locks,
Like sunnie beams, on Alablaster rocks.
22
Her looks with fire, her eyes with lightning blaze,
Sweet was her wrath, what then would be her smile?
Tancred whereon think thou? what do thou gaze?
Have thou forgot her in so short a while?
The same is she, the shape of whose sweet face
The god of love did in thy heart compile,
The same that left thee by the cooling stream,
Safe from suns heat, but scorcht with beauties beam.
23
The Prince well knew her, though her painted shield
And golden helm he had not marked before,
She saved her head, and with her axe (well stield,)
Assailed the knight but her the knight forbore,
Against other foes he proved him through the field,
Yet she for that refrained nere the more,
But following turn thee cride, in irefull wise;
And so at once she threats to kill him twice.
24
Not once the Baron lift his armed hand
To strike the maid, but gazing on her eyes,
Where lordly Cupid seemed in arms to stand,
No way to ward or shun her blows he tries;
But softly says, no stroke of thy strong hand
Can vanquish Tancred, but thy conquest lies
In those fair eyes, which fiery weapons dart,
That find no lighting place except this heart.
25
Atlast resolved, although he hopt small grace,
Yet ere he did to tell how much he loved,
For pleasing words in women's ear find place,
And gentle hearts with humble suit are moved.
O thou (quoth he) withhold thy wrath a space,
For if thou long to see my valor proved,
Were it not better, from this warlike rout
Withdrawn, somewhere, alone to fight it out?
26
So singled, may we both our courage try:
Clorinda to that motion yielded glad,
And helmlesse to the forrestward began hie,
Whither the Prince right pensive went and sad,
And there the virgin began him soon defy,
One blow she strooken and he warded had,
When he cride hold, and ere we prove our might,
First hear thou some conditions of the fight.
27
She staid, and desprate love had made him bold,
Since from the fight thou will no respite give,
The cou'nants be (he said) that thou unfold
This wretched bosom, and my heart out riue,
Given thee long since, and if thou cruel would,
I should be dead, let me no longer live,
But pearse this breast, that all the world may say
The Eagle made the turtle dove her pray.
28
Save with thy grace, or let thine anger kill,
Love has disarmed my life of all defense;
An easy labor harmless blood to spill,
Strike then, and punish where is none offense.
This said the Prince, and more perchance had will
To have declared, to move her cruel sense.
But in ill time of Pagans thither came
A troop, and Christians that pursued the same.
29
The Pagans fled before their valiant foes,
For dread or craft, it skils not that we knew,
A soldier wild, careless to win or loes,
Saw where her locks about the damsel flew,
And at her back he profreth (as he goes)
To strike where her he did disarmed view:
But Tancred cride, oh stay thy cursed hand,
And for to ward the blow lift up his brand.
30
But yet the cutting steel arrived theare,
Where her fair neck adioin'd her noble head,
Light was the wound, but through her amber hear
The purple drops down railed bloody read,
So rubies set in flaming gold appear:
But Lord Tancredie pale with rage as lead,
Flew on the villain, who to flight him bound;
The smart was his, though she received the wound:
31
The villain flies; he, full of rage and ire
Pursues, she stood and wondered on them both,
But yet to follow them showed no desire,
To stray so far she would perchance be loath,
But quickly turned her, fierce as flaming fire,
And on her foes wreaked her anger wroth,
On every side she kills them down amain,
And now she flies, and now she turns again:
32
As the swift Ure by Volgaes rolling flood
Chased through the plains the mastiue curres toforne,
Flies to the succor of some neighbor wood,
And often turns again his dreadful horn
Against the dogs imbrued in sweat and blood,
That bite not, till the beast to flight return;
Or as the Moors at their strange tennise run
Defenst, the flying balls unhurt to shun:
33
So run Clorinda, so her foes pursewed,
Until they both approcht the cities wall,
When lo the Pagans their fierce wrath renewed,
Cast in a ring about they wheeled all,
And against the Christians backs and sides they showed
Their courage fierce, and to new combat fall,
When down the hill Argantes came to fight
Like angry Mars to aid the Trojan knight,
34
Furious, to fore the foremost of his rank,
In sturdie steel forth stepped the warrior bold,
The first he smote down from his saddle sanke,
The next under his steed lay on the mold,
Under the Sarsens spear the worthies shranke,
No breast plate could that cursed tree out-hold,
When that was broke his precious sword he drew,
And whom he hit, he felled, hurt or slew.
35
Clorinda slew Ardelio, aged knight,
Whose grauer years would for no labor yield,
His age was full of puissance and might,
Two sons he had to guard his noble eild,
The first (far from his fathers care and sight)
Called Alicandro wounded lay in field,
And Poliphern the younger by his side,
Had he not nobly fought had surely did.
36
Tancred by this, that strove to overtake
The villain that had hurt his only dear,
From vain pursuit at last returned bake,
And his brave troop discomfite saw welneare,
Thither he spurd, and began huge slaughter make,
His shocke no steed, his blow no knight could bear.
For dead he strikes him whom he lights upon,
So thunders break high trees on Libanon.
37
Dudon his squadron of aduentrers brings,
To aid the worthy and his tired crew,
Before the res'due young Rinaldo flings
As swift, as fiery lightning kindled new,
His Argent Eagle with her silver wings
In field of Azure, fair Erminta knew,
See there sir king, (she says) a knight as bold
And brave, as was the son of Peleus old.
38
He winnes the prise in Just and Turnament,
His acts are numberless, though few his years,
If Europe six like him to war had sent
Among these thousands, strong of Christian Pears,
Syria were lost, lost were the Orient,
And all the lands the southren Ocean wears,
Conquered were all hot Affrikes tawnie kings,
And all that dwell by Nilus unknown springs.
39
Rinaldo is his name, his armed fist
Breaks down stone walls, when rams and engines fail;
But turn your eyes because I would you wist
What Lord that is, in green and golden maile,
Dudon he hight who guides as him list
Th'aduentrers troop, whose prowess seld does fail,
High birth, grave years and practice long in war,
And fearelesse heart, make him renowned far.
40
See that big man, that all in brown is bound,
Gernando called, the king of Norwaies son,
A prouder knight treads not on grass or ground,
His pride has lost the praise, his prowess won,
And that kind pair in white all armed round,
Is Edward and Gildippes, who begone
Through love the hazard of fierce war to prove,
Famous for arms, but famous more for love.
41
While thus they tell their foemens worthiness,
The slaughter rages in the plain at large,
Tancred and young Rinaldo break the press,
They bruise the helm, and pearse the seuenfold targe,
The troop by Dudon led performed no less,
But in they come and give a furious charge:
Argantes self, feld at one single blow,
Inglorious, bleeding lay, on earth full low:
42
Nor had the boaster ever risen more,
But that Rinaldoes horse even then down fell,
And with the fall his leg oppressed so sore,
That for a space there must he algates dwell.
Meane-while the Pagan troops were nie forlore,
Swiftly they fled, glad they escapt so well,
Argantes and with him Clorinda stout,
For bank and bulwark served to save the rout.
43
These fled the last, and with their force sustained
The Christians rage, that followed them so near,
Their scattred troops to safety well they trained,
And while the res'due fled, the brunt these bear,
Dudon pursued the victory he gained,
And on Tigranes nobly broke his spear,
Then with his sword headless to ground him cast,
So gardeners branches lop, that spring too fast.
44
Algazers breast plate, of fine temper made,
Nor Corbans helmet, forged by magike art,
Could save their owners, for Lord Dudons blade
Cleft Corbans head, and pearst Algazers heart,
And their proud souls down to the infernal shade,
From Amurath and Mahomet depart,
Nor strong Argantes thought his life was sure,
He could not safely fly, nor fight secure.
45
The angry Pagan bit his lips for teene,
He ran, he staid, he fled, he turned again,
Until at last vnmarkt, vnuiew'd, unseen,
(When Dudon had Almansor newly slain)
Within his side he sheathed his weapon keen,
Down fell the Worthy on the dustie plain,
And lifted up his feeble eyes uneath,
Oppressed with leaden sleep, of iron death.
46
Three times he strove to view heavens golden ray,
And raised him on his feeble elbow thries,
And thrice he tumbled on the lowly lay,
And three times closed again his dying eyes,
He speaks no word, yet makes he signs to pray,
He sighs, he faints, he groans and then he dies:
Argantes proud to spoil the corpse disdained,
But shook his sword with blood of Dudon stained.
47
And turning to the Christian knights, he cride
Lordings, behold, this bloody reeking blade,
Last night was given me by your noble guide,
Tell him what proof thereof this day is made,
Needs must this please him well that is betide,
That I so well can use this martial trade,
To whom so rare a gift he did present,
Tell him the workman fits the instrument.
48
If further proof hereof he long to see,
Say it still thirsts, and would his heart blood drink;
And if he haste not to encounter me,
Say I will find him when he least does think:
The Christians at his words enraged be,
But he to shun their ire does safely shrink
Under the shelter, of the neighbor wall,
Well guarded with his troops and soldiers all.
49
Like storms of hail the stones fell down from hie,
Cast from the bulwarks, flankers, ports and towers,
The shafts and quarries from their engines fly,
As thick as falling drops in April showers:
The French withdrew, they list not prease too nie,
The Sarrasins escaped all the powers.
But now Rinaldo from the earth up lept,
Where by the leg his steed had long him kept;
50
He came and breathed vengeance from his breast
Against him that noble Dudon late had slain,
And being come, thus spoke he to the rest,
Warriors, why stand you gazing here in vain?
Pale death our valiant leader has oppressed,
Come wreake his loss, whom bootlesse you complain.
These walls are weak, they keep but cowards out,
No rampire can withstand a courage stout.
51
Of double iron, brass or adamant,
Or if this wall were built of flaming fire,
Yet should the Pagan vile a fortress want
To shroud his coward head safe from mine ire;
Come follow then and bid base fear auant,
The harder work deserves the greater hire:
And with that word close to the walls he starts,
Nor fears he arrows, quarries, stones or darts.
52
Above the waves as Neptune lift his eyes
To chide the winds, that Trojan ships oppressed,
And with his count nance calin'd seas, winds and skies;
So looked Rinaldo, when he shook his crest
Before those walls, each Pagan fears and flies
His dreadful sight, or trembling staid at lest:
Such dread his awful visage on them cast,
So seem poor doves at goshaukes sight aghast,
53
The herald Sigiere now from Godfrey came,
To will them stay and calm their courage hot,
Retire, quoth he, Godfrey commands the same,
To wreake your ire this season fitteth not:
Though loath Rinaldo staid, and stopped the flame
That boiled in his hardy stomach hot;
His bridled fury grew thereby more fell,
So rivers stopped, above their banks do swell.
54
The bands retire, not dang'red by their foes
In their retrait, so wise were they and wary,
To murdered Dudon each lamenting goes,
From wonted use of ruth they list not vary,
Upon their friendly arms they soft impose
The noble burden of his corpse to carry:
Meane-while Godfredo from a mountain great
Beheld the sacred city and her seat.
55
Jerusalem is seated on two hills
Of height unlike, and turned side to side,
The space between a gentle valley fills,
From mount to mount expansed fair and wide.
Three sides are sure imbard, with crags and hills,
The rest is easy, scant to rise espide:
But mighty bulwarks fence that plainer part,
So art helps nature, nature strength'neth art.
56
The town is stored of troughes and cestrens, made
To keep fresh water, but the country seames
Deuoid of grass, unfit, for plowmens trade,
Not fertile, moist with rivers, wels and streams.
There grow few trees, to make the summers shade,
To shield the parched land from scorching beams,
Save that a wood stands six mile from the town,
With aged Cedars dark, and shadows brown.
57
By East, among the dustie valleis, glide
The silver streams of Iordans crystal flood;
By West, the midland sea, with bounders tide
Of sandy shores, where Ioppa whilome stood;
By North Samaria stands, and on that side
The golden calfe was reared in Bethel wood;
Bethleem by South, where Christ incarnate was,
A pearl in steel, a diamond set in brass.
58
While thus the Duke on every side descried
The cities strength, the walls and gates about,
And saw where least the same was fortified,
Where weakest seemed the walls to keep him out;
Erminia as he armed rode, him spied
And thus bespake the heathen tyrant stout,
See Godfrey there, in purple clad and gold,
His stately port, and princely look behold:
59
Well seems he borne to be with honor crowned,
So well the lore he knows of regiment,
Peerless in fight, in counsel grave and sound,
The double gift of glory excellent,
Among these armies is no warrior found
Grauer in speech, bolder in Turnament.
Raimond pardie in counsel match him might;
Tancred and young Rinaldo like in fight.
60
To whom the king; he likes me well therefore,
I knew him whilome in the court of France,
When I from Egypt went Ambassadore,
I saw him there break many a sturdie lance,
And yet his chinne no sign of manhood bore,
His youth was forward, but with governance,
His words, his actions, and his portance brave,
Of future virtue, timely tokens gave.
61
Presages ah too true: with that a space
He sighed for grief, then said, feign would I know
The man in red, with such a knightly grace,
A worthy Lord he seems by his show,
How like to Godfrey looks he in the face?
How like in person? but some-deale more low.
Baldwine (quoth she) that noble Baron hight,
By birth his brother, and his match in might.
62
Next look on him that seems for counsel fit,
Whose silver locks bewray his store of days,
Raimond he hight, a man of wondrous wit,
Of Toulouse Lord, his wisdom is his praise,
What he forethinkes does (as he looks for) hit,
His stratagems have good success always:
With guilden helm beyond him rides the mild
And good Prince William Englands kings dear child.
37
With him is Guelpho as his noble mate,
In birth, in acts, in arms alike the rest,
I know him well, since I beheld him late,
By his broad shoulders and his squared breast:
But my proud foe that quite has ruinate
My high estate, and Antioch oppressed,
I see not, Boemond, that to death did bring
Mine aged Lord, my father and my king.
64
Thus talked they; meane-while Godfredo went
Down to the troops, that in the valley staid,
And for in vain he thought the labor spent,
Tassaile those parts that to the mountains laid,
Against the northren gate his force he bent,
Against it he campt, against it his engines played,
All felt the fury of his angry power,
That from those gates lies to the corner tower.
65
The towns third part was this, or little less,
Fore which the Duke his glorious ensigns spread,
For so great compass had that forteresse,
That round it could not be environed
With narrow siege, (nor Babels king I guess
That whilome took it, such an army led)
But all the ways he kept, by which his foe
Might to or from the city, come or go.
66
His care was next, to cast the trenches deep,
So to preserve his resting camp by night,
Least from the city (while his soldiers sleep)
They might assail them with untimely fight.
This done, he went where Lords and Princes weep,
With dire complaints, about the murdered knight,
Where Dudon dead, lay slaughtred on the ground,
And all the soldiers sat lamenting round.
67
His wayling friends adorned the mournful bear
With woeful pomp, whereon his corpse they laid,
And when they saw the Bulloigne Prince draw near,
All felt new grief, and each new sorrow maid,
But he, withouten show or change of cheer,
His springing tears within their fountains staid,
His ruefull looks upon the coarse he cast
Awhile, and thus bespake the same at last.
68
We need not mourn for thee, here laid to rest,
Earth is thy bed, and not thy grave, the skies
Are for thy soul the cradle and the nest,
There live, for here thy glory never dies:
For like a Christian knight and champion blessed
Thou did both live and die, now feed thine eyes
With thy redeemers sight, where crowned with blis
Thy faith, zeal, merit, well-deseruing is.
69
Our loss, not thine, prouokes these plaints and tears,
For when we lost thee, then our ship her mast,
Our chariot lost her wheels, their points our spears,
The bird of conquest her chief feather cast:
But though thy death, far from our army bears
Her chiefest earthly aid, in heaven yet plast
Thou will procure us help divine, so reapes
He, that sowes godly sorrow, joy by heaps.
70
For if our God the Lord Armipotent
Those armed Angels in our aid down send,
That were at Dothan to his Prophet sent,
Thou will come down with them, and well defend
Our host, and with thy sacred weapons bent
Against Sions fort, these gates and bulwarks rend,
That so thy hand may win this hold, and we
May in these temples praise our Christ for thee.
71
Thus he complained; but now the sable shade
Icleped night, had thick enueloped
The sun, in veil of double darkness made,
Sleep, eased care; rest, brought complaint to bed:
All night the wary Duke devising laid
How that high wall should best be battered,
How his strong engines he might aptly frame,
And whence get timber, fit to build the same.
72
Up with the lark the sorrowful Duke arose,
Amourner chief at Dudons burial,
Of Cipresse sad a pile his friends compose
Under a hill, oregrowne with Cedars tall,
Beside the hearce a fruitful palm tree groes,
(Ennobled since by this great funeral)
Where Dudons corpse they softly laid in ground,
The priests sung hymns, the soldiers wept around.
73
Among the boughs, they here and there bestow
Ensigns and arms, as witness of his praise,
Which he from Pagan Lords, that did them owe,
Had won in prosperous sights, and happy fraies:
His shield they fixed on the bole below,
And there this distich vnder-writ, which says,
This palm with stretched arms, does ouerspread
The champion Dudons glorious carcass dead.
74
This work performed with aduisement good,
Godfrey his carpenters, and men of skill
In all the camp, sent to an aged wood,
(With conuoy meet to guard them safe from ill)
Within a valley deep this forest stood,
To Christian eyes unseen, unknown, until
A Syrian told the Duke, who thither sent
Those chosen workmen, that for timber went.
75
And now the axe raged in the forest wild,
The Echo sighed in the groves unseen,
The weeping Nymphs fled from their bowres exilde,
Down fell the shadie tops of shaking treene,
Down came the sacred palms, the ashes wild,
The funeral Cipresse, Hollie ever green,
The weeping Fur, thick Beech, and sailing Pine,
The married Elm fell with his fruitful vine.
76
The showter Eugh, the broad-leau'd Sicamore,
The barraine Platane, and the Wall-nut sound,
The Myrrh, that her foul sin does still deplore,
The Alder owner of all watrish ground,
Sweet Juniper, whose shadow hurts sore,
Proud Cedar, Oak, the king of forests crowned,
Thus fell the trees, with noice the deserts rore,
The beasts, their caves; the birds, their nests forlore.
The fourth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Satan his feends and sprites assembleth all,
And sends them forth to work the Christians woe,
False Hidraort their aid from hell does call,
And sends Armida to entrap his foe:
She tells her birth, her fortune and her fall,
Asks aid, allures and winnes the worthies so,
That they consent her enterprise to prove;
She winnes them with deceit, craft, beauty, love.
1
WHile thus their work went on with luckie speed,
And reared rams their horned fronts advance,
The ancient foe to man, and mortal seed,
His wannish eyes upon them bent askance;
And when he saw their labors well succeed,
He wept for rage, and threat'ned dire mischance,
He chokt his curses, to himself he spoke,
Such noise wild bulls, that softly bellow make.
2
At last resolving in his damned thought,
To find some let, to stop their warlike feat,
He gave command his princes should be brought
Before the throne of his infernal seat,
O fool! as if it were a thing of naught
God to resist, or change his purpose great,
Who on his foes does thunder in his ire,
Whose arrows hailestones be, and coals of fire.
3
The drearie trumpet blew a dreadful blast,
And rombled through the lands and kingdoms under,
Through wastnes wide it roard, and hollowes vast,
And filled the deep, with horror, fear and wonder,
Not half so dreadful noise the tempests cast,
That fall from skies, with storms of hail and thunder,
Nor half so loud the whistling winds do sing,
Broke from the earthen prisons of their king.
4
The Peers of Plutoes realm assembled been
Amid the palace of their angry king,
In hideous forms and shapes, tofore unseen,
That fear, death, terror and amasement bring,
With ouglie paws some trample on the green,
Some gnaw the snakes that on their shoulders hing,
And some their forked tails stretch forth on hie,
And tear the twinkling stars from trembling sky.
5
There were Cilenos foul and loathsome rout,
There Sphinges, Centaures, there were Gorgons fell,
There howling Scillaes, yawling round about,
There serpents hiss, there seu'n-mouth'd Hydraes yell,
Chunera there spues fire and brimstone out,
And Poliphemus blind supporteth hell,
Besides ten thousand monsters therein dwells
Mis-shapt, unlike themselves, and like naught else.
6
About their Prince each took his wonted seat
On thrones red hot, ibuilt of burning brass,
Pluto in midst heau'd his trident great,
Of rastie iron huge that forged was,
The rocks, on which the salt sea billows beat,
And Atlas tops, the clouds in height that pass,
Compared to his huge person, mole-hils be,
So his rough front, his horns so lifted he.
7
The tyrant proud frowned from his lofty cell,
And with his looks made all his monsters tremble,
His eyes, that full of rage and venom swell,
Two beacons seem, that men to arms assemble,
His feltred locks, that on his bosom fell,
On rugged mountains briers and thorns resemble,
His yawning mouth, that fomed clotted blood,
Gapte like a whirlepoole wide in Stygian flood.
8
And as mount Etna vomits sulphur out,
With clifts of burniag crags, and fire and smoke,
So from his mouth flew kindled coals about,
Hot sparks and smells, that man and beast would choke,
The gnarring porter durstnot whine for dout,
Still were the Furies, while their sovereign spoke,
And swift Cocytus staid his murmur shrill,
While thus the murdrer thundered out his will.
9
Ye powers infernal, worthier far to sit
Above the sun, whence you your offspring take,
With me that whilome, through the welkin flit,
Down tombled headlong to this empty lake,
Our former glory, still remember it,
Our bold attemptes and war we once did make
Against him, that rules above the starrie sphere,
For which like traitors we lie damned here.
10
And now in stead of clear and gladsome sky,
Of Titans brightness, that so glorious is,
In this deep darkness lo we helpless lie,
Hopeless again to joy our former blis,
And more (which makes my grieves to multiply)
That sinful creature man, elected is,
And in our place, the heavens possess he must,
Vile man, begot of clay, and borne of dust.
11
Nor this suffis'd, but that he also gave
His only son, his darling to be slain,
To conquer so, hell, death, sin and the grave,
And man condemned to restore again,
He brake our prisons and would algates save
The souls that here should dwell in woe and pain,
And now in heaven with him they live always
With endless glory crowned, and lasting praise.
12
But why recount I thus our passed harms?
Remembrance fresh makes weak'ned sorrows strong,
Expulsed were we with injurious arms
From those due honors, us of right belong.
But let us leave to speak of these alarmes,
And bend our forces against our present wrong,
Ah see you not, how he attempted has
To bring all lands, all nations to his faith?
13
Then, let us careless spend the day and night,
Without regard what haps, what comes or goes.
Let Asia subject be to Christians might,
A pray be Sion to her conquering foes,
Let her adore again her Christ aright,
Who her before all nations whilome choes,
In brazen tables be his lore iwrit,
And let all tongues and lands acknowledge it.
14
So shall our sacred altars all be his,
Our holy Idols tombled in the mold,
To him the wretched man, that sinful is,
Shall pray, and offer incense, myrrh and gold;
Our temples shall their costly deckings mis,
With naked walls and pillars freezing cold,
Tribute of souls shall end, and our estate,
Or Pluto reign in kingdoms desolate.
15
Oh, be not than the courage perished cleene,
That whilome dwelt within your haughty thought,
When, armed with shining fire and weapons keen,
Against the Angels of proud heaven we fought,
I grant we fell on the Phlegrean green,
Yet good our cause was, though our fortune naught;
For chance assisteth often th'ignobler part,
We lost the field, yet lost we not our heart.
16
Go then my strength, my hope, my spirits, go,
These westren rebels, with your power withstand,
Pluck up these weeds, before they ouergroe
The gentle garden of the Hebrews land,
Quench out this spark, before it kindle so
That Asia burn, consumed with the brand.
Use open force, or secret guile unspied;
For craft is virtue against a foe defied.
17
Among the knights and worthies of their train,
Let some like out-lawes wander uncouth ways,
Let some be slain in field, let some again
Make oracles of women's yeaes and naies,
And pine in foolish love, let some complain
On Godfreyes rule, and mutines against him raise,
Turn each ones sword, against his fellows heart,
Thus kill them all, or spoil the greatest part.
18
Before his words the tyrant ended had,
The lesser devils arose with gastlie rore,
And thronged forth about the world to gad,
Each land they filled, river, stream and shore,
The Goblins, Fairies, Feends and Furies mad,
Ranged in flowrie dales, and mountains hoar,
And under every trembling leaf they sit,
Between the solid earth and welkin flit.
19
About the world they spread both far and wide,
Filling the thoughts of each ungodly heart,
With secret mischief, anger, hate and pride,
Wounding lost souls with sins impoyson'd dart.
But say (my muse) recount whence first they tried
To hurt the Christian Lords, and from what part,
Thou know of things performed so long agone,
This later age hears little troath or none.
20
The town Damascus and the lands about
Ruled Hidraort, a wisard grave and sage,
Acquainted well with all the damned rout
Of Plutoes reign, even from his tender age;
Yet of this war he could not figure out
The wished ending, or success presage;
For neither stars above, nor powers of hell,
Nor skill, nor art, nor charm, nor devil could tell.
21
And yet he thought (O vain conceit of man!
Which as thou wishest, iudgest things to come)
That the French host to sure destruction ran,
Condemned quite by heavens eternal dome:
He thinks no force withstand or vanquish can
Th* Egyptian strength, and therefore would that some,
Both of the pray and glory of the fight,
Upon his Syrian folk should happily light.
22
But for he held the French men's worth in prise,
And feared the doubtful gain of bloody war,
He, that was closely false and slilie wise,
Cast how he might annoy them most from far:
And as he began upon this point devise,
(As counselors in ill still nearest ar)
At hand was Satan, ready, ere men need,
If once they think to make them do the deed.
23
He counseld him how best to hunt his game,
What dart to cast, what net, what toil to pitch,
A niece he had, a nice and tender dame,
Peerless in wit, in natures blessings rich,
To all deceit she could her beauty frame,
False, fair and young, a virgin and a witch;
To her he told the sum of this emprise,
And praised her thus, for she was fair and wise.
24
My dear, who underneath these locks of gold,
And native brightness of thy lovely hew,
Hidest grave thoughts, ripe wit, and wisdom old,
More skill than I, in all mine arts untrew,
To thee my purpose great I must unfold,
This enterprise thy cunning must pursew,
Weaue thou to end this web which I begin,
I will the distaffe hold, come thou and spin.
25
Go to the Christians host, and there assay.
All subtle sleights that women use in love,
Shed brinish tears, sob, sigh, entreat and pray,
Wring thy fair hands, cast up thine eyes above,
(For mourning beauty has much power (men say)
The stubbron hearts with pity frail to move)
Look pale for dread, and blush sometime for shame,
In seeming troath thy lies will soonest frame.
26
Take with the bait Lord Godfrey, if thou maste,
Frame snares, of looks; trains, of alluring speech;
For if he love, the conquest than thou have,
Thus purposed war thou may with ease impeach,
Else lead the other Lords to deserts wast,
And hold them slaves far from their leaders reach:
Thus taught he her, and for conclusion, says,
All things are lawful for our lands and faith.
27
The sweet Armida took this charge on hand,
A tender piece, for beauty, sex and age,
The sun was sunken underneath the land
When she began her wanton pilgrimage,
In silken weeds she trusts to withstand,
And conquer knights, in warlike equipage,
Of their night ambling dame, the Syrians prated
Some good, some bad, as they her loved or hated.
28
Within few days, the Nymph arrived theare
Where puissant Godfrey had his tents ipight;
Upon her strange attire, and visage clear,
Gazed each soldier, gazed every knight,
As when a comet does in skies appear,
The people stand amazed at the light,
So wondered they, and each at other sought,
What mister wight she was, and whence ibrought.
29
Yet never eye to Cupids service vowed
Beheld a face of such a lovely pride,
A tinsell veil her amber locks did shroud,
That strove to cover what it could not hide,
The golden sun, behind a silver cloud,
So streameth out his beams on every side,
The marble goddess, set at Guidos, naked,
She seemed, were she vncloath'd, or that awaked.
30
The gamesome wind among her tresses plays,
And curleth up, those growing riches, short;
Her sparefull eye to spread his beams denaies,
But keeps his shot, where Cupid keeps his fort;
The rose and lilly on her cheek, assaies
To paint true fairness out, in brauest sort,
Her lips, where bloomes naught but the single rose,
Still blush, for still they kiss, while still they close.
31
Her breasts, two hills orespred with purest snow,
Sweet, smooth and supple, soft and gently swelling,
Between them lies a milken dale below,
Where love, youth, gladness, whitenes make their dwelling,
Her breasts half hid, and half were laid to show;
Her envious vesture greedy sight repelling,
So was the wanton clad, as if thus much
Should please the eye, the rest unseen, the tuch.
32
As when the sunbeams diue through Tagus wave,
To spy the storehouse of his springing gold,
Love pearsing thought so through her mantle drove,
And in her gentle bosom wandered bold:
It viewed the wondrous beauty virgins have,
And all to fond desire (with vantage) told,
Alas what hope is left, to quench his fire
That kindled is, by sight; blown, by desire.
33
Thus past she, praised, wished, and wondered at,
Among the troops, who there encamped lay,
She smiled for joy, but well dissembled that
Her greedy eye chose out her wished pray;
On all her gestnres, seeming virtue sat,
Toward the imperial tent she asked the way:
With that she met a bold and louesome knight,
Lord Godfreys youngest brother, Eustace hight.
34
This was the foul that first fell in the snare,
He saw her fair, and hopte to find her kind;
The throne of Cupid has an easy staire,
His bark is fit to fail with every wind,
The breach he makes no wisdom can repair:
With reu'rence meet the Baron low enclinde,
And thus his purpose to the virgin told,
For youth, use, nature, all had made him bold.
35
Lady, if thee beseem a style so low,
In whose sweet looks such sacred beauties shine,
(For never yet did heaven such grace bestow
On any daughter borne of Adams line)
Thy name let us (though far unworthy) knoe,
Unfold thy will, and whence thou art in fine,
Least my audacious boldness learn, too late,
What honors due become thy high estate.
36
Sir knight (quoth she) your praises reach too hie
Above her merit you commenden so,
A hapless maid I am, both borne to die,
And dead to joy, that line in care and woe,
A virgin helpless, fugitive pardie,
My native soil and kingdom thus forgo
To seek Duke Godfreys aid, such store men tell
Of virtuous ruth does in his bosom dwell.
37
Conduct me than that mighty Duke before,
If you be courteous, sir, as well you seem.
Content (quoth he) since of one womb ibore,
We brothers are, your fortune good esteem
T'encounter me, whose word prevails more
In Godfreys hearing, than you happily deem,
Mine aid I grant, and his I promise too,
All that his scepter, or my sword, can do.
38
He led her easly forth when this was said,
Where Godfrey sat among his Lords and pears,
She reu'rence did, then blushed, as one dismayed
To speak, for secret wants and inward fears,
It seemed a bashful shame her speeches staid,
At last the courteous Duke her gently cheares;
Silence was made, and she began her tale,
They fit to hear, thus sung this nightingale.
39
Victorious Prince, whose honorable name
Is held so great among our Pagan kings,
That to those lands thou do by conquest tame,
That thou have won them, some content it brings;
Well known to all is thy immortal fame,
The earth, thy worth; thy foe, thy praises sings,
And Painims wronged come to seek thine aid,
So does thy virtue, so thy power perswaide.
40
And I though bred in Macous, heathenish lore,
Which thou oppressest with thy puissant might,
Yet trust thou will an helpless maid restore,
And repossesse her in her fathers right:
Others in their distress do aid implore
Of kin and friends; but I in this sad plight
Inuoke thy help, my kingdom to invade,
So does thy virtue, so my need persuade.
41
In thee I hope, thy succors I inuoke,
To win the crown whence I am dispossessed;
For like renown awaiteth on the stroke
To cast the haughty down, or raise the oppressed;
Nor greater glory brings a scepter broke,
Than does deliu'rance of a maid distressed:
And since thou can at will perform the thing,
More is thy praise to make, than kill a king.
42
But if thou would thy succors due excuse,
Because in Christ I have no hope nor trust,
Ah yet for virtues sake, thy virtue use!
Who scorneth gold because it lies in dust?
Be witness heaven, if thou to grant refuse,
Thou do forsake a maid in cause most just,
And for thou shall at large my fortunes know,
I will my wrongs, and their great treasons show.
43
Prince Arbilan that reigned in his life
On fair Damascus, was my noble sire,
Borne of mean race he was, yet got to wife
The Queen Charicha, such was the fire
Of her hot love, but soon the fatal knife
Had cut the thread that kept their joys entire,
For so mishap her cruel lot had cast,
My birth, her death; my first day, was her last.
44
And ere five years were fully come and gone,
Since his dear spouse to hasty death did yield,
My father also did, consumed with moan,
And sought his love amid th'Elisian field,
His crown and me (poor orphan) left alone,
Mine uncle governed in my tender eild;
For well he thought, if mortal men have faith,
In brothers breast true love his mansion haith.
45
He took the charge of me, and of the crown,
And with kind shows of love so brought to pass,
That through Damascus great report was blown
How good, how just, how kind mine uncle was;
Whether he kept his wicked hate unknown,
And hid the serpent in the flowring grass,
Or that true faith did in his bosom won,
Because he meant to match me with his son.
46
Which son, within short while, did undertake
Degree of knighthood, as beseem'd him well,
Yet never durst he for his Ladies sake
Break sword or lance, aduanst in lofty cell:
As fair he was, as Cithereas make,
As proud as he, that signoriseth hell,
In fashions way-ward, and in love unkind,
For Cupid deignes not wound, a currish mind.
47
This Paragon should Queen Armida wed,
A goodly swain to be a Princess pheare,
A lovely partner of a Ladies bed,
A noble head, a golden crown to wear:
His glosing sire his errand daily sed,
And sugared speeches whispred in mine ear,
To make me take this darling in mine arms,
But still the adder stopped her ears from charms.
48
At last he left me with a troubled grace,
Through which transparent was his inward spite,
Me thought I red the story in his face
Of these mishaps, that on me since have light,
Since that foul spirits haunt my resting place,
And ghastly visions break my sleep by night,
Grief, horror, fear my fainting soul did kill,
For so my mind foreshew'd my coming ill.
49
Three times the shape of my dear mother came,
Pale, sad, dismayed, to warn me in my dream,
Alas, how far transformed from the same,
Whose eyes shone erst, like Titans glorious beam:
Daughter, she says, fly, fly, behold thy dame
Foreshowes the treasons of thy wretched eame,
Who poison against thy harmless life prouides,
This said, to shapelesse air unseen, she glides.
50
But what auailes high walls or bulwarks strong,
Where fainting cowards have the piece to guard?
My sex too weak, mine age was all too young,
To undertake alone, a work so hard,
To wander wild, the desert woods among,
A banished maid, of wonted ease debard,
So grievous seemed, that leifer were my death,
And there t'expire where first I drew my breath.
51
I feared deadly evil, if long I staid,
And yet to fly had neither will nor power,
Nor durst my heart declare it waxt afraid,
Least so I hasten might my dying hour:
Thus restless waited I (unhappy maid)
What hand should first pluck up my springing flower,
Even as the wretch condemned to lose his life,
Awaites the falling of the murdring knife.
52
In these extremes (for so my fortune would,
Perchance preserve me to my further ill)
One of my noble fathers servants old,
That for his goodness bore his child good will,
With store of tears this treason began unfold,
And said; my guardian would his pupil kill,
And that himself, if promise made he kept,
Should give me poison dire ere next I slept.
53
And further told me, if I wished to live,
I must convey my self by secret flight,
And offered than all succors he could give
To aid his mistress, banished from her right,
His words of comfort fear to exile drive,
The dread of death made lesser dangers light:
So we concluded when the shadows dim,
Obscured the earth, I should depart with him.
54
Of close escapes the aged patroness,
Blacker than erst, her sable mantle spread,
When with two trusty maids in great distress,
Both from mine uncle and my realm I fled;
Often looked I back, but hardly could suppress
Those streams of tears, mine eyes incessant shed,
For when I looked on my kingdom lost,
It was a grief, a death, an hell almost.
55
My steeds drew on the burden of my limbs,
But still my looks, my thoughts, drew back as fast;
So fare the men, that from the havens brims,
Far out to sea, by sudden storm are cast,
Swift ore the grass the rolling chariot swims,
Through ways unknown, all night, all day we have,
At last (nie tired) a castle strong we fand,
The utmost border of my native land.
56
The fort Arontes was, for so the knight
Was called, that my deliu'rance thus had wrought.
But when the tyrant saw, by mature flight
I had escapt the treasons of his thought,
The rage increased in the cursed wight
Against me, and him, that me to safety brought,
And us accused, we would have poisoned
Him, but descride to save our lives we fled.
57
And that in lieu of his approved truth,
To poison him I hired had my guide,
That he dispatched, mine unbridled yuth
Might range at will, in no subjection tide,
And that each night I slept (O foul untruth!)
(Mine honor lost) by this Arontes side:
But heaven I pray send down revenging fire,
When so base love shall change my chaste desire.
58
Not that he sits on my regal throne,
Nor that he thirst to drink my lukewarm blood,
So greeueth me, as this despite alone,
That my renown, which ever blameless stood,
Has lost the light wherewith it always shone:
With forged lies he makes his tale so good,
And holds my subjects hearts in such suspense,
That none takes armor for their Queens defense.
59
And though he do my regal throne possess,
Clothed in purple, crowned with burnisht gold;
Yet is his hate, his rancour, nere the less,
Since naught asswageth malice when it is old:
He threats to burn Arontes forteresse,
And murder him unless he yield the hold,
And me and mine threats (not with war, but death)
Thus causeless hatred, endless is uneath.
60
And so he trusts to wash away the stain,
And hide his shameful fact with mine offense,
And says he will restore the throne again
To his late honor, and due excellence,
And therefore would I should be algates slain,
For while I live, his right is in suspense.
This is the cause my guiltless life is sought,
For on my ruin is his safety wrought.
61
And let the tyrant have his hearts desire,
Let him perform the cruelty he meant,
My guiltless blood must quench the ceaseless fire,
On which my endless tears were bootlesse spent,
Unless thou help; to thee renowned fire,
I fly, a virgin, orphan, innocent,
And let these tears that on thy feet distill,
Redeem the drops of blood, he thirsts to spill.
62
By these thy glorious feet, that tread secure
On necks of tyrants, by thy conquests brave,
By that right hand, and by those temples pure,
Thou seeks to free from Macons lore, I crave
Help for this sickness, none but thou can cure,
My life and kingdom let thy mercy save
From death and ruin: but in vain I prove thee,
If right, if truth, if justice cannot move thee.
63
Thou, who do all thou wishest, at thy will,
And never willest ought, but what is right,
Preserve this guiltless blood they seek to spill,
Thine be my kingdom, save it with thy might:
Among these captains, Lords, and knights of skill,
Appoint me ten, approved most in fight,
Who with assistance of my friends and kin
May serve, my kingdom lost, again to win.
64
For lo a knight, that has a gate to ward,
(A man of chifest trust about his king)
Has promised so to beguile the guard,
That me and mine he undertakes to bring
Safe, where the tyrant happily sleeps hard:
He counseld me to undertake this thing,
Of thee some little succor to entreat,
Whose name alone accomplish can the feat.
65
This said, his answer did the Nymph attend,
Her looks, her sighs, her gestures all did pray him:
But Godfrey wisely did his grant suspend,
He doubts the worst, and that awhile did stay him,
He knows, who fears no God, he loves no friend,
He fears the heathen false would thus betray him:
But yet such ruth dwelt in his princely mind,
That against his wisdom, pity made him kind.
66
Besides the kindness of his gentle thought,
Ready to comfort each distressed wight,
The maidens offer profit with it brought;
For if the Syrian kingdom were her right,
That won, the way were easy, which he sought
To bring all Asia subject to his might,
There might he raise munition, arms and treasure,
To work The Egyptian king and his displeasure.
67
Thus was his noble heart long time betwixt
Fear and remorse, not granting nor denaying,
Upon his eyes the dame her lookings fixed,
As if her life and death lay on his saying,
Some tears she shed, with sighs and sobbings mixed,
As if her hope were dead through his delaying;
At last her earnest suit the Duke denaid,
But with sweet words thus would content the maid.
68
If not in service of our God we fought,
In meaner quarrel if this sword were shaken,
Well might thou gather in thy gentle thought,
So fair a Princess should not be forsaken;
But since these armies, from the worlds end brought,
To free this sacred town have undertaken,
It were unfit we turned our strength away,
And victory, even in her coming, stay.
69
I promise thee, and on my princely word
The burden of thy wish and hope repose,
That when this chosen temple of the Lord,
Her holy doors shall to his saints unclose
In rest and peace; then this victorious sword
Shall execute due vengeance on thy foes:
But if for pity of a worldly dame
I left this work, such pity, were my shame.
70
At this the Princess bent her eyes to ground,
And stood unmoved, though not vnmarkt, a space,
The secret bleeding of her inward wound
Shed heavenly dew, upon her angels face.
Poor wretch (quoth she) in tears and sorrows drowned,
Death be thy peace, the grave thy resting place,
Since such thy hap, that least thou mercy find,
The gentlest heart on earth is proou'd unkind.
71
Where none attends, what boots it to complain?
Men's froward hearts are moved with women's tears,
As marble stones are pearst with drops of rain,
No plaints find passage through unwilling ears:
The tyrant (happily) would his wrath restrain
Heard he these prayers, ruthlesse Godfrey hears,
Yet not thy fault is this, my chance (I see)
Has made even pity, pitilesse in thee.
72
So both thy goodness, and good hap, denaid me,
Grief, sorrow, mischief, care, has overthrown me,
The star that ruled my birthday has betrayed me,
My Genius sees his charge, but dares not own me,
Of Queene-like state, my flight has disarraid me,
My father did, ere he five years had known me,
My kingdom lost, and lastly rests now,
Down with the tree, since broke is every bow.
73
And for the modest lore of maidenhood,
Bids me not soiourne with these armed men,
Oh whither shall I fly? what secret wood
Shall hide me from the tyrant? or what den,
What rock, what vault, what cave can do me good?
No, no, where death is sure, it rests then
To scorn his power, and be it therefore seen,
Armida lived, and did, both like a Queen.
74
With that she looked, as if a proud disdain
Kindled displeasure in her noble mind,
The way she came she turned her steps again,
With gestures sad, but in disdainful kind,
A tempest railed down her cheeks amain,
With tears of woe, and sighs of angers wind;
The drops her footsteps wash, whereon she treads,
And seems to step on pearls, or crystal beads.
75
Her cheeks on which this streaming Nectar fell,
Stilled through the limbecke of her diamondeies,
The roses white and red resembled well,
Whereon the roarie May-deaw sprinkled lies,
When the fair morn first blusheth from her cell,
And breaths balm from opened paradies;
Thus sighed, thus mourned, thus wept, this lovely queen,
And in each drop, bathed a grace unseen.
76
Thrice twenty Cupids unperceived flew
To gather up this licour, ere it fall,
And of each drop an arrow forged new,
Else, as it came, snatched up the crystal ball,
And at rebellious hearts for wild fire threw,
O wondrous love! thou make gain of all;
For if she weeping sit, or smiling stand,
She bends thy bow, or kindles else thy brand.
77
This forged plaint drew forth unfeigned tears,
From many eyes, and pearst each worthies heart,
Each one condoleth with her that her hears,
And of her grief would help her bear the smart:
If Godfrey aid her not, not one but swears
Some tygresse gave him suck, on roughest part
Midst the rude crags, on Alpine cliffes aloft:
Hard is that heart which beauty makes not soft.
78
But iollie Eustace, in whose breast the brand
Of love and pity, kindled had the flame,
While other softly whispred under hand
Before the Duke, with comely boldness, came:
Brother and Lord (quoth he) too long you stand
In your first purpose, yet vouchsafe to frame
Your thoughts to ours, and lend this virgin aid:
Thanks are half lost, when good turns are delaid.
79
And think not that Eustaces talk assaies
To turn these forces from this present war,
Or that I wish you should your armies raise
From Sions walls, my speech tends not so far:
But we that venture all, for fame and praise,
That to no charge nor service bounden ar,
Forth of our troop may ten well spared be
To succor her, which naught can weaken thee.
80
And know, they shall in Gods high service fight,
That virgins innocent, save and defend:
Dear will the spoils be in the heavens sight,
That from a tyrants hateful head we rend:
Nor seemed I forward in this Ladies right,
With hope of gain or profit in the end;
But for I know he arms unworthy bears,
To help a maidens cause, that shunnes or fears.
81
Ah! be it not pardie declared in France,
Or elsewhere told where courtsie is in prise,
That we forsook so fair a cheuisance,
For doubt or fear that might from fight arise;
Else, here surrender I both sword and lance,
And swear no more to use this martial guise;
For ill deserves he to be termed a knight,
That bears a blunt sword, in a Ladies right.
82
Thus parled he: and with confused sound,
The rest approved what the gallant said.
Their General the knights encompast round,
With humble grace, and earnest suit they praid:
I yield (quoth he) and be it happy found,
What I have granted, let her have your aid:
Yours be the thanks, for yours the danger is,
If ought succeed (as much I fear) amiss.
83
But if with you my words may credit find,
O temper then this heat misguides you so!
Thus much he said: but they, with fancy blind,
Accept his grant, and let his counsel go.
What works not beauty, maris relenting mind,
Is eath to move with plaints and shows of woe:
Her lips cast forth a chain of sugared words,
That captive led most of the Christian Lords.
84
Eustace recalled her, and bespake her thus:
Beauties chief darling, let these sorrows be,
For such assistance shall you find in us,
As with your need, or will, may best agree;
With that she cheered her forehead dolorous,
And smiled for joy, that Phoebus blushed to see,
And had she daign'd her veil for to remove,
The god himself, once more, had fallen in love.
85
With that she broke the silence once again,
And gave the knight great thanks in little speech,
She said she would his handmaid poor remain,
So far as honors laws received no breach.
Her humble gestures made the res'due plain,
Dumb eloquence, persuading more, than speech:
Thus women know, and thus they use the guise,
T'enchant the valiant, and beguile the wise.
86
And when she saw her enterprise had got
Some wished mean, of quick and good proceeding,
She thought to strike the iron that was hot;
For every action has his hour of speeding:
Medea or false Circe changed not,
So far the shapes of men, as her eyes spreeding
Altered their hearts, and with her Sirens sound
In lust, their minds; their hearts, in love she drowned.
87
All wily sleights, that subtle women know,
Howrely she used, to catch some lover new.
None kend the bent of her unsteadfast bow,
For with the time her thoughts her looks renew,
From some she cast her modest eyes below,
At some her gazing glances roauing flew,
And while she thus pursewd her wanton sport,
She spurd the slow, and rained the forward short.
88
If some, as hopeless that she would be won,
Forbore to love, because they durst not move her,
On them her gentle looks to smile begone,
As who say, she is kind, if you dare prove her:
On every heart thus shone this lustful son,
All strove to serve, to please, to wowe, to love her,
And in their hearts that chaste and bashful wear,
Her eyes hot glance dissolved the frost of fear.
89
On them, who durst with fingring bold assay
To touch the softnes of her tender skin,
She looked as coy, as if she list not play,
And made as things of worth were hard to win;
Yet tempred so her deignfull looks always,
That outward scorn showed store of grace within:
Thus with false hope their longing hearts she fired,
For hardest gotten things, are most desired.
90
Alone sometimes she walked in secret where,
To ruminate upon her discontent,
Within her eie-lids sat the swelling tear,
Not powered forth, though sprung from sad lament;
And with this craft a thousand souls welneare,
In snares of foolish ruth and love she hent,
And kept as slaves, by which we fitly prove,
That witless pity, breeds fruitless love.
91
Sometimes, as if her hope unloosed had
The chains of grief, wherein her thoughts lay fettered,
Upon her minions looked she blithe and glad,
In that deceitful lore so was she lettered;
Not glorious Titan, in his brightness clad,
The sunshine of her face in luster bettered:
For when she list to cheer her beauties so,
She smiled away the clouds of grief and woe.
92
Her double charm of smiles and sugared words,
Lulled on sleep the virtue of their senses,
Reason small aid against those assaults affords,
Wisdom no warrant from those sweet offenses,
Cupids deep rivers, have their shallow fordes,
His griefs, bring joys; his losses recompenses;
He breeds the sore, and cures us of the pain:
Achilles lance that wounds and heales again.
93
While thus she them torments twixt frost and fire,
Twixt joy and grief, twixt hope and restless fear,
The sly enchantresse, felt her gain the nier,
These were her flocks that golden fleeces bear:
But if some one durst utter his desire,
And by complaining make his grieves appear,
He labored hard rocks with plaints to move,
She had not learned the Gamut then of love.
94
For down she bent her bashful eyes to ground,
And dond the weed of women's modest grace,
Down from her eyes welled the pearls round,
Upon the bright Ennamell of her face;
Such honey drops on springing flowers are found,
When Phoebus holds the crimsen morn in chase;
Full seemed her looks of anger, and of shame;
Yet pity shone transparent through the same.
95
If she perceived by his outward cheer,
That any would his love by talk bewray,
Sometimes she heard him, sometimes stopped her ear,
And played fast and loose the liue-long day:
Thus all her lovers kind deluded wear,
Their earnest suit got neither yea nor nay;
But like the sort of weary huntsmen fare,
That hunt all day, and lose at night the hare.
96
These were the arts by which she captiued
A thousand souls, of young and lusty knights;
These were the arms where with love conquered
Their feeble hearts, subdew'd in wanton fights:
What wonder if Achilles were misled,
Or great Alcides at their Ladies sights,
Since these true champions of the Lord above
Were thralles to beauty, yeelden slaves to love.
The fifth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Gernando scorns Rinaldo should aspire
To rule that charge, for which he seeks and strives,
And slanders him so far, that in his ire
The wronged knight his foe of life depriues:
Far from the camp the slayer does retire,
Nor lets himself he bound in chains or gives:
Armide departs content, and from the seas
Godfrey hears news, which him and his displeas.
1
WHile thus Armida false the knights misled
In wandering errors of deceitful love,
And thought, besides the champions promised,
The other Lordings in her aid to move,
In Godfreys thought a strong contention bred
Who fittest were this hazard great to prove;
For all the worthies of th'aduentrers band
Were like in birth, in power, in strength of hand.
2
But first the Prince (by grave advise) decreed
They should some knight choose (at their own election)
That in his charge Lord Dudon might succeed,
And of that glorious troop should take protection;
So none should grieve, displeased with the deed,
Nor blame the causer of their new subjection:
Besides Godfredo showed by this device,
How much he held that regiment in price.
3
He called the worthies than, and spoke them so,
Lordings, you know I yielded to your will,
And gave you license with this Dame to go,
To win her kingdom, and that tyrant kill:
But now again I let you further knoe,
In following her it may betide you ill;
Refrain therefore, and change this forward thought,
For death unsent for, danger comes unsought.
4
But if to shun these perils, sought so far,
May seem disgraceful to the place you hold;
If grave advise and prudent counsel, ar
Esteemed detractors from your courage bold;
Then know, I none against his will debar,
Nor what I granted erst I now withhold;
But be mine empire (as it ought of right)
Sweet, easy, pleasant, gentle, meek and light.
5
Go than or tarry, each as likes him best,
Free power I grant you on this enterprise;
But first in Dudons place (now laid in chest)
Choose you some other captain, stout and wise:
Then ten appoint among the worthiest,
But let no more attempt this hard emprise,
In this my will content you that I have,
For power constrained is but a glorious slave.
6
Thus Godfrey said, and thus his brother spoke,
And answered for himself and all his Pears;
My Lord, as well it fitteth thee to make
These wise delays, and cast these doubts and fears:
So it is our part at first to undertake,
Courage and haste beseemes our might and years;
And this proceeding with so grave advise,
Wisdom, in you; in us, were cowardice.
7
Since than the feat is easy, danger none,
All set in battle and in hardy fight,
Do thou permit the chosen ten to gone
And aid the damsel: thus devised the knight,
To make men think the sun of honor shone,
There where the lamp of Cupid gave the light:
The rest perceive his guile, and it approve,
And call that knighthood, which was childish love.
8
But loving Eustace, that with jealous eye
Beheld the worth of Sophias noble child,
And his fair shape did secretly envy,
Beside the virtues in his breast compilde,
(And for in love he would no company)
He stored his mouth with speeches smoothly filde,
Drawing his rival to attend his word,
Thus with fair slight he laid the knight abord.
9
Of great Bertoldo thou far greater hair,
Thou star of knighthood, flower of chivalry,
Tell me, who now shall lead this squadron fair,
Since our late guide in marble cold does lie?
I, that with famous Dudon might compaire
In all, but years, hoare locks, and gravity,
To whom should I, Duke Godfreys brother, yield,
Unless to thee, the Christian armies sheeld?
10
Thee (whom high birth makes equal with the best)
Thine acts prefer both me and all beforne,
Nor that in fight thou both surpass the rest
And Godfreys worthy self, I hold in scorn,
Thee to obey then am I only pressed,
Before these worthies be thine eagle borne,
This honor happily thou esteemest light,
Whose day of glory never yet found night.
11
Yet may thou further (by this means) display
The spreading wings of thy immortal fame,
I will procure it, if thou say not nay,
And all their wills to thine election frame:
But for I scantly am resolved which way
To bend my force, or where employ the same,
Leave me (I pray) at my discretion, free
To help Armida, or serve here with thee.
12
This last request (for love is evil to hide)
Empurpled both his cheeks with scarlet read,
Rinaldo soon his passions had descride,
And gently smiling turned aside his head,
And, for weak Cupid was too feeble eide
To strike him sure, the fire in him was dead;
So that of riualls was he naught afraid,
Nor cared he for the journey or the maid:
13
But in his noble thought reuolu'd he often
Dudons high prowess, death and burial,
And how Argantes bore his plumes aloft,
Praising his fortune for that worthies fall;
Besides, the knights sweet words and praises soft
To his due honor did him fitly call,
And made his heart rejoice, for well he knew
(Though much he praised him) all his words were true.
14
Degrees (quoth he) of honors hie to hold,
I would them first deserve, and then desire;
And were my valor such as you have told,
Would I for that to higher place aspire:
But if to honors due raise me you would,
I will not of my works refuse the hire;
And much it glads me, that my power and might
I praised is by such a valiant knight.
15
I neither seek it, nor refuse the place,
Which if I get, the praise and thanks be thine.
Eustace (this spoken) hied thence apace
To know which way his fellows hearts incline:
But Prince Gernando coueted the place,
Whom though Armida sought to undermine,
Against him yet vain did all her engines prove,
His pride was such, there was no place for love.
16
Gernando was the king of Norwaies son,
That many a realm and region had to guide,
And for his elders lands and crowns had won,
His heart was puffed up with endless pride:
The other boasts more what himself had done
Than all his ancestors great acts beside;
Yet his forefathers old before him wear
Famous in war and peace, five hundredth year.
17
This barbarous Prince, who only vainly thought
That bliss in wealth and kingly power does lie,
And in respect esteemed all virtue naught,
Unless it were adorned with titles hie,
Could not endure, that to the place he sought
A simple knight should dare to prease so nie;
And in his breast so boiled fell despite,
That ire and wrath exiled reason quite.
18
The hidden devil, that lies in close awate
To win the fort of unbelieving man,
Found entry there, where ire undid the gate,
And in his bosom unperceived ran,
It filled his heart with malice, strife and hate,
It made him rage, blaspheme, swear, curse and ban,
Invisible it still attends him near,
And thus each minute whisp'reth in his ear.
19
What, shall Rinaldo match thee? dares he tell
Those idle names of his vain pedigree?
Then let him say (if thee he would excel)
What lands, what realms his tributaries be:
If his forefathers in the graves that dwell,
Were honored like thine that live, let see,
Oh how dares one so mean aspire so hie,
Borne in that servile country Italy?
20
Now, if he win, or if he lose the day,
Yet is his praise and glory hence derived,
For that the world will (to his credit) say,
Lo, this is he that with Gernando striued.
The charge some-deale thee happily honor may,
That noble Dudon had while here he lived;
But laid on him, he would the office shame,
Let it suffice, he durst desire the same.
21
If when this breath from man's frail body flies,
The soul take keep, or know the things done hear,
Oh! how looks Dudon from the glorious skies?
What wrath: what anger in his face appear?
On this proud yongling while he bends his eyes,
Marking how high he does his feathers rear?
Seeing his rash attempt, how soon he dare
(Though but a boy) with his great worth compare.
22
He dares not only, but he strives and proves,
Where chastisement were fit, there winnes he praise:
One counsels him, his speech, him forward moves;
Another fool approves all he says:
If Godfrey favor him more than behoues,
Why then he wrongeth thee an hundredth ways;
Nor let thy state so far disgraced be,
But what thou art and can, let Godfrey see.
23
With such false words the kindled fire began
To every vain his pois'ned heat to reach,
It swelled his scornful heart, and forth it ran
At this proud looks, and to audacious speech;
All that he thought blame-worthie in the man,
To his disgrace, that would he each-where preach;
He termed him proud and vain, his worth in fight
He called foole-hardice, rashness, madness, right.
24
All that in him was rare or excellent,
All that was good, all that was princely found,
With such sharp words as malice could invent,
He blamed (such power has wicked tongue to wound)
The youth (for every where those rumors went)
Of these reproaches heard sometimes the sound;
Nor did for that his tongue the fault amend,
Until it brought him to his woeful end.
25
The cursed feend that set his tongue at large,
Still bred more fancies in his idle brain,
His heart with slanders new did ouercharge,
And soothed him still in his angry vain:
Amid the camp a place was broad and large,
Where one fair regiment might easly train;
And there, in Tilt and harmless Turnament
Their days of rest, the youths and gallants spent.
26
There (as his fortune would it should betide)
Amid the prease Gernando began retire,
To vomit out his venom vnespide,
Wherewith foul envy did his heart inspire.
Rinaldo heard him as he stood beside,
And (as he could not bridle wrath and ire)
Thou lie, cride he loud, and with that word
About his head he tossed his flaming sword.
27
Thunder his voice, and lightning seemed his brand,
So fell his look and furious was his cheer,
Gernando trembled, for he saw at hand
Pale death, and neither help nor comfort near;
Yet for the soldiers all to witness stand,
He made proud sign as though he naught did fear,
But bravely drew his little helping blade,
And valiant show of strong resistance made.
28
With that a thousand blades of burnisht steel
Glistred on heaps, like flames of fire in sight,
Hundreds, that knew not yet the quarrel we will,
Ran thither, some to gaze and some to fight:
The empty air a sound confused did feel
Of murmurs low and outcries loud on hight,
Like rolling waves, and Boreas angry blasts,
When roaring seas against the rocks he casts.
29
But not for this the wronged warrior staid
His just displeasure, and incensed ire,
He cared not what the vulgar did or said,
To vengeance did his courage fierce aspire:
Among the thickest weapons way he maid,
His thundering sword made all on heaps retire,
So that of nere a thousand staid not one,
But prince Gernando bore the brunt alone.
30
His hand (too quick to execute his wrath)
Performed all, as pleased his eye and heart,
At head and breast often times he strooken has,
Now at the right, now at the other part:
On every side thus did he harm and scath,
And often beguiled his sight with nimble art,
That no defense the Prince of wounds acquits,
Where least he thinks, or fears, there most he hits.
31
Nor ceased he, till in Gernandos breast
He sheathed once or twice his furious blade;
Down fell the hapless Prince with death oppressed,
A double way to his weak soul was made,
His bloody sword the victor wipte and dressed:
Nor longer by the slaughtred body staide,
But sped him thence, and soon appeased has
His hate, his ire, his rancour and his wrath.
32
Called by the tumult, Godfrey drew him near,
And there beheld a sad and rufull sight,
The signs of death upon his face appear,
With dust and blood his locks were loathly dight,
Sighs and complaints on each side might he hear,
Made for the sudden death of that great knight:
Amazed, he asked who durst and did so much;
For yet he knew not whom the fault would tuch.
33
Arnoldo, minion of the Prince thus slain,
Augments the fault in telling it, and says,
This Prince is murdered, for a quarrel vain,
By young Rinaldo, in his desperate wraith,
And with that sword, that should Christ's law maintain,
One of Christ's champions bold he killed haith,
And this he did, in such a place and hour,
As if he scorned your rule, despised your power.
34
And further ads, that he deserved death
By law, and law should be inuiolate,
That none offense could greater be uneath,
And yet the place the fault did aggrauate:
If he escapte, that mischief would take breath,
And flourish bold, in spite of rule and state;
And that Gernandos friends would venge the wrong,
Although to justice that should first belong.
35
And by that means, should discord, hate and strife
Raise mutinies, and what thereof ensu'th:
Lastly he praised the dead, and still had rife
All words he thought could vengeance move or ruth.
Against him Taucred argued for life,
With honest reasons to excuse the yuth:
The Duke heard all, but with such sober cheer,
As banished hope, and still increased fear.
36
Grave Prince (quoth Tancred) set before thine eyes
Rinaldos worth and courage, what it is,
How much our hope of conquest in him lies;
Regard that princely house and race of his;
He that corrects every fault he spies,
And judges all alike, does all amiss;
For faults (you know) are greater thought or less,
As is the persons self, that does transgress.
37
Godfredo answered him, if high and low
Of sovereign power alike should feel the stroke,
Than Tancred ill you counsel us (I trow)
If Lords should know no law as erst you spoke,
How vile and base our empire were you know,
If none but slaves and peasants bear the yoke;
Weak is the scepter and the power is small,
That such prouisoes brings annexed withal.
38
But mine was freely given ere it was sought,
Nor that it lesned be, I now consent;
Right well know I both when and where I ought
To give condign reward, and punishment,
Since you are all in like subjection brought,
Both high and low obey, and be content.
This heard, Tancredie wisely staid his words,
Such weight the sayings have of kings and Lords.
39
Old Raymond praised his speech (for old men think
They ever wisest seem when most severe)
It Is best (quoth he) to make these great ones shrink,
The people love him whom the nobles fear:
There must the rule to all disorders sink,
Where pardons, more than punishment, appear;
For feeble is each kingdom, frail and weak,
Unless his basis be this fear I speak.
40
These words Tancredie heard and pondred well,
And by them wist how Godfreys thoughts were bent,
Nor list he longer with these old men dwell,
But turned his horse and to Rinaldo went,
Who when his noble foe death wounded fell,
Withdrew him softly to his gorgeous tent;
There Tancred found him, and at large declared
The words and speeches sharp, which late you hard.
41
And said, although I wot the outward show
Is not true witness of the secret thought,
For that some men so subtle are I trow,
That what they purpose most, appears naught;
Yet dare I say Godfredo means I know,
(Such knowledge has his looks and speeches wrought)
You shall first prisner be, and then be tried,
As he shall deem it good, and law provide.
42
With that a bitter smile well might you see
Ridaldo cast, with scorn and hie disdain,
Let them in fetters plead their cause (quoth he)
That are base peasants, borne of servile strain,
I was free borne, I live, and will die free,
Before these feet be fettred in a chain:
These hands were made to shake sharp spears and swords,
Not to be tide in gives and twisted cords.
43
If my good service reap this recompense,
To be clapped up in close and secret mew,
And as a thief be after dragd from thence,
To suffer punishment, as law finds dew;
Let Godfrey come or send, I will not hence,
Until we know who shall this bargain rue,
That of our tragedy the late done fact,
May be the first, and this the second, act.
44
Give me mine arms he cride; his squire them brings,
And clad his head and breast in iron strong,
About his neck his silver shield he flings,
Down by his side a cutting sword there hong;
Among this earthes brave Lords, and mighty kings,
Was none so stout, so fierce, so fair, so young,
God Mars he seemed descending from his sphere,
Or one whose looks could make great Mars to fear.
45
Tancredie labored with some pleasing speech
His spirits fierce and courage to appease:
Young Prince, thy valor (thus he began to preach)
Can chastise all that do thee wrong, at ease,
I know your virtue can your enmies teach,
That you can venge you when and where you please:
But God forbid this day you lift your arm,
To do this camp, and us your friends, such harm.
46
Tell me what will you do? why would you stain
Your noble hands in our vnguiltie blood?
By wounding Christians will you again
Pearse Christ, whose parts they are and members good?
Will you destroy us for your glory vain,
Unstaid as rolling waves in Ocean flood?
Far be it from you so to prove your strength,
And let your zeal appease your rage at length.
47
For Gods love stay your heat, and just displeasure,
Appease your wrath, your courage fierce assuage,
Patience, a praise; forbearance, is a treasure;
Suffrance, an angellis; a monster, rage:
At least your actions by ensample measure,
And think how I in mine unbridled age
Was wronged, yet I nould reuengement take
On all this camp, for one offenders sake.
48
Cilicia conquered I, as all men wot,
And there the glorious cross on hie I reared,
But Baldwine came, and what I nobly got
Bereft me falsely, when I least him feared;
He seemed my friend, and I discovered not
His secret couetise which since appeered;
Yet strive I not to get mine own by fight,
Or civil war, although perchance I might.
49
If than you scorn to be in prison pent,
If bonds, as hie disgrace, your hands refuse;
Or if your thoughts still to maintain are bent
Your liberty, as men of honor use:
To Antioch what if forthwith you went?
And leave me here your absence to excuse,
There with Prince Boemond live in ease and peace,
Until this storm of Godfreys anger cease.
50
For soon, if forces come from Egypt land,
Or other nations that us here confine,
Godfrey will beaten be with his own wand,
And feel he wants that valor great of thine,
Our camp may seem an arm without a hand,
Amid our troops unless thy eagle shine:
With that came Guelpho and those words approved,
And praid him go, if him he feared or loved.
51
Their speeches soften much the warriors heart,
And make his wilful thoughts at last relent,
So that he yields, and says he will depart,
And leave the Christian camp incontinent.
His friends, whose love did never shrink or start,
Profred their aid, what way so ere he went:
He thankt them all, but left them all, besides
Two bold and trusty squires, and so he rides.
52
He rides, reuoluing in his noble spright
Such hawtie thoughts, as fill the glorious mind;
On hard adventures was his whole delight,
And now to wondrous acts his will inclinde;
Alone against the Pagans would he fight,
And kill their kings from Egypt unto Inde,
From Cinthias hills, and Nilus unknown spring,
He would fetch praise and glorious conquest bring.
53
But Guelpho (when the Prince his leave had take,
And now had spurred his courser on his way)
No longer tarriance with the rest would make,
But hastes to find Godfre do, if he may:
Who seeing him approaching, forthwith spoke,
Guelpho (quoth he) for thee I only stay,
For thee I sent my heralds all about,
In every tent to seek and find thee out.
54
This said, he softly drew the knight aside
Where none might hear, and then bespake him thus:
How chances it thy nephews rage and pride,
Makes him so far forget himself and us?
Hardly could I believe what is betide,
A murder done for cause so frivolous,
How I have loved him, thou and all can tell;
But Godfrey loved him, but whilst he did well.
55
I must provide that every one have right,
That all be heard, each cause be well discust,
As far from partial love, as free from spite,
I hear complaints, yet naught but proves I trust:
Now if Rinaldo weigh our rule so light,
And have the sacred lore of war so brust,
Take you the charge that he before us come,
To clear himself and hear our upright dome.
56
But let him come withouten bond or chain,
For still my thoughts to do him grace are framed:
But if our power he happily shall disdain,
(As well I know his courage yet untamed)
To bring him by persuasion take some pain:
Else, if I prove severe, both you be blamed,
That force my gentle nature (against my thought)
To rigor, least our laws return to naught.
57
Lord Guelpho answered thus: what heart can bear
Such slanders false, devised by hate and spite?
Or with staid patience, reproaches hear,
And not revenge by battle and by fight?
The Norway Prince has bought his folly dear,
But who with words could stay the angry knight?
A fool is he that comes to preach or prate,
When men with swords their right and wrong debate.
58
And where you wish he should himself submit
To hear the censure of your upright laws;
Alas, that cannot be, for he is flit
Out of this camp, withouten stay or pause.
There take my gage, behold I offer it
To him that first accused him in this cause,
Or any else that dare, and will maintain
That for his pride the Prince was justly slain.
59
I say with reason Lord Gernandos pride
He has abated, if he have offended
Against your commands, who are his Lord and guide,
Oh pardon him, that fault shall be amended.
If he be gone (quoth Godfrey) let him ride
And braule elsewhere, here let all strife be ended:
And you Lord Guelpho, for your nephews sake,
Breed us no new, nor quarrels old awake.
60
This while, the fair and false Armida striued
To get her promised aid, in sure possession,
The day to end, with endless plaint, she driued;
Wit, beauty, craft for her made intercession:
But when the earth was once of light deprived,
And westren seas felt Titans hot impression,
Twixt two old knights, and matrons twain she went,
Where pitched was her fair and curious tent.
61
But this false Queen of craft and sly invention,
(Whose looks, loves arrows were; whose eyes, his quiuers;
Whose beauty matchless, free from reprehension,
(A wonder left by heaven to after livers)
Among the Christian Lords had bred contention,
Who first should quench his flames in Cupids rivers,
With all her weapons and her darts rehearsed,
Had not Godfredos constant bosom persed.
62
To change his modest thought the dame procures,
And profreth heaps of loves entising treasure:
But as the faulcon newly gorged endures
Her keeper lure her often, but comes at leisure;
So he, whom fullness of delight assures,
What long repentance comes of loves short pleasure,
Her crafts, her arts, her self and all despises,
So base affections fall, when virtue rises.
63
And not one foot his steadfast foot was moved
Out of that heavenly path, wherein he paced,
Yet thousand wiles, and thousand ways, she proved,
To have that castle fair of goodness raced:
She used those looks and smiles, that most behooved
To melt the frost which his hard heart embraced,
And against his breast a thousand shot she ventred,
Yet was the fort so strong it was not entered.
64
The Dame who thought that one blinke of her eye,
Could make the chastest heart feel loves sweet pain,
Oh, how her pride abated was hereby!
When all her sleights were void, her crafts were vain,
Some other where she would her forces try,
Where at more ease she might more vantage gain,
As tired soldiers whom some fort keeps out,
Thence raise their siege, and spoil the towns about.
65
But yet always the wily witch could find,
Could not Tancredres heart to loue-ward move,
His sails were filled with another wind,
He list no blast of new affection prove;
For, as one poison does exclude by kind
Another force, so love excludes love:
These two alone nor more, nor less the Dame
Could win, the rest all burnt in her sweet flame.
66
The Princess (though her purpose would not frame,
As late she hoped, and as still she would)
Yet, for the Lords and knights of greatest name
Became her pray, as erst you heard it told;
She thought, ere truth-reuealing time, or fame
Bewraid her act, to lead them to some hold,
Where chains and bands she meant to make them prove,
Composed by Vulcan, not by gentle love.
67
The time prefixed at length was come and past,
Which Godfrey had set down, to lend her aid,
When at his feet her self to earth she cast,
The hour is come (my Lord) she humbly said;
And if the tyrant happily hear at last,
His banished niece has your assistance praid,
He will in arms (to save his kingdom) rise,
So shall we harder make this enterprise.
68
Before report can bring the tyrant news,
Or his espials certify their king,
O let thy goodness these few champions choose,
That to her kingdom should thy handmaid bring;
Who, except heaven to aid the right refuse,
Recover shall her crown, from whence shall spring
Thy profit; for betide thee peace or war,
Thine all her cities, all her subjects ar.
69
The captain sage the damsel fair assured,
His word was past, and should not be recanted,
And she with sweet and humble grace endured
To let him point those ten, which late he granted:
But to be one, each one sought and procured,
No suit, entreatie, intercession wanted;
Their envy each at others love exceeded,
And all importunate made, more than needed.
70
She (that well saw the secret of their hearts)
And knew how best to warm them in their blood,
Against them threw the cursed poisoned darts
Of jealousy, and grief at others good,
For love she wist was weak without those arts,
And slow; for jealousy, is Cupids food;
For the swift steed runs not so fast alone,
As when some strain, some strive him to outgone.
71
Her words in such alluring sort she framed,
Her looks entising, and her wowing smiles,
That every one his fellows favors blamed,
That of their mistress he received erewhiles:
This foolish crew of lovers, vnashamed,
Mad with the poison of her secret wiles,
Ran forward still, in this disordred sort,
Nor could Godfredoes bridle rain them short.
72
He that would satisfy each good desire
(Withouten partial love) of every knight,
Although he sweld with shame, with grief and ire,
To see these follies, and these fashions light;
Yet since by no advice they would retire,
Another way he sought, to set them right:
Write all your names (quoth he) and see whom chance
Of lot, to this exploit will first advance.
73
Their names were writ, and in a helmet shaken,
While each did fortunes grace and aid implore;
At last they drew them, and the foremost taken
The Earl of Pembrooke was, Artimidore,
Doubtless the County thought his bread well baken;
Next Gerrard followed, then with tresses hoar
Old Wenceslaus, that felt Cupids rage
Now in his doting, and his dying age.
74
Oh how contentment in their foreheads shined!
Their looks with joy; thoughts sweld with secret pleasure,
These three it seemed good success defined
To make the Lords of love, and beauties treasure:
Their doubtful fellows at their hap repined,
And with small patience wait fortunes leisure,
Upon his lips that red the scrowles attending,
As if their lives were on his words depending.
75
Guascar the fourth, Ridolpho him succeedes,
Then Vldericke whom love list so advance,
Lord William of Ronciglion next he reeds,
Then Eberard, and Henry borne in France,
Rambaldo last, whom wicked lust so leedes,
That he forsook his Savior with mischance;
This wretch the tenth was, who was thus deluded,
The rest to their huge grief were all excluded.
76
Overcome with envy, wrath and jealousy,
The rest blind fortune curse, and all her laws,
And mad with love, yet out on love they cry,
That in his kingdom let her judge their cause:
And for man's mind is such, that often we try
Things most forbidden, without stay or pause,
In spite of fortune, purposed many a knight,
To follow fair Armida when 'twas night.
77
To follow her, by night or else by day,
And in her quarrel venture life and lim:
With sighs and tears she began them softly pray
To keep that promise, when the skies were dim,
To this and that knight, did she plain, and say
What grief she felt to part withouten him:
Meane-while the ten had dond their armor best,
And taken leave of Godfrey and the rest.
78
The Duke advised them every one apart,
How light, how trustlesse was the Pagans faith,
And told what policy, what wit, what art,
Auoides deceit, which heedlesse men betrai'th;
His speeches pearse their ear, but not their heart,
Love calls it folly, what so wisdom says:
Thus warned he leaves them to their wanton guide,
Who parts that night; such haste had she to ride.
79
The conqueresse departs, and with her led
These prisoners, whom love would captive keep,
The hearts of those she left behind her, bled,
With point of sorrows arrow pearsed deep.
But when the night her drousie mantle spread,
And filled the earth with silence, shade and sleep,
In secret sort then each forsook his tent,
And as blind Cupid led them, blind they went.
80
Eustatio first, who scantly could forbear,
Till friendly night might hide his haste and shame,
He road in post, and let his beast him bear
As his blind fancy would his journey frame,
All night he wandered and he wist not wheare;
But with the morning he espide the Dame,
That with her guard up from a village rode,
Where she and they that night had made abode.
81
Thither he gallopt fast, and drawing nere
Rambaldo knew the knight, and lowdly cride,
Whence comes young Eustace, and what seeks he here?
I come (quoth he) to serve the Queen Armide,
If she accept me, would we all were there
Where my good will and faith might best be tried.
Who (quoth the other) chooses thee to prove
This hie exploit of hers? he answered, love.
82
Love has Eustatio chosen, fortune thee,
In thy conceit which is the best election?
Nay then these shifts are vain, replied he,
These titles false serve thee for no protection,
Thou can not here for this admitted be
Our fellow servant, in this sweet subjection.
And who (quoth Eustace angry) dares deny
My fellowship? Rambaldo answered, I.
83
And with that word his cutting sword he drew,
That glistred bright and sparkled flaming fire,
Upon his foe the other champion flew,
With equal courage and with equal ire.
The gentle Princess (who the danger knew)
Between them stepped and prayed them both retire.
Rambald (quoth she) why should you grudge or plain,
If I a champion, you an helper gain?
84
If me you love, why wish you me deprived
(In so great need) of such a puissant knight?
But welcome Eustace, in good time arrived,
Defender of my state, my life, my right,
I wish my hapless self no longer lived,
When I esteem such good assistance light:
Thus talked they on and trauail'd on their way,
Their fellowship increasing every day.
85
From every side they come, yet wist there none
Of others coming or of others mind,
She welcomes all, and tells every one,
What joy her thoughts in his arrival find.
But when Duke Godfrey wist his knights were gone,
Within his breast his wiser soul deuinde
Some hard mishap upon his friends should light,
For which he sighed all day, and wept all night.
86
A messenger (while thus he mused) drew near,
All soiled with dust and sweat, quite out of breath,
It seemed the man did heavy tidings bear,
Upon his looks sat news of loss and death:
My Lord (quoth he) so many ships appear
At sea, that Neptune bears the load uneath,
From Egypt come they all, this lets thee weete
William Lord Amrall of the Genoa fleet.
87
Besides, a conuoy (coming from the shore
With vittaile for this noble camp of thine)
Surprised was, and lost is all that store,
Mules, horses, camels laden, corn and wine,
Thy servants fought till they could fight no more;
For all were slain or captives made in fine:
The Arabian outlawes them assailed by night,
When least they feared, and least they looked for fight.
88
Their frantic boldness does presume so far,
That many Christians have they falsely slain,
And like a raging flood they sparsed ar,
And ouerflow each country, field and plain;
Send therefore some strong troops of men of war,
To force them hence, and drive them home again,
And keep the ways between these tents of thine,
And those broad seas, the seas of Palestine.
89
From mouth to mouth the heavy rumor spread
Of these misfortunes, which dispersed wide
Among the soldiers, great amasement bred,
Famine they doubt, and new come foes beside:
The Duke (that saw their woonted courage fled,
And in the place thereof weak fear espide)
With merry looks these cheerful words he spoke,
To make them heart again and courage take.
90
You champions bold, with me that escaped have
So many dangers, and such hard assaies,
Whom still your God did keep, defend and save,
In all your battles, combats, fights and fraies,
You that subdew'd the Turks and Persians brave,
That thirst and hunger held in scorn always,
And vanquished hills, and seas, with heat and cold,
Shall vain reports appall your courage bold?
91
That Lord, who helped you out at every need,
When ought befell this glorious camp amiss,
Shall fortune all your actions well to speed,
On whom his mercy large extended is;
Tofore his tomb, when conquering hands you spreed,
With what delight will you remember this?
Be strong therefore, and keep your valors hie
To honor, conquest, fame and victory.
92
Their hope's half dead and courage well-nie lost,
Revived, with these brave speeches of their guide;
But in his breast a thousand cares he tossed,
Although his sorrows he could wisely hide;
He studied how to feed that mighty host,
In so great scarceness; and what force provide
He should, against The Egyptian warriors sly,
And how subdue those thieves of Arabie.
The sixth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Argantes calls the Christians out to just:
Otho not chosen does his strength assay,
But from his saddle tumbleth in the dust,
And captive to the town is sent away:
Tancred begins new fight, and when both trust
To win the praise and palm, night ends the fray:
Erminia hopes to cure her wounded knight,
And from the city armed rides by night.
1
But better hopes had them recomforted
That lay besieged in the sacred town;
With new supply late were they vittailed,
When night obscured the earth with shadows brown,
Their arms and engines on the walls they spread,
Their slings to cast, and stones to tumble down;
And all that side which to the northward lies,
High rampires and strong bulwarks fortifies.
2
Their wary king commands now here now there,
To build this tower, to make that bulwark strong,
Whither the sun, the moon, or stars appear,
To give them light, to work no time comes wrong:
In every street new weapons forged were,
By cunning smithes, sweating with labor long;
While thus the careful Prince provision maid,
To him Argantes came, and boasting said.
3
How long shall we (like prisoners in chains)
Captiued lie enclosed within this wall?
I see your workmen taking endless pains
To make new weapons, for no use at all;
Meane-while these westren thieves destroy the plains,
Your towns are burnt, your forts and castles fall,
Yet none of us dares at these gates out-peepe,
Or sound one trumpet shrill to break their sleep.
4
Their time in feasting and good cheer they spend,
Nor dare we once their bankets sweet molest,
The days and nights they bring likewise to end,
In peace, assurance, quiet, ease and rest:
But we must yield, whom hunger soon will shend,
And make for peace (to save our lives) request,
Else (if The Egyptian army stay too long)
Like cowards die within this fortress strong.
5
Yet never shall my courage great consent
So vile a death should end my noble days,
Nor on mine arms, within these walls ipent,
To morrowes sun shall spread his timely rays:
Let sacred heavens dispose (as they are bent)
Of this frail life, yet not withouten praise
Of valor, prowess, might, Argantes shall
Inglorious die, or unrevenged fall.
6
But if the roots of wonted chivalry
Be not quite dead, your princely breast within,
Devise not how with fame and praise to die,
But how to live, to conquer and to win;
Let us together at these gates out-flie,
And skirmish bold, and bloody fight begin;
For when last need to desperation drives,
Who dares most, he wisest counsel gives.
7
But if in field your wisdom dare not venture
To hazard all your troops to doubtful fight,
Then bind your self to Godfrey by endenter,
To end your quarrels, by one single knight:
And, for the Christian this accord shall enter
With better will, say such you know your right,
That he the weapons, place and time, shall choose,
And let him for his best, that vantage use.
8
For though your foe had hands, like Hector strong,
With heart vnfear'd, and courage stern and stout,
Yet no misfortune can your justice wrong,
And what that wants, shall this arm help out,
In spite of fate shall this right hand ere long,
Return victorious: if hereof you dout,
Take it for pledge, wherein if trust you have,
It shall your self defend and kingdom save.
9
Bold youth (the tyrant thus began to speak)
Although I withered seem with age and years,
Yet are not these old arms so faint and weak,
Nor this hoare head so full of doubts and fears;
But when as death this vital thread shall break,
He shall my courage hear, my death who hears:
And Aladine that lived a king and knight,
To his fair morn will have an evening bright.
10
But that (which yet I would have further blaised)
To thee in secret shall be told and spoken,
Great Soliman of Nice (so far ipraised,
To be revenged, for his scepter broken)
The men of arms of Arabie has raised,
From Inde to Afrike, and (when we give token)
Attends the favor of the friendly night
To vittaile us, and with our foes to fight.
11
Now though Godfredo hold by warlike feat
Some castles poor, and fortes in vile oppression,
Care not for that; for still our princely seat,
This stately town, we keep in our possession:
But thou appease and calm that courage great,
Which in thy bosom makes so hot impression;
And stay fit time, which will betide ere long,
T'encrease thy glory, and revenge our wrong.
12
The Saracine at this was inly spited,
Who Solimans great worth had long envied,
To hear him praised thus he naught delited,
Nor that the king upon his aid relied:
Within your power (sir king) he says, united
Are peace and war, nor shall that be denied;
But for the Turk and his Arabian band,
He lost his own, shall he defend your land?
13
Perchance he comes some heaunly messengare,
Sent down to set the Pagan people free,
Then let Argantes for himself take care:
This sword (I trust) shall well safeconduct me:
But while you rest and all your forces spare,
That I go forth to war at least agree,
Though not your champion, yet a private knight,
I will some Christian prove in single fight.
14
The king replied, though thy force and might
Should be reserved, to better time and use;
Yet that thou challenge some renowned knight,
Among the Christians bold I not refuse.
The warrior breathing out desire of fight,
An herald called, and said, go tell these news
To Godfreys self, and to the westren Lords,
And in their hearings boldly say these words.
15
Say that a knight (who holds in great disdain
To be thus closed up in secretmew)
Will with his sword in open field maintain,
(If any dare deny his words for true)
That no devotion (as they falsely feign)
Has moved the French these countries to subdew;
But vile ambition, and prides hateful vice,
Desire of rule and spoil, and couetice.
16
And that to fight I am not only pressed
With one or two that dare defend the cause,
But come the fourth or fifth, come all the rest,
Come all that will, and all that weapon draws,
Let him that yields obey the victors hest,
As wills the lore of mighty Mars his laws:
This was the challenge that fierce Pagan sent,
The herald dond his coat of arms, and went.
17
And when the man before the presence came
Of princely Godfrey, and his captains bold;
My Lord (quoth he) may I withouten blame
Before your grace, my message brave unfold?
Thou may, he answered, we approve the same,
Withouten fear, be thine embassage told.
Then (quoth the herald) shall your highness see,
If this embassage sharp or pleasing be.
18
The challenge began he then at large expose,
With mighty threats, high terms and glorious words,
On every side an angry murmur rose,
To wrath so moved were the knights and Lords.
Then Godfrey spoke and said, the man has chose
An hard exploit, but when he feels our swords,
I trust we shall so fair entreat the knight,
As to excuse the fourth or fifth of fight.
19
But let him come and prove, the field I grant,
Nor wrong nor treason let him doubt or fear,
Some here shall pay him for his glorious vant,
Without or guile or vantage, that I swear.
The herald turned when he had ended scant,
And hasted back the way he came whileare,
Nor staid he ought, nor once foreslow'd his pace,
Till he bespake Argantes face to face.
20
Arm you, my Lord, he said, your bold defies
By your brave foes accepted boldly been,
This combat neither high nor low denies,
Ten thousand wish to meet you on the green;
A thousand frowned with angry flaming eyes,
And shakt for rage their swords and weapons keen;
The field is safely granted by their guide,
This said, the champion for his armor cride.
21
While he was armed, his heart for ire nie brake,
So earnd his courage hot his foe to find:
The king, to fair Clorinda present, spoke;
If he go forth, remain not you behind,
But of our soldiers best a thousand take,
To guard his person and your own assignde;
Yet let him meet alone the Christian knight,
And stand your self aloof, while they two fight.
22
Thus spoke the king, and soon without abode
The troop went forth in shining armor clad,
Before the rest the Pagan champion road,
His wonted arms and ensigns all he had:
A goodly plain displayed wide and broad,
Between the city and the camp was sprad,
A place like that wherein proud Rome beheild
He forward young men menage spear and shield.
23
There all alone Argantes took his stand,
Defying Christ, and all his servants true,
In stature, stomach, and in strength of hand,
In pride, presumption, and in dreadful show,
Encelade like, on the Phlegrean strand,
Or that huge giant Ishaies infant flew;
But his fierce semblant they esteemed light,
For most not knew, or else not seared, his might.
24
As yet not one had Godfrey singled out
To undertake this hardy enterpries,
But on prince Tancred saw he all the rout
Had fixed their wishes, and had cast their eyes,
On him he spide them gazing round about,
As though their honor on his prowess lies,
And now they whispred louder what they meant,
Which Godfrey heard and saw, and was content.
25
The rest gave place; for every one descride
To whom their chieftaines will did most incline,
Tancred (quoth he) I pray thee calm the pride,
Abate the rage, of yonder Sarracine:
No longer would the chosen champion bide,
His face with joy, his eyes with gladness shine,
His helm he took, and ready steed bestroad,
And guarded with his trusty friends, forth road.
26
But scantly had he spurred his courser swift
Near to that plain, where proud Argantes staid,
When unawares his eyes he chanst to lift,
And on the hill beheld the warlike maid,
As white as snow upon the Alpine clift
The virgin shone, in silver arms arraid,
Her ventall up so hie, that he descride
Her goodly visage, and her beauties pride.
27
He saw not where the Pagan stood, and stared,
As if with looks he would his foeman kill,
But full of other thoughts he forward fared,
And sent his looks before him up the hill,
His gesture such his troubled soul declared,
At last as marble rock he stands still,
Stone-cold, without; within, burnt with loves flame,
And quite forgot himself, and why he came.
28
The challenger, that yet saw none appear
That made or sign or show he came to just,
How long (cride he) shall I attend you hear?
Dares none come forth? dares none his fortune trust?
The other stood amazed, love stopped his ear,
He thinks on Cupid, think of Mars who lust;
But forth start Otho bold, and took the field,
A gentle knight, whom God from danger shield.
29
This youth was one of those, who late desired
With that vainglorious boaster to have fought,
But Tancred chosen, he and all retired:
Yet to the field the valiant Prince they brought,
Now when his slacknes he a while admired,
And saw elsewhere employed was his thought,
Nor that to just (though chosen) once he profred,
He boldly took that fit occasion offered.
30
No tiger, panther, spotted leopard,
Runs half so swift, the forests wild among,
As this young champion hasted thitherward,
Where he attending saw the Pagan strong:
Tancredie started with the noise he hard,
As wakt from sleep, where he had dreamed long,
Oh stay he cride, to me belongs this war,
But cride too late, Otho was gone too far.
31
Then full of fury, anger and despite,
He staid his horse, and waxed red for shame,
The fight was his, but now disgraced quite
Himself he thought, another played his game;
Meane-while the Sarracine did hugely smite
On Othoes helm, who to requite the same,
His foe quite through his seu'n-fold targe did bear,
And in his breast plate stuck and broke his spear.
32
Th'incounter such, upon the tender gras,
Down from his steed the Christian backward fell;
Yet his proud foe so strong and sturdie was,
That he nor shook, nor staggred in his cell,
But to the knight, that lay full low (alas)
In high disdain his will thus began he tell,
Yield thee my slave, and this thine honor be,
Thou may report thou have encountered me.
33
Not so (quoth he) pardie its not the guise
Of Christian knights, though fallen, so soon to yield;
I can my fall excuse in better wise,
And will revenge this shame, or die in feeld.
The great Circassian bent his frowning eyes,
Like that grim visage in Mineruaes sheeld,
Then learn (quoth he) what force Argantes uses
Against that fool, that profred grace refuses.
34
With that he spurred his horse with speed and haste,
(Forgetting what good knights to virtue owe)
Otho his fury shunned, and (as he past)
At his right side he reached a noble blow,
Wide was the wound, the blood outstreamed fast,
And from his side fell to his stirrup low:
But what auailes to hurt, if wounds augment
Our foes fierce courage, strength and hardiment?
35
Argantes nimbly turned his ready stead,
And ere his foe was wist or well aware,
Against his side he drove his coursers head,
What force could he against so great might prepare?
Weak were his feeble ioints, his courage dead,
His heart amazed, his palenesse showed his care,
His tender side against the hard earth he cast,
Shamed, with the first fall; bruised, with the last.
36
The victor spurred again his light-foot stead,
And made his passage over Othos heart,
And cride; these fools thus under foot I tread,
That dare contend with me in equal mart.
Tancred for anger shook his noble head,
So was he grieved with that vnknightly part;
The fault was his, he was so slow before,
With double valor would he salve that sore.
37
Forward he gallopt fast, and lowdly cride:
Villain (quoth he) thy conquest is thy shame,
What praise, what honor shall this fact betide?
What gain, what guerdon shall befall the same?
Among the Arabian thieves thy face go hide,
Far from resort of men of worth and fame,
Or else in woods and mountains wild, by night,
On savage beasts, employ thy savage might.
38
The Pagan patience never knew, nor used,
Trembling for ire, his sandy locks he tore,
Out from his lips flew such a sound confused,
As lions make, in deserts thick which rore;
Or as when clouds together crushed and bruised,
Power down a tempest by the Caspian shore:
So was his speech imperfect, stopped and broken,
He roared and thrund'red, when he should have spoken.
39
But when with threats they both had whetted keen
Their eager rage, their fury, spite and ire,
They turned their steeds, and left large space between,
To make their forces greater, proaching nire,
With terms that warlike and that worthy been:
(O sacred muse) my hawtie thoughts inspire,
And make a trumpet of my slender quill,
To thunder out this furious combat shrill.
40
These sons of Mauors bore (in stead of spears)
Two knottie masts, which none but they could lift,
Each foming steed so fast his master bears,
That never beast, bird, shaft flew half so swift;
Such was their fury, as when Boreas tears
The shattred crags from Taurus northren clift,
Upon their helmes their lances long they broke,
And up to heaven flew splinters, sparks, and smoke.
41
The shocke made all the towers and turrets quake,
And woods and mountains all nie-hand resound;
Yet could not all that force and fury shake
The valiant champions, nor their persons wound,
Together hurtled both their steedes, and brake
Each others neck, the riders lay on ground:
But they (great masters of wars dreadful art)
Plucked forth their swords and soon from earth up start.
42
Close at his surest ward each warrior lies,
He wisely guides his hand, his foot, his eye,
This blow he proves, that defense he tries,
He trauerseth, retireth, preaseth nie,
Now strikes he out, and now he falsifieth,
This blow he wardeth, that he lets slip bie,
And for advantage often he lets some part
Discovered seem, thus art deludeth art.
43
The Pagan ill defenst with sword or targe
Tancredies thigh (as he supposed) espide,
And reaching forth against it his weapon large,
Quite naked to his foe leaves his left side;
Tancred auoideth quick his furious charge,
And gave him eeke a wound deep, sore and wide;
That done himself safe to his ward retired,
His courage praised by all, his skill admired.
44
The proud Circassian saw his streaming blood,
Down from his wound (as from a fountain) running,
He sighed for rage, and trembled as he stood,
He blamed his fortune, folly, want of cunning;
He lift his sword aloft, for ire nigh wood,
And forward rusht: Tancred his fury shunning,
With a sharp thrust once more the Pagan hit,
To his broad shoulder where his arm is knit.
45
Like as a bear through pearsed with a dart,
Within the secret woods, no further flies,
But bites the senseless weapon mad with smart,
Seeking revenge till unrevenged she dies;
So mad Argantes fared, when his proud heart
Wound upon wound, and shame on shame espieth,
Desire of vengeance so orecame his senses,
That he forgot all dangers, all defenses.
46
Uniting force extreme, with endless wrath,
Supporting both with youth and strength untired,
His thundering blows so fast about he la'th,
That skies and earth the flying sparkles fired:
His foe to strike one blow no leisure has,
Scantly he breathed, though he often desired,
His warlike skill and cunning all was waste,
Such was Argantes force, and such his haste.
47
Long time Tancredie had in vain attended,
When this huge storm should ouerblow and pas,
Some blows his mighty target well defended,
Some fell beside and wounded deep the gras;
But when he saw the tempest never ended,
Nor that the Painims force ought weaker was,
He high aduanst his cutting sword at length,
And rage to rage opposed, and strength to strength.
48
Wrath bore the sway, both art and reason fail,
Fury new force and courage new supplies,
Their armours forged were of metal frail,
On every side, thereof huge cantels flies,
The land was strowed all with plate and maile,
That, on the earth; on that, their warm blood lies,
And at each rush and every blow they smote,
Thunder, the noise; the sparks, seemed lightning hot.
49
The Christian people and the Pagans gazed,
On this fierce combat, wishing often the end,
Twixt hope and fear they stood long time amassed,
To see the knights assail and eeke defend:
Yet neither sign they made, nor noise they raised,
But for the issue of the fight attend,
And stood as still, as life and sense they wanted,
Save that their hearts within their bosoms panted.
50
Now were they tired both, and well-nie spent,
Their blows showed greater will, then power to wound:
But night her gentle daughter darkness, sent
With friendly shade, to ouerspread the ground,
Two heralds to the fighting champions went,
To part the fray, as law of arms them bound,
Aridens borne in France, and wise Pindore,
The man that brought the challenge proud before.
51
These men their scepters interpose, between
The doubtful hazards of uncertain fight;
For such their privilege has ever been,
The law of nations does defend their right;
Pindore began, stay, stay, you warriors keen,
Equal your honor, equal is your might;
Forbear this combat, so we deem it best,
Give nighther due, and grant your persons rest.
52
Man goes forth to labor with the sun,
But with the night, all creatures draw to sleep,
Nor yet of hidden praise in darkness won,
The valiant heart of noble knight takes keep.
Argantes answered him, the fight begone
Now to forbear, does wound my heart right deep:
Yet will I stay, so that this Christian swear,
(Before you both) again to meet me hear.
53
I swear (quoth Tancred) but swear thou likewise,
To make return, thy prisner eeke with thee;
Else for atchieuement of this enterprise,
None other time but this expect of me:
Thus swear they both; the heralds both devise,
What time for this exploite should fittest be:
And for their wounds of rest and cure had need,
To meet again the sixth day was decreed.
54
This fight was deep imprinted in their hearts,
That saw this bloody fray to ending brought,
An horror great possessed their weaker parts,
Which made them shrink who on this combat thought:
Much speech was of the praise and high deserts,
Of these brave champions, that so nobly fought;
But which for knightly worth was most ipraised,
Of that was doubt, and disputation raised.
55
All long to see them end this doubtful fray,
And as they favor, so they wish success,
These hope true virtue shall obtain the day,
Those trust on fury, strength and hardiness;
But on Erminia most this burden lay,
Whose looks her trouble and her fear express;
For on this dangerous combats doubtful end,
Her joy, her comfort, hope and life depend.
96
Her the sole daughter of that hapless king,
That of proud Antioch late wore the crown,
The Christian soldiers to Tancredie bring,
When they had sacked and spoiled that glorious town;
But he (in whom all good and virtue spring)
The virgins honor saved, and her renown;
And when her city and her state was lost,
Then was her person loved, and honored most.
57
He honored her, served her, and leave her gave,
And willed her go whither, and when she list,
Her gold and jewels had he care to save,
And them restored all, she nothing mist,
She (that beheld his youth and person brave)
When, by this deed, his noble mind she wist,
Laid open her heart for Cupids shaft to hit,
Who never knots of love more surer knit.
58
Her body free, captiued was her heart,
And love the keys did of that prison bear,
Prepared to go it was a death to part
From that kind Lord, and from that prison dear:
But thou O honor which esteemed art,
The chiefest vesture noble Ladies wear,
Enforcest her against her will, to wend
To Aladine, her mothers dearest friend.
59
At Sion was this princess entertained,
By that old tyrant and her mother dear,
Whose loss too soon the woeful damsel plained,
Her grief was such, she lived not half the year,
Yet banishment, nor loss of friends constrained
The hapless maid, her passions to forbear,
For though exceeding were her woe and grief,
Of all her sorrows yet her love was chief.
60
The seely maid in secret longing pined,
Her hope a mote drawn up by Phoebus rays,
Her love a mountain seemed, whereon bright shined
Fresh memory of Tancreds worth and praise,
Within her closet if her self she shrined,
A hotter fire her tender heart assaies:
Taucred at last, to raise her hope nigh dead,
Before those walls did his broad ensign spread.
61
The rest to view the Christian army feared,
Such seemed their number, such their power and might,
But she alone her troubled forehead cleared,
And on them spread her beauty shining bright;
In every squadron when it first appeared,
Her curious eye sought out her chosen knight;
And every gallant that the rest excels,
The same seems him, so love and fancy tells.
62
Within the kingly palace, builded hie,
A turret stands near the cities wall,
From which Erminia might at ease descrie
The westren host, the plains and mountains all,
And there she stood all the long day to spy,
From Phoebus rising to his evening fall,
And with her thoughts disputed of his praise,
And every thought a scalding sigh did raise.
63
From hence the furious combat she suruaid,
And felt her heart tremble with fear and pain,
Her secret thought thus to her fancy said,
Behold thy dear in danger to be slain;
So with suspect, with fear and grief dismayed,
Attended she her darlings loss or gain,
And ever when the Pagan lift his blade,
The stroke a wound in her weak bosom made.
64
But when she saw the end, and wist withal
Their strong contention should eftsoons begin,
Amasement strange her courage did appall,
Her vital blood was icie cold within;
Sometimes she sighed, sometimes tears let fall,
To witness what distress her heart was in,
Hopeless, dismayed, pale, sad, astonished,
Her love, her fear; her fear, her torment bred.
65
Her idle brain unto her soul presented
Death, in an hundred ugly fashions painted,
And if she slept, then was her grief augmented,
With such sad visions were her thoughts acquainted;
She saw her Lord with wounds and hurts tormented,
How he complained, called for her help, and fainted,
And found, awakt from that unquiet sleeping,
Her heart with panting, sore; eics, red with weeping.
66
Yet these presages of his coming ill,
Not greatest cause of her discomfort wear,
She saw his blood from his deep wounds distill,
Nor what he suffered could she bide or bear:
Besides, report her longing ear did fill,
Doubling his danger, doubling so her fear,
That she concludes (so was her courage lost)
Her wounded Lord was weak, faint, dead almost.
67
And for her mother had her taught before
The secret virtue of each herb that springs,
Besides fit charms for every wound or sore
Corruption breeds, or misfortune brings,
(An art esteemed in those times of yore,
Beseeming daughters of great Lords and kings)
She would her self, be surgeon to her knight,
And heal him with her skill, or with her sight.
68
Thus would she cure her love, and cure her foe
She must, that had her friends and kinsfolk slain:
Some cursed weeds her cunning hand did knoe,
That could augment his harm, increase his pain;
But she abhorred to be revenged so,
No treason should her spotless person stain,
And vertuelesse she wished all herbs and charms,
Wherewith false men increase their patients harms.
69
Nor feared she among the bands to stray
Of armed men, for often had she seen
The tragike end, of many a bloody fray;
Her life had full of haps and hazards been,
This made her bold in every hard assay,
More than her feeble sex became, I ween,
She feared not the shake of every reed,
So cowards are courageous made through need.
70
Love, fearelesse, hardy, and audacious love,
Embold'ned had this tender damsel so,
That where wild beasts and serpents glide and move,
Through Afrikes deserts, durst she ride or go,
Save that her honor (she esteemed above
Her life and bodies safety) told her noe;
For in the seeret of her troubled thought,
A doubtful combat, love and honor fought.
71
O spotless virgin (honor thus begone)
That my true lore observed firmly have,
When with thy foes thou did in bondage won,
Remember then I kept thee pure and chaste,
At liberty, now whither would thou run,
To lay that field of princely virtue waste?
Or lose that jewel Ladies hold so dear?
Is maidenhood so great a load to bear?
72
Or deem'st thou it a praise of little prise,
The glorious title of a virgins name?
That thou will gad by night in giglet wise,
Amid thine armed foes, to seek thy shame.
O fool, a woman conquers when she flies,
Refusal kindles, profers quench the flame.
Thy Lord will judge thou sinnest beyond measure,
If vainly thus thou waste so rich a treasure.
73
The sly deceiuer Cupid, thus beguild
The simple damsel, with his filed tongue;
Thou were not borne (quoth he) in deserts wild
The cruel bears, and savage beasts among,
That thou should scorn fair Cithereas child,
Or hate those pleasures that to youth belong,
Nor did the gods thy heart of iron frame;
To be in love is neither sin nor shame.
74
Go then, go, whither sweet desire inuiteth,
How can thy gentle knight so cruel be?
Love in his heart thy greefes and sorrows writes,
For thy laments how he complains, see.
Oh cruel woman, whom no care exciteth
To save his life, that saved and honored thee!
He languisheth, one foot thou will not move
To succor him, yet say thou art in love.
75
No, no, stay here Argantes wounds to cure,
And make him strong to shed thy darlings blood,
Of such reward he may himself assure,
That does a thanklesse woman so much good:
Ah may it be thy patience can endure
To see the strength of this Circassion wood,
And not with horror and amazement shrink,
When on their future fight thou hapst to think?
76
Besides the thanks and praises for the deed,
Suppose what joy, what comfort shall thou win,
When thy soft hand does wholesome plasters spreed,
Upon the breaches in his iuorie skin,
Thence to thy dearest Lord, may health succeed,
Strength to his lims, blood to his cheeks so thin,
And his rare beauties now half dead and more,
Thou may to him, him, to thy self restore.
77
So shall some part of his adventures bold,
And valiant acts, henceforth be held as thine;
His dear embracements shall thee strait enfold,
Together ioin'd in marriage rites divine:
Lastly high place of honor shall thou hold
Among the matrons sage, and dames Latin,
In Italy, a land (as each one tells)
Where valor true, and true religion dwells.
78
With such vain hopes the seely maid abused,
Promised her self mountains, and hills of gold;
Yet were her thoughts with doubts and fears confused,
How to escape unseen out of that hold,
Because the watchmen every minute used
To guard the walls, against the Christians bold,
And in such fury and such heat of war,
The gates or seld, or never, opened ar.
79
With strong Clorinda was Erminia sweet,
In surest linkes of dearest friendship bound,
With her she used the rising sun to greet,
And her (when Phoebus glided under ground)
She made the lovely partner of her sheet;
In both their hearts one will, one thought was found;
Nor ought she hid from that Virago bold,
Except her love, that tale to none she told.
80
That kept she secret, if Clorinda hard
Her make complaints, or secretly lament,
To other cause her sorrow she refard:
Matter enough she had of discontent,
Like as the bird that having close imbard
Her tender young ones in the springing bent,
To draw the searcher further from her neast,
Cries and complains most, where she needs least.
81
Alone, within her chambers secret part,
Sitting one day upon her heavy thought,
Devising by what means, what slight, what art,
Her close departure should be safest wrought,
Assembled in her unresolved heart,
An hundredth passions strove and ceaselesse fought;
At last she saw high hanging on the wall
Clorindaes silver arms, and sighed withal:
82
And sighing, softly to her self she said,
How blessed is this virgin in her might?
How I envy the glory of the maid,
Yet envy not her shape or beauties light;
Her steps are not with trailing garments staid,
Nor chambers hide her valors shining bright;
But armed she rides, and breaks sword and spear,
Nor is her strength restrained by shame or fear.
83
Alas, why did not heaven these members frail,
With lively force and vigor strengthen so?
That I this silken gown, and slendervaile
Might for a brestplate, and an helm forgo?
Then should not heat, nor cold, nor rain, nor hail,
Nor storms that fall, nor blustering winds that bloe
Withhold me, but I would both day and night,
In pitched field, or private combat, fight.
84
Nor had thou Argantes, first begone
With my dear Lord, that fierce and cruel fight,
But I to that encounter would have run,
And, happily taken him captive by my might;
Yet should he find (our furious combat done)
His thraldom easy, and his bondage light;
For fetters, mine embracements should he prove;
For diet, kisses sweet; for keeper, love:
85
Or else my tender bosom opened wide,
And heart through pearsed with his cruel blade,
The bloody weapon in my wounded side
Might cure the wound, which love before had made;
Then should my soul in rest and quiet slide
Down to the valleies of th'Elisian shade,
And my mishap the knight perchance would move,
To shed some tears upon his murdered love.
86
Alas! impossible are all these things,
Such wishes vain afflict my woeful spright,
Why yield I thus to plaints and sorrowings,
As if all hope and help were perished quight?
My heart dares much, it soars with Cupids wings,
Why use I not for once these armours bright?
I may sustain a while this shield aloft,
Though I be tender, feeble, weak and soft.
87
Love, strong, bold, mighty, neuer-tired love,
Supplieth force to all his servants true;
The fearful stags he does to battle move,
Till each his horns in others blood imbrew;
Yet mean not I the haps of war to prove,
A stratageme I have devised new,
Clorinda like in this fair harness dight,
I will escape out of the town this night.
88
I know the men that have the gate to ward,
If she command dare not her will deny,
In what sort else could I beguile the guard?
This way is only left, this will I try:
O gentle love, in this adventure hard
Thine handmaide guide, assist and fortify!
The time, the hour now fitteth best the thing,
While stout Clorinda talks with the king.
89
Resolved thus without delay she went,
(As her strong passion did her rashly guide)
And those bright arms down from the rafter hent,
Within her closet did she closely hide,
That might she do unseen; for she had sent
The rest, on sheeuelesse errands from her side,
And night her stealthes brought to their wished end,
Night, patroness of thieves, and lovers friend.
90
Some sparkling fires on heavens bright visage shone,
His azure robe the orient blewnesse lost,
When she (whose wit and reason both were gone)
Called for a squire she loved and trusted most,
To whom and to a maid (a faithful one)
Part of her will she told, how that in post
She would depart from Iudais king, and feigned
That other cause her sudden flight constrained.
91
The trusty squire provided needments meet,
As for their journey fitting most should be;
Meane-while her vesture (pendant to her feet)
Erminia doft, as erst determined she,
Stripped to her petticote the virgin sweet,
So slender was, that wonder was to see;
Her handmaid ready at her mistress will,
To arm her helped, though simple were her skill.
92
The rugged steel oppressed and offended
Her dainty neck, and locks of shining gold;
Her tender arm so feeble was, it bended
When that huge target it presum'de to hold,
The burnisht steel bright rays far off extended,
She feigned courage, and appeared bold;
Fast by her side unseen smiled Venus son,
As erst he laughed when Alcides sponne,
93
Oh, with what labor did her shoulders bear
That heavy burden, and how slow she went!
Her maid (to see that all the coasts were clear)
Before her mistress through the streets was sent;
Love gave her courage, love exiled fear,
Love to her tired lims new vigor lent,
Till she approached where the squire abode,
There took they horse forthwith and forward rode.
94
Disguised they went, and by unused ways,
And secret paths they strove unseen to gone,
Until the watch they meet, which sore affraies
These soldiers new, when swords and weapons shone;
Yet none to stop their journey once assaies,
But place and passage yielded every one;
For that white armor and that helmet bright,
Were known and feared, in the darkest night.
95
Erminia (though some-deale she were dismayed)
Yet went she on, and goodly countenance bore,
She doubted least her purpose were bewraid,
Her too much boldness she repented sore;
But now the gate her fear and passage staid,
The heedlesse porter she beguiled therefore,
I am Clorinda, open the gates she cride,
Where as the king commands, thus late I ride.
96
Her woman's voice and terms all framed been,
Most like the speeches of the Princess stout,
Who would have thought on horseback to have seen
That feeble damsel armed round about?
The porter her obei'd, and she (between
Her trusty squire and maiden) sallied out,
And through the secret dales they silent pas,
Where danger least, least fear, least peril was.
97
But when these fair aduentrers entered we are
Deep in a vale, Erminia staid her have,
To be recalled she had no cause to fear,
This foremost hazard had she trimly past;
But dangers new (tofore unseen) appear,
New perils she descride, new doubts she cast.
The way that her desire to quiet brought,
More difficult now seemed than erst she thought.
98
Armed to ride among her angry foes,
She now perceived it were great oversight,
Yet would she not (she thought) her self disclose,
Until she came before her chosen knight,
To him she purposed to present the rose
Pure, spotless, clean, untouched of mortal wight,
She staid therefore, and in her thoughts more wise,
She called her squire, whom thus she began advise.
99
Thou must (quoth she) be mine ambassadore,
Be wise, be careful, true, and diligent,
Go to the camp, present thy self before
The Prince Tancredie, wounded in his tent;
Tell him thy mistress comes to cure his sore,
If he to grant her peace and rest consent,
Against whom fierce love such cruel war has reased,
So shall his wounds be cured, her torments eased.
100
And say, in him such hope and trust she has,
That in his powers she fears no shame nor scorn,
Tell him thus much, and what so ere he sath,
Unfold no more, but make a quick return,
I (for this place is free from harm and scath)
Within this valley will meanewhile soiorne,
Thus spoke the Princess: and her servant true
To execute the charge imposed, flew;
101
And was received (he so discreetly wrought)
First of the watch, that guarded in their place;
Before the wounded Prince, than was he brought:
Who heard his message kind, with gentle grace,
Which told, he left him tossing in his thought
A thousand doubts, and turned his speedy pace
To bring his Lady and his mistress word,
She might be welcome to that courteous Lord.
102
But she, impatient, to whose desire
Grievous and harmefull seemed each little stay,
Recounts his steps, and thinks, now draws he nire,
Now enters in, now speaks, now comes his way;
And that which grieved her most, the careful squire
Less speedy seemed, than ere before that day;
Lastly she forward rode with love to guide,
Until the Christian tents at hand she spide.
103
Invested in her starrie veil, the night
In her kind arms embraced all this round,
The silver moon from sea vprising bright
Spread frostie pearl on the canded ground:
And Cinthia like for beauties glorious light,
The loue-sicke Nymph threw glistring beams around,
And counselors of her old love, she made
Those valleys dumb, that silence, and that shade.
104
Beholding then the camp (quoth she) O fair
And castle-like pauilions, richly wrought!
From you how sweet me thinks blows the air,
How comforts it my heart, my soul, my thought?
Through heavens fair grace from gulf of sad despair
My tossed bark, to port well nie is brought:
In you I seek redress for all my harms,
Rest, midst your weapons; peace, amongst your arms.
105
Receive me than and let me mercy find,
As gentle love assures me I shall,
Among you had I entertainment kind,
When first I was the Prince Tancredies thrall:
I covet not (led by ambition blind)
You should me in my fathers throne enstall,
Might I but serve in you my Lord so dear,
That my content, my joy, my comfort wear.
106
Thus parled she (poor soul) and never feared
The sudden blow of fortunes cruel spite,
She stood where Phebes splendant beam appeared
Upon her silver armor double bright,
The place about her round the shining cleared,
Of that pure white wherein the Nymph was dight:
The Tigresse great (that on her helmet laid)
Bore witness where she went, and where she staid.
107
(So as her fortune would) a Christian band
Their secret ambush there had closely framed,
Led by two brothers of Italia land,
Young Polipherne and Alicandro named,
These with their forces watched to withstand
Those that brought vittailes to their foes untamed,
And kept that passage; them Erminia spide,
And fled as fast as her swift steed could ride.
108
But Polipherne (before whose watrie eyes,
His aged father strong Clorinda slew)
When that bright sheeld and silver helm he spies,
The Championess he thought he saw and knew;
Upon his hidden mates for aid he cries,
Against his supposed foe, and forth he flew,
As he was rash, and heedlesse in his wrath,
Bending his lance, thou art but dead he sath.
109
As when a chased hind her course does bend
To seek by soil to find some ease or good,
Whether from craggie rock the spring descend,
Or softly glide within the shadie wood;
If there the dogs she meet, where late she wend
To comfort her weak lims in cooling flood,
Again she flies swift as she fled at first,
Forgetting weakness, weariness, and thirst.
110
So she, that thought to rest her weary spright,
And quench the endless thirst of ardent love,
With dear embracements of her Lord and knight,
But such as marriage rites should first approve,
When she beheld her foe with weapon bright
Threatening her death, his hasty courser move,
Her love, her Lord, her self abandoned,
She spurred her speedy steed, and swift she fled.
111
Erminia fled, scantly the tender grass
Her Pegasus with his light footesteps bent,
Her maidens beast for speed did likewise pass;
Yet diverse ways (such was their fear) they went:
The squire who all too late returned (alas)
With tardie news from Prince Tancredies tent,
Fled likewise, when he saw his mistress gone,
It booted not to soiourne there alone.
112
But Alicandro wiser than the rest,
Who this supposed Clorinda saw likewise,
To follow her yet was he nothing pressed,
But in his ambush still and close he lies,
A messenger to Godfrey he addressed,
That should him of this accident advise,
How that his brother chased with naked blade
Clorindas self, or else Clorindas shade:
113
Yet that it was, or that it could be she,
He had small cause or reason to suppose,
Occasion great and weighty must it be,
Should make her ride by night among her foes:
What Godfrey willed that observed he,
And with his soldiers lay in ambush close:
These news through all the Christian army went,
In every cabin talked, and every tent.
114
Tancred, whose thoughts the squire had filled with doubt,
By his sweet words, supposed now, hearing this,
Alas, the virgin came to seek me out,
And for my sake her life in danger is;
Himself forthwith he singled from the rout,
And rode in haste, though half his arms he mis,
Among those sandy fields and valleis green,
To seek his love, he gallopte fast unseen.
The seventh Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
A shepherd fair Erminia entertaines,
Whom whilst Tancredie seeks in vain to find,
He is entrapped in Armidaes trains:
Raimond with strong Argantes is assignde
To fight, an Angel to his aid he gains:
Satan that sees the Pagans fury blind,
And hasty wrath turn to his loss and harm,
Does raise new tempest, uproar and alarm.
1
ERminiaes steed (this while) his mistress bore
Through forests thick among the shadie treene,
Her feeble hand the bridle raines forlore,
Half in a swoune she was for fear I ween;
But her flit courser spared nere the more,
To bear her through the desert woods unseen
Of her strong foes, that chased her through the plain,
And still pursued, but still pursued in vain.
2
Like as the weary hounds at last retire,
Windlesse, displeased, from the fruitless chase,
When the sly beast Tapisht in bush and brire,
No art nor pains can rowse out of his place:
The Christian knights so full of shame and ire
Returned back, with faint and weary pace;
Yet still the fearful Dame fled, swift as wind,
Nor ever staid, nor ever looked behind.
3
Through thick and thin, all night, all day, she driued,
Withouten comfort, company or guide,
Her plaints and tears with every thought revived,
She heard and saw her greefes, but naught beside:
But when the sun his burning chariot diued
In Thet is wave, and weary teame untied,
On Iordans sandy banks her course she staid
At last, there down she light, and down she laid.
4
Her tears, her drink; her food, her sorrowings,
This was her diet that unhappy night:
But sleep (that sweet repose and quiet brings)
To ease the greefes of discontented wight,
Spread forth his tender, soft, and nimble wings,
In his dull arms foulding the virgin bright;
And love, his mother, and the graces kept
Strong watch and ward, while this fair Lady slept.
5
The birds awakte her with their morning song,
Their warbling music pearst her tender ear,
The murmuring brooks and whistling winds among
The rattling boughs, and leaves, their parts did bear;
Her eyes vnclos'd beheld the groves along
Of swains and shepherd grooms, that dwellings wear;
And that sweet noise, birds, winds and waters sent,
Provoked again the virgin to lament.
6
Her plaints were interrupted with a sound,
That seemed from thickest bushes to proceed,
Some jolly shepherd sung a lusty round,
And to his voice had tuned his oaten reed;
Thither she went, an old man there she found,
(At whose right hand his little flock did feed)
Set making baskets, his three sons among,
That learned their fathers art, and learned his song.
7
Beholding one in shining arms appear
The seely man and his were sore dismayed;
But sweet Erminia comforted their fear,
Her ventall up, her visage open laid,
You happy folk, of heaven beloved dear,
Work on (quoth she) upon your harmless traid,
These dreadful arms I bear no warfare bring
To your sweet toil, nor those sweet tunes you sing.
8
But father, since this land, these towns and towers,
Destroyed are with sword, with fire and spoil,
How many it be unhurt, that you and yours
In safety thus, apply your harmless toil?
My son (quoth he) this poor estate of ours
Is ever safe from storm of warlike broile;
This wilderness does us in safety keep,
No thundering drum, no trumpet breaks our sleep.
9
Happily just heavens defense and shield of right,
Does love the innocence of simple swains,
The thunderbolts on highest mountains light,
And seld or never strike the lower plains;
So kings have cause to fear Bellonaes might,
Not they whose sweat and toil their dinner gains,
Nor ever greedy soldier was entised
By poverty, neglected and despised.
10
O poverty, chief of the heavenly brood,
Dearer to me than wealth or kingly crown!
No wish for honor, thirst of others good,
Can move my heart, contented with mine own:
We quench our thirst with water of this flood,
Nor fear we poison should therein be thrown;
These little flocks of sheep and tender goats
Give milk for food, and wool to make us coats.
11
We little wish, we need but little wealth,
From cold and hunger us to cloth and feed;
These are my sons, their care preserues from stealth
Their fathers flocks, nor servants more I need:
Amid these groves I walk often for my health,
And to the fishes, birds and beasts give heed,
How they are fed, in forest, spring and lake,
And their contentment for ensample take.
12
Time was (for each one has his doting time)
(These silver locks were golden tresses than)
That country life I hated as a crime,
And from the forests sweet contentment ran,
To Memphis stately palace would I clime,
And there became the mighty Caliphes man,
And though I but a simple gardner wear,
Yet could I mark abuses, see and hear.
13
Entised on with hope of future gain,
I suffered long what did my soul displease;
But when my youth was spent, my hope was vain,
I felt my native strength at last decrease;
I began my loss of lusty years complain,
And wished I had enjoyed the countries peace;
I bod the court farewell, and with content
My later age here have I quiet spent.
14
While thus he spoke, Erminia hushed and still
His wise discourses heard, with great attention,
His speeches grave those idle fancies kill,
Which in her troubled soul bred such dissension;
After much thought reformed was her will,
Within those woods to dwell was her intention,
Till fortune should occasion new afford,
To turn her home to her desired Lord.
15
She said therefore, O shepherd fortunate!
That troubles some did whilom feel and prove,
Yet live now in this contented state,
Let my mishap thy thoughts to pity move,
To entertain me as a willing mate
In shepherds life, which I admire and love;
Within these pleasant groves perchance my heart,
Of her discomforts, may unload some part.
16
If gold or wealth of most esteemed dear,
If jewels rich, thou did hold in prise,
Such store thereof, such plenty have I hear,
As to a greedy mind might well suffice:
With that down trickled many a silver tear,
Two crystal streams fell from her watrie eyes;
Part of her sad misfortunes than she told,
And wept, and with her wept that shepherd old.
17
With speeches kind, he began the virgin dear
Toward his cottage gently home to guide;
His aged wife there made her homely cheer,
Yet welcomde her, and plast her by her side.
The Princess dond a poor pastoraes gear,
A kerchiefe course upon her head she tide;
But yet her gestures and her looks (I guess)
Were such, as ill beseem'd a shepherdess.
18
Not those rude garments could obscure, and hide,
The heavenly beauty of her angels face,
Nor was her princely offspring damnifide,
Or ought disparag'de, by those labors bace;
Her little flocks to pasture would she guide,
And milk her goats, and in their folds them place,
Both cheese and butter could she make, and frame
Her self to please the shepherd and his dame.
19
But often, when underneath the greene-wood shade
Her flocks lay hid from Phoebus scorching rays,
Unto her knight she songs and sonnets made,
And them engrau'd in bark of beech and baies;
She told how Cupid did her first invade,
How conquered her, and ends with Tancreds praise:
And when her passions writ she over red,
Again she mourned, again salt tears she shed.
20
You happy trees for ever keep (quoth she)
This woeful story in your tender rind,
Another day under your shade may be,
Will come to rest again some lover kind;
Who if these trophies of my greefes he see,
Shall feel dear pity pearse his gentle mind;
With that she sighed and said, too late I prove
There is no troath in fortune, trust in love.
21
Yet may it be (if gracious heavens attend
The earnest suit of a distressed wight)
At my entreat they will vouchsafe to send
To these huge deserts that unthankful knight,
That when to earth the man his eyes shall bend,
And sees my grave, my tomb, and ashes light,
My woeful death, his stubborn heart may move,
With tears and sorrows to reward my love.
22
So, though my life has most unhappy been,
At least yet shall my spirit dead be blessed,
My ashes cold shall buried on this green,
Enjoy that good this body nere possessed.
Thus she complained to the senseless treene,
Floods in her eyes and fires were in her breast;
But he for whom these streams of tears she shed,
Wandered far off (alas) as chance him led.
23
He followed on the footsteps he had traced,
Till in high woods and forests old he came,
Where bushes, thorns and trees so thick were placed,
And so obscure the shadows of the same,
That soon he lost the tract wherein he paced;
Yet went he on, which way he could not ame,
But still attentive was his longing ear,
If noise of horse, or noise of arms he hear.
24
If with the breathing of the gentle wind,
An aspen leaf but shaked on the tree,
If bird or beast stird in the bushes blind,
Thither he spurred, thither he rode to see;
Out of the wood by Cinthiaes favor kind,
At last (with travail great and pains) got he,
And following on a little path, he hard
A rumbling sound, and hasted thitherward.
25
It was a fountain from the living stone,
That powered down cleree streams, in noble store,
Whose conduit pipes (united all in one)
Throughout a rockie channel ghastly rore,
Here Tancred staid, and called, yet answered none,
Save babbling Echo, from the crooked shore;
And there the weary knight at last espies,
The springing daylight red and white arise.
26
He sighed sore, and guiltless heaven began blame,
That wished success to his desires denide,
And sharp revenge protested for the same,
If ought but good his mistress fair betide;
Than wished he to return the way he came,
Although he wist not by what path to ride,
And time drew nere when he again must fight,
With proud Argantes, that vainglorious knight.
27
His stalworth steed the champion stout bestroad,
And pricked fast to find the way he lost,
But through a valley as he musing road,
He saw a man, that seemed for haste a post,
His horn was hung between his shoulders broad,
As is the guise with us: Tacredie crossed
His way, and gently praid the man to say,
To Godfreys camp how he should find the way.
28
Sir (in the Italian language) answered he,
I ride where noble Boemond has me sent:
The Prince thought this his uncles man should be,
And after him his course with speed he bent,
A fortress stately built at last they see,
Bout which a muddie stinking lake there went,
There they arrived, when Titan went to rest
His weary lims, in nights untroubled nest.
29
The currer gave the fort a warning blast;
The drawbridge was let down by them within:
If thou a Christian be (quoth he) thou mast
Till Phoebus shine again, here take thine Inn,
The County of Cosenza (three days past)
This castle from the Turks did nobly win.
The Prince beheld the piece, which site and art
Impregnable had made on every part.
30
He feared within a pile so fortified,
Some secret treason or enchantment lay,
But had he known even there he should have died,
Yet should his looks no sign of fear bewray;
For where so ever will or chance him guied,
His strong victorious hand still made him way;
Yet for the combat he must shortly make,
No new adventures list he undertake.
31
Before the castle, in a meadow plain
Beside the bridges end, he staid and stood,
Nor was entreated by the speeches vain
Of his false guide, to pass beyond the flood.
Upon the bridge appeared a warlike swain,
From top to toe all clad in armor good,
Who brandishing a broad and cutting sword,
Thus threat'ned death with many an idle word:
32
O thou, whom chance or will brings to the soil,
Where fair Armida does the scepter guide,
Thou can not fly, of arms thy self despoile,
And let thy hands with iron chains be tide;
Enter and rest thee from thy weary toil,
Within this dungeon shall thou safe abide,
And never hope again to see the day,
Or that thy hair for age shall turn to gray,
33
Except thou swear her valiant knights to aid
Against those traitors of the Christian crew.
Tancred at this discourse a little staid,
His arms, his gesture and his voice he knew;
It was Rambaldo, who for that false maid,
Forsook his country, and religion true,
And of that fort defender chief became,
And those vile customs stablisht in the same.
34
The warrior answered (blushing red for shame)
Cursed Apostate, and ungracious wight,
I am that Tancred, who defend the name
Of Christ, and have been ay his faithful knight;
His rebel foes can I subdue and tame,
As thou shall find before we end this fight;
And thy false heart cleft with this vengefull sword,
Shall feel the ire of thy forsaken Lord.
35
When that great name Rambaldoes ears did fill,
He shook for fear, and looked pale for dread,
Yet proudly said, Tancred thy hap was ill
To wander hither where thou art but dead,
Where naught can help, thy courage, strength and skill,
To Godfrey will I send thy cursed head,
That he may see, how for Armidaes sake,
Of him and of his Christ a scorn I make.
36
This said; the day to sable night was turned,
That scant one could another arms descrie,
But soon an hundredth lamps and torches burned,
That cleared all the earth and all the sky;
The castle seemed a stage with lights adorned,
On which men play some pompous tragedy;
Within a tarras sat on high the Queen,
And heard and saw, and kept her self unseen.
37
The noble Baron whet his courage hot,
And buskt him boldly to the dreadful fight;
Upon his horse long while he tarried not,
Because on foot he saw the Pagan knight,
Who underneath his trusty sheeld was got,
His sword was drawn, closed was his helmet bright;
Against whom the Prince marched on a stately pace,
Wrath in his voice, rage in his eyes and face.
38
His foe, his furious charge not well abiding,
Trauerst his ground, and started here and there,
But he (though faint and weary both with riding)
Yet followed fast and still oppressed him nere,
And on what side he felt Rambaldo sliding,
On that his forces most employed were;
Now at his helm, now at his hawberke bright,
He thundered blows, now at his face and sight.
39
Against those members battrie chief he makes,
Wherein man's life keeps chiefest residence;
At his proud threats the Gascoigne warrior quaketh,
An uncouth fear appalled every sense,
To nimble shifts the knight himself betaketh,
And skippeth here and there for his defense;
Now with his targe, now with his trusty blade,
Against his blows he good resistance made.
40
Yet no such quickness for defenee he used,
As did the Prince to work him harm and scath;
His sheeld was cleft in twain, his helmet bruised,
And in his blood his other arms did bath;
On him he heaped blows, with thrusts confused,
And more or less each stroke annoyed him has;
He feared, and in his troubled bosom strove,
Remorse of conscience, shame, disdain and love.
41
At last so careless, foul despair him made,
He meant to prove his fortune ill or good,
His shield cast down, he took his helpless blade
In both his hands, which yet had drawn no blood,
And with such force upon the Prince he lade,
That neither plate nor maile the blow withstood,
The wicked steel seaz'd deep in his right side,
And with his streaming blood his bases did:
42
Another stroke he lent him on the brow,
So great that lowdly roong the sounding steel;
Yet pearst he not the helmet with the blow,
Although the owner twice or thrice did reele.
The Prince (whose looks his sdainfull anger show)
Now meant to use his puissance every deele,
He shakt his head and crasht his teeth for ire,
His lips breathed wrath, eyes sparkled shining fire.
43
The Pagan wretch no longer could sustain
The dreadful terror of his fierce aspect,
Against the threat'ned blow he saw right plain,
No tempred armor could his life protect,
He leapt aside, the stroke fell down in vain,
Against a pillour near the bridge erect,
Thence flaming fire and thousand sparks out start,
And kill with fear the coward Pagans heart.
44
Toward the bridge the fearful Painim fled,
And in swift flight, his hope of life reposed;
Himself fast after Lord Tancredie sped,
And now in equal pace almost they closed,
When all the burning lamps extinguished
The shining fort his goodly splendute losed,
And all those stars on heavens blew face that shone,
With Cinthiaes self, dispeared were and gone.
45
Amid those witchcrafts and that ouglie shade,
No further could the Prince pursue the chase,
Nothing he saw, yet forward still he made,
With doubtful steps, and ill assured pace;
At last his foot upon a threshold trade,
And ere he wist he entered had the place;
With ghastly noise the door leaves shut behind,
And closed him fast in prison dark and blind.
46
As in our seas in the Commachian bay,
A seely fish (with streams enclosed) strives,
To shun the fury and avoid the sway
Wherewith the current, in that whirlepoole, drives;
Yet seeks all in vain, but finds no way
Out of that watrie prison, where she diueth;
For with such force there be the tides in brought,
There enters all that will, thence issues naught:
47
This prison so entrapt that valiant knight,
Of which the gate was framed by subtle train,
To close without the help of humane wight,
So sure, none could undo the leaves again;
Against the doors he bended all his might,
But all his forces were employed in vain,
At last a voice began to him lowdly call,
Yield thee (quoth it) thou art Armidaes thrall.
48
Within this dungeon buried shall thou spend
The res'due of thy woeful days and years;
The champion list not more with words contend,
But in his heart kept close his griefs and fears,
He blamed love, chance began he reprehend,
And against enchantment huge complaints he reares.
It were small loss, softly he thus begun,
To lose the brightness of the shining sun;
49
But I alas, the golden beam forgo
Of my far brighter sun, nor can I say
If these poor eyes shall ere be blessed so,
As once again to view that shining ray:
Then thought he on his proud Circassian foe,
And said, ah! how shall I perform that fray?
He (and the world with him) will Tancred blame^,
This is my grief, my fault, mine endless shame.
50
While those high spirits of this champion good,
With love and honors care are thus oppressed,
While he torments himself, Argantes wood,
Waxt weary of his bed and of his rest,
Such hate of peace, and such desire of blood,
Such thirst of glory, boiled in his breast;
That though he scant could stir or stand upright,
Yet longed he for the appointed day to fight.
51
The night which that expected day fore-went,
Scantly the Pagan closed his eyes to sleep,
He told how night her sliding hours spent,
And rose ere springing day began to peep;
He called for armor, which incontinent
Was brought, by him that used the same to keep,
That harness rich, old Aladine him gave,
A worthy present for a champion brave:
52
He dond them on, nor loug their riches eied,
Nor did he ought with so great weight incline,
His wonted sword upon his thigh he tied,
The blade was old and tough, of temper fine.
As when a comet far and wide descried,
In scorn of Phoebus midst bright hean'n does shine,
And tidings sad of death and mischief brings
To mighty Lords, to monarchs, and to kings:
53
So shone the Pagan in bright armor clad,
And rolled his eyes great swollen with ire and blood,
His dreadful gestures threat'ned horror sad,
And ouglie death upon his forehead stood;
Not one of all his squires the courage had,
T'approch their master in his angry mood,
Above his head he shook his naked blade,
And against the subtle air vain battle made.
54
That Christian thief (quoth he) that was so bold
To combat me in hard and single fight,
Shall wounded fall inglorious on the mold,
His locks with clods of blood and dust bedight,
And living shall with watrie eyes behold
How from his back I tear his harness bright,
Nor shall his dying words me so entreat,
But that I Will give his flesh to dogs for meat.
55
Like as a bull when pricked with jealousy,
He spies the rival of his hot desire,
Through all the fields does bellow, rore and cry,
And with his thundering voice augments his ire,
And threatening battle to the empty sky,
Tears with his horn, each tree, plant, bush and brire,
And with his foot casts up the sand on hight,
Defying his strong foe to deadly fight:
56
Such was the Pagans fury, such his cry,
An herald called he than, and thus he spoke;
Go to the camp, and in my name, defy
The man that combats for his Jesus sake;
This said, upon his steed he mounted hie,
And with him did his noble prisoner take,
The town he thus forsook, and on the green
He ran, as mad or frantic he had been.
57
A bugle small he winded loud and shrill,
That made resound the fields and valleis near,
Louder than thunder from Olimpus hill
Seemed that dreadful blast to all that hear:
The Christian Lords of prowess, strength and skill,
Within the imperial tent assembled wear,
The herald there in boasting terms defide
Tancredie first, and all that durst beside.
58
With sober cheer Godfredo looked about,
And viewed at leisure every Lord and knight;
But yet for all his looks not one stepped out,
With courage bold, to undertake the fight:
Absent were all the Christian champious stout,
No news of Tancred since his secret flight;
Boemond far off, and banished from the crew,
Was that strong Prince, who proud Gernando slew:
59
And eeke those ten which chosen were by lot,
And all the worthies of the camp beside,
After Armida false were followed hot,
When night was come their secret flight to hide;
The rest their hands and hearts that trusted not,
Blushed for shame, yet silent still abide;
For none there was that sought to purchase fame,
In so great peril, fear exiled shame.
60
The angry Duke their fear discovered plain,
By their pale looks and silence, from each part,
And as he moved was with just disdain,
These words he said, and from his seat vpstart:
Unworthy life I judge that coward swain,
To hazard it even now that wants the heart,
When this vile Pagan with his glorious boast,
Dishonours and defies Christ's sacred host.
61
But let my camp sit still in peace and rest,
And my lives hazard at their ease behold,
Come bring me here my fairest arms and best;
And they were brought sooner than could be told.
But gentle Raimond, in his aged breast
Who had mature advise, and counsel old,
Than whom in all the camp were none or few
Of greater might, before Godfredo drew,
62
And gravely said, Ah let it not betide,
On one man's hand to venture all this host!
No private soldier thou, thou art our guide,
If thou miscarrie all our hope were lost,
By thee must Babel fall and all her pride;
Of our true faith thou art the prop and post,
Rule with thy scepter, conquer with thy word,
Let other combats make with spear and sword.
63
Let me this Pagans glorious pride assuage,
These aged arms can yet their weapons use,
Let other shun Bellonaes dreadful rage,
These silver locks shall not Raimondo scuse:
Oh that I were in prime of lusty age,
Like you, that this adventure brave refuse,
And dare not once lift up your coward eyes,
Against him that you and Christ himself defies!
64
Or as I was, when all the Lords of fame
And German Princes great stood by to view,
In Conrades court (the second of that name)
When Leopold in single fight I slew;
A greater praise I reaped by the same,
So strong a foe in combat to subdue,
Than he should do, who all alone should chase,
Or kill a thousand of these Pagans bace.
65
Within these arms, had I that strength again,
This boasting Painim had not lived till now,
Yet in this breast does courage still remain;
For age or years these members shall not bow;
And if I be in this encounter slain,
Scotfree Argantes shall not escape, I vow;
Give me mine arms, this battle shall with praise
Augment mine honor, got in younger days.
66
The jolly Baron old thus bravely spoke,
His words are spurs to virtue; every knight
That seemed before to tremble and to quake,
Now talked bold, ensample has such might;
Each one the battle fierce would undertake,
Now strove they all who should begin the fight;
Baldwine and Roger both, would combat feign,
Stephen, Guelpho, Gernier and the Gerrards twain:
67
And Pyrrhus, who with help of Boemonds sword,
Proud Antioch by cunning slight oppressed;
The battle eeke with many a lowly word,
Ralph, Rosimond, and Eberard request,
A Scotsh, an Irish, and an English Lord,
Whose lands the sea diuides far from the rest;
And for the fight did likewise humbly sue,
Edward and his Gildippes, lovers true.
68
But Raimond more then all the rest does sue,
Upon that Pagan fierce to wreake his ire,
Now wants he naught of all his armours due
Except his helm, that shone like flaming fire.
To whom Godfredo thus; O mirror true
Of antique worth! thy courage does inspire
New strength in us, of Mars in thee does shine
The art, the honor and the discipline.
69
If ten like thee of valor and of age,
Among these legions I could happily find,
I should the heat of Babels pride assuage,
And spread our faith from Thule to furthest Inde;
But now I pray thee calm thy valiant rage,
Reserve thy self till greater need us bind,
And let the rest each one write down his name,
And see whom fortune chooses to this game,
70
Or rather see whom Gods high judgment takes,
To whom is chance and fate and fortune slave:
Raimond his earnest suit not yet forsakes,
His name writ with the res'due would he have,
Godfrey himself in his bright helmet shakes
The scroules, with names of all the champions brave,
They drew, and red the first whereon they hit,
Wherein was Raimond Earl of Toulouse writ.
71
His name with joy and mighty shoutes they blis;
The rest allow his choice, and fortune praise,
New vigor blushed through those looks of his:
It seemed he now resumed his youthful days,
Like to a snake whose slough new changed is,
That shines like gold against the sunnie rays:
But Godfrey most approved his fortune hie,
And wished him honor, conquest, victory.
72
Then from his side he took his noble brand,
And giving it to Raimond, thus he spoke;
This is the sword wherewith in Saxon land,
The great Rubello battle used to make,
From him I took it fighting hand to hand,
And took his life with it, and many a lake
Of blood with it I have shed since that day,
With thee God grant it prove as happy may.
73
Of these delays meane-while impatient,
Argantes threat'neth loud and sternly cries,
O glorious people of the Occident!
Behold him here that all your host defies:
Why comes not Tancred, whose great hardiment,
With you is pris'd so dear? pardie he lies
Still on his pillow, and presumes the night
Again may shield him from my power and might.
74
Why than some other come, by band and band
Come all, come forth on horseback, come on foot,
If not one man dares combat hand to hand,
In all the thousands of so great a rout:
See where the tomb of Mary's son does stand,
March thither warriors bold, what makes you dout?
Why run you not, there for your sins to weep,
Or to what greater need these forces keep?
75
Thus scorned by that heathen Sarracine,
Were all the soldiers of Christ's sacred name:
Raimond (while others at his words repine)
Burst forth in rage, he could not bear this shame:
For fire of courage brighter far does shine,
If challenges and threats augment the same;
So that, upon his steed he mounted light,
Which Aquilino for his swiftnes hight.
76
This Iennet was by Tagus bred; for often
The breeder of these beasts to war assinde,
When first on trees burgen the blossoms soft,
Pricked forward with the sting of fertile kind,
Against the air cast up her head aloft,
And gath'reth seed so from the fruitful wind,
And thus conceauing of the gentle blast,
(A wonder strange and rare) she foales at last.
77
And had you seen the beast, you would have said
The light and subtle wind his father was;
For if his course upon the sands he maid,
No sign was left what way the beast did pas;
Or if he menag'd were, or if he played,
He scantly bended down the tender gras:
Thus mounted rode the Earl, and as he went,
Thus prayed, to heaven his zealous looks up bent,
78
O Lord, that did save, keep and defend
Thy servant David, from Golias rage,
And broughtest that huge giant to his end,
Slain by a faithful child, of tender age;
Like grace (O Lord) like mercy now extend,
Let me this vile blasphemous pride assuage,
That all the world may to thy glory know,
Old men and babes thy foes can overthrow.
79
Thus prayed the County, and his prayers dear
Strengthened with zeal, with godliness and faith,
Before the throne of that great Lord appear,
In whose sweet grace is life, death in his wraith,
Among his armies bright and legions clear,
The Lord an angel good selected haith,
To whom the charge was given to guard the knight,
And keep him safe from that fierce Pagans might.
80
The angel good, appointed for the guard
Of noble Raimond from his tender eild,
That kept him than, and kept him afterward,
When spear and sword he able was to weild,
Now when his great creators will he hard,
That in this fight he should him chiefly shield,
Up to a tower set on a rock he flies,
Where all the heavenly arms and weapons lies:
81
There stands the lance wherewith great Michael slew
The aged dragon in a bloody fight,
There are the dreadful thunders forged new,
With storms and plagues that on poor sinners light;
The massy trident may thou pendant view,
There on a golden pin hung up on hight,
Wherewith sometimes he smites this solid land,
And throws down towns and towers thereon which stand.
82
Among the blessed weapons there which stands
Upon a diamond shield his looks he bended,
So great that it might cover all the lands,
Twixt Caucasus and Atlas hills extended;
With it the Lords dear flocks and faithful bands,
The holy kings and cities are defended,
The sacred Angel took this target sheene,
And by the Christian champion stood unseen.
83
But now the walls and turrets round about,
Both young and old with many thousands fill;
The king Clorinda sent and her brave rout,
To keep the field, she staid upon the hill:
Godfrey likewise some Christian bands sent out,
Which armed and rankt in good array stood still,
And to their champions empty let remain
Twixt either troop a large and spacious plain.
84
Argantes looked for Tancredie bold,
But saw an uncouth foe at last appear,
Raimond rode on, and what he asked him, told,
Better thy chance, Tancred is now else-wheare,
Yet glory not of that, my self behold
Am come prepared, and bid thee battle hear,
And in his place, or for my self, to fight,
Lo here I am, who scorn thy heathenish might.
85
The Pagan cast a scornful smile, and said,
But where is Tancred, is he still in bed?
His looks late seemed to make high heaven afraid,
But now for dread he is or dead or fled,
But were earthes center or the deep sea maid
His lurking hole, it should not save his head.
Thou lie, he says, to say so brave a knight
Is fled from thee, who thee exceedes in might.
86
The angry Pagan said, I have not spilt
My labor then, if thou his place supply,
Go, take the field, and lets see how thou will
Maintain thy foolish words and that brave lie;
Thus parled they to meet in equal tilt,
Each took his aim at others helm on hie,
Even in the sight his foe good Raimond hit,
But shakt him not, he did so firmly sit.
87
The fierce Circassian missed of his blow,
A thing which seld befell the man before,
The angel by unseen his forced did know,
And far awrie the poinant weapon bore,
He burst his lance against the sand below,
And bit his lips for rage, and cursed and swore,
Against his foe returned he swift as wind,
Half mad in arms a second match to find;
88
Like to a ram that buttes with horned head,
So spurred he forth his horse with desperate race:
Raimond at his right hand let slide his stead,
And as he past struck at the Pagans face;
He turned again the Earl nothing dread,
Yet stepped aside and to his rage gave place,
And on his helm with all his strength began smite,
Which was so hard his courtlax could not bite.
89
The Sarracine imploi'd his art and force,
To gripe his foe within his mighty arms;
But he avoided nimbly with his horse,
He was no prentise in those fierce allarmes,
About him made he many a winding corse,
No strength, no slight the subtle warrior harms,
His nimble steed obeid his ready hand,
And where he stepped no print left in the sand.
90
As when a captain does besiege some hold,
Set in a marish or high on a hill,
And tries ways and wiles a thousand fold,
To bring the piece subjected to his will;
So fared the County with the Pagan bold,
And when he did his head and breast none ill,
His weaker parts he wisely began assail,
And entrance searched often twixt maile and maile;
91
At last he hit him on a place or twain,
That on his arms the red blood trickled down,
And yet himself untouched did remain,
No nail was broke, no plume cut from his crown;
Argantes raging spent his strength in vain,
Waste were his strokes, his thrusts were idle thrown,
Yet preas'd he on, and doubled still his blows,
And where he hits he neither cares nor knows.
92
Among a thousand blows the Sarracine
At last stroke one, when Raymond was so near,
That not the swiftnes of his Aquiline
Could his dear Lord from that huge danger bear:
But lo (at hand unseen was help divine,
Which saues when worldly comforts none appear)
The angel on his targe received that stroke,
And on that shield Argantes sword was broke.
93
The sword was broke, therein no wonder lies,
If earthly tempred metal could not hold,
Against that target forged above the skies,
Down fell the blade in pieces on the mold,
The proud Circassian scant believed his eyes,
Though naught were left him but the hilts of gold,
And full of thoughts amazed a while he stood,
Wondering the Christians armor was so good.
94
The brittle web of that rich sword he thought,
Was broke through hardness of the Counties sheeld;
And so thought Raimond, who discou'red naught,
What succor heaven did for his safety yield:
But when he saw the man against whom he fought,
Unweaponed, still stood he in the feeld;
His noble heart esteemed the glory light,
At such advantage if he slew the knight.
95
Go fetch, he would have said, another blade,
When in his heart a better thought arose,
How for Christ's glory he was champion made,
How Godfrey had him to this combat chose,
The armies honor on his shoulder lade,
To hazards new he list not that expose;
While thus his thoughts debated on the case,
The hilts Argantes hurled at his face.
96
And forward spurred his mounture fierce withal,
Within his arms longing his foe to strain,
Upon whose helm the heavy blow did fall,
And bent well nie the metal to his brain:
But he, whose courage was heroical,
Leapt by and makes the Pagans onset vain,
And wounds his hand, which he outstretched saw,
Fiercer than eagles talent, lions paw.
97
Now here now there on every side he road,
With nimble speed, and spurred now out now in,
And as he went and came still laid on load
Where Lord Argantes arms were weak and thin,
All that huge force which in his arms abode,
His wrath, his ire, his great desire to win,
Against his foe together all he bent,
And heaven and fortune furthred his intent.
98
But he, whose courage for no peril fails,
Well armed and better hearted, scorns his power,
Like a tall ship when spent are all her sails,
Which still resists the rage of storm and shower,
Whose mighty ribs fast bound with bands and nails,
Withstands fierce Neptunes wrath, for many an hour,
And yields not up her bruised keele to winds,
In whose stern blasts no ruth nor grace she finds.
99
Argantes such thy present danger was,
When Satan stirred to aid thee at thy need,
In humane shape he forged an airie mas,
And made the shade a body seem indeed;
Well might the spirit for Clorinda pas,
Like her it was, in armor and in weed,
In stature, beauty, countenance and face,
In looks, in speech, in gesture and in pace.
100
And for the sprite should seem the same indeed,
From where she was whose show and shape it had,
Toward the wall it road with feigned speed,
Where stood the people all dismayed and sad
To see their knight of help have so great need,
And yet the law of arms all help forbad.
There in a turret sat a soldier stout
To watch, and at a loope-hole peeped out;
101
The spirit spoke to him called Oradine,
The noblest archer then that handled bow,
O Oradin (quoth she) who straight as line
Can shoot, and hit each mark set high or low,
If yonder knight (alas) be slain in fine,
As likest is, great ruth it were you know,
And greater shame, if his victorious foe
Should with his spoils triumphant homeward go.
102
Now prove thy skill, thine arrows sharp head dip
In yonder theeuish French-mans guilty blood,
I promise thee thy sovereign shall not slip,
To give thee large rewards for such a good;
Thus said the sprite: the man did laugh and skip
For hope of future gain, nor longer stood,
But from his quiver huge a shaft he hent,
And set it in his mighty bow new bent,
103
Twanged the string, out flew the quarrel long,
And through the subtle air did singing pas,
It hit the knight the buckles rich among,
Wherewith his precious girdle fast'ned was,
It bruised them and pearst his hawberke strong,
Some little blood down trickled on the gras;
Light was the wound; the angel by unseen,
The sharp head blunted of the weapon keen.
104
Raimond drew forth the shaft (as much behooved)
And with the steel, his blood out streaming came,
With bitter words his foe he than reproved,
For breaking faith, to his eternal shame.
Godfrey whose careful eyes from his beloved
Were never turned, saw and marked the same,
And when he vew'd the wounded County bleed,
He sighed, and feared, more perchance than need;
105
And with his words and with his threatening eyes,
He stirred his captains to revenge that wrong;
Forthwith the spurred courser forward hies,
Within their rests put were their lances long,
From either side a squadron brave out flies,
And boldly made a fierce encounter strong,
The raised dust to ouerspread begun
Their shining arms, and far more shining sun.
106
Of breaking spears, of ringing helm and shield,
A dreadful rumor roard on every side,
There lay an horse, another through the field
Ran masterlesse, dismounted was his guide;
Here one lay dead, there did another yield,
Some sighed, some sobb'd, some prayed and some cride;
Fierce was the fight, and longer still it lasted,
Fiercer and fewer, still themselves they wasted.
107
Argantes nimbly leapt amid the throng,
And from a soldier wrung an iron mace,
And breaking through the ranks and ranges long,
Therewith he passage made himself and place,
Raimond he sought, the thickest prease among,
To take revenge for late recein'd disgrace,
A grecdie woolfe he seemed, and would assuage
With Raimonds blood his hunger and his rage.
108
The way he found not easy as he would,
But fierce encounters put him often to pain,
He met Ormanno and Rogero bold,
Of Balnauile, Guie, and the Gerards twain;
Yet nothing might his rage and haste withhould,
These worthies strove to stop him, but in vain,
With these strong lets increased still his ire,
Like rivers stopped, or closely smouldred fire.
109
He slew Ormanno, wounded Guie, and laid
Rogero low, among the people slain,
On every side new troops the man inuaid,
Yet all their blows were waste, their onsets vain.
But while Argantes thus his prises played,
And seemed alone this skirmish to sustain,
The Duke his brother called and thus he spoke,
Go with thy troop, fight for thy Saviors sake;
110
There enter in where hottest is the fight,
Thy force against the left wing strongly bend,
This said, so brave an onset gave the knight,
That many a Painim bold there made his end
The Turks too weak seemed to sustain his might,
And could not from his power their lives defend,
Their ensigns rent and broke was their array,
And men and horse on heaps together lay.
111
Orethrowne likewise away the right wing ran,
Nor was there one again that turned his face,
Save bold Argantes, else fled every man,
Fear drove them thence on heaps, with headlong chase:
He staid alone, and battle new began,
Five hundredth men, weapon'd with sword and mace,
So great resistance never could have made,
As did Argantes with his single blade:
112
The strokes of swords and thrusts of many a spear,
The shocke of many a just, he long sustained,
He seemed of strength enough this charge to bear,
And time to strike now here now there he gained,
His armours broke, his members bruised wear,
He sweat and bled, yet courage still he fained;
But now his foes upon him preas'd so fast,
That with their weight they bore him back at last.
113
His back against this storm at length he turned,
Whose headlong fury bore him backward still,
Not like to one that fled, but one that murned
Because he did his foes no greater ill,
His threatening eyes like flaming torches burned,
His courage thirsted yet more blood to spill,
And every way and every mean he sought,
To stay his flying mates, but all for naught.
114
This good he did, while thus he played his part,
His bands and troops at ease, and safe, retired;
Yet coward dread lacks order, fear wants art,
Deaf to attend, commanded or desired.
But Godfrey that perceived in his wise heart,
How his bold knights to victory aspired,
Fresh soldiers sent, to make more quick pursuit,
And help to gather conquests precious fruit.
115
But this (alas) was not the appointed day,
Set down by heaven to end this mortal war,
The westren Lords this time had borne away
The prise, for which they trauail'd had so far,
Had not the devils (that saw the sure decay
Of their faise kingdom by this bloody war)
At once made heaven and earth with darkness blind,
And stird up tempests, storms and blustering wind.
116
Heavens glorious lamp wrapped in an ouglie veil
Of shadows dark, was hid from mortal eye,
And hels grim blacknes did bright skies assail,
On every side the fiery lightenings fly,
The thunders roar, the streaming rain and hail
Power down, and make that sea which erst was dry,
The tempests rend the Oaks and Cedars brake,
And make not trees, but rocks and mountains shake.
117
The rain, the lightning and the raging wind,
Bet in the French-mens eyes, with hideous force,
The soldiers staid amazed in heart and mind,
The terror such stopped both man and horse,
Surprised with this evil no way they find,
Whither for succor to direct their corse.
But wise Clorinda soon the advantage spied,
And spurring forth thus to her soldiers cried:
118
You hardy men at arms behold (quoth she)
How heaven, how justice in our aid does fight,
Our visages are from this tempest free,
Our hands at will may weild our weapons bright,
The fury of this friendly storm you see
Upon the foreheads of our foes does light,
And blindes their eyes, then let us take the tide,
Come follow me, good fortune be our guide.
119
This said, against her foes on rode the Dame,
And turned their backs against the wind and rain,
Upon the French with furious rage she came,
And scorned those idle blows they stroke in vain;
Argantes at the instant did the same,
And them who chased him now chased again,
Naught but his fearful back, each Christian shows
Against the tempest, and against their blows.
120
The cruel hail and deadly wounding blade,
Upon their shoulders smote them as they fled,
The blood new spilt while thus they slaughter made,
The water fallen from skies had died red,
Among the murdered bodies Pyrrhus lade,
And valiant Raiphe his heart blood there out bled,
The first subdued by strong Argantes might,
The second conqu'red by that virgin knight.
121
Thus fled the French, and them pursued in chase
The wicked sprites and all the Syrian train:
But against their force and against the fell menace
Of hail and wind, of tempest and of rain,
Godfrey alone turned his audacious face,
Blaming his Barons for their fear so vain,
Himself the camp gate boldly stood to keep,
And saved his men within his trenches deep,
122
And twice upon Argantes proud he flew,
And beat him backward maugre all his might,
And twice his thirsty sword he did imbrew
In Pagans blood where thickest was the fight;
At last himself with all his folk withdrew,
And that days conquest gave the virgin bright,
Which got, she home retired and all her men,
And thus she chased this lion to his den.
123
Yet ceased not the fury and the ire
Of these huge storms, of wind, of rain and hail,
Now was it dark, now shone the lightning fire,
The wind and water every place assail,
No bank was safe, no rampire left entire,
No tent could stand, when beam and cordage fail,
Wind, thunder, rain, all gave a dreadful sound,
And with that music deaft the trembling ground.
The eight Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Amessenger to Godfrey sage does tell
The Prince of Denmarks valor, death and end:
The Italians trusting signs untrue too well,
Think their Rinaldo slain: the wicked fend
Breeds fury in their breasts, their bosoms swell
With ire and hate, and war and strife forth send:
They threaten Godfrey, he prays to the Lord,
And calmes their fury with his look and word.
1
NOw were the skies of storms and tempests cleared,
Lord AEolus, shut up his winds in hold,
The silver mantled morning fresh appeared,
With roses crowned, and buskind high with gold:
The spirits yet which had these tempests reared,
Their malice would still more and more unfold;
And one of them that Astragor was named,
His speeches thus, to foul Alecto framed.
2
Alecto, see, we could not stop nor stay.
The knight that to our foes new tidings brings,
Who from the hands escapt (with life away)
Of that great Prince, chief of all Pagan kings,
He comes, the fall of his slain Lord to say,
Of death and loss he tells, and such sad things,
Great news he brings, and greatest danger is,
Bertoldoes son shall be called home for this.
3
Thou know what would befall, bestir thee than;
Prevent with craft, what force could not withstand,
Turn to their evil the speeches of the man,
With his own weapon wound Godfredoes hand;
Kindle debate, infect with poison wan
The English, Switzer and Italian band,
Great tumults move, make braules and quarrels rife,
Set all the camp on uproar and at strife.
4
This act beseemes thee well, and of the deed
Much may thou boast, before our Lord and king,
Thus said the sprite: persuasion small did need,
The monster grants to undertake the thing.
Meane-while the knight whose coming thus they dreed,
Before the camp his weary lims does bring,
And well nie breathless, warriors bold (he cride)
Who shall conduct me to your famous guide?
5
An hundredth strove the strangers guide to be,
To harken news the knights by heaps assemble,
The man fell lowly down upon his knee,
And kissed the hand that made proud Babel tremble;
Right puissant Lord, whose valiant acts (quoth he)
The sands and stars in number best resemble,
Would God some gladder news I might unfold,
And there he paws'd, and sighed; then thus he told:
6
Sweno the king of Denmarks only hair,
The stay and staff of his declining eild,
Longed to be among these squadrons fair,
Who for Christ's faith here serve with spear and shield,
No weariness, no storms of sea or air,
No such contents as crowns and scepters yield,
No dear entreaties of so kind a sire,
Could in his bosom quench that glorious fire.
7
He thirsted sore to learn this warlike art
Of thee, great Lord and master of the same,
And was ashamed in his noble heart,
That never act he did deserved fame;
Besides, the news and tidings from each part
Of young Rinaldoes worth, and praises came;
But that which most his courage stirred haith
Is zeal, religion, godliness and faith.
8
He hasted forward than without delay,
And with him took of knights a chosen band,
Directly toward Thrace we took the way,
To Bizance old, chief fortress of that land,
There the Greek monarch gently praid him stay,
And there an herald sent from you we fand,
How Antioch was won, who first declared,
And how defended nobly afterward.
9
Defended against Corbana valiant knight,
That all the Persian armies had to guide,
And brought so many soldiers bold to fight,
That void of men he left that kingdom wide,
He told thine acts, thy wisdom and thy might,
And told the deeds of many a Lord beside,
His speech at length to young Rinaldo past
And told his great atchieuements, first and last:
10
And how this noble camp of yours, of late
Besieged had this town, and in what sort,
And how you praid him to participate
Of the last conquest, of this noble fort.
In hardy Sweno opened was the gate
Of worthy anger, by this brave report,
So that each hour seemed five years long,
Till he were fighting, with these Pagans strong.
11
And while the herald told your fights and fraies,
Himself of cowardice reprou'd he thought,
And him, to stay that counsels him, or prays,
He hears not, or (else heard) regards naught,
He fears no perils, but (whilst he delays)
Least this last work without his help be wrought:
In this his doubt, in this his danger lies,
No hazard else he fears, no peril spies.
12
Thus hasting on, he hasted on his death,
Death that to him and us was fatal guide,
The rising morn appeared yet uneath,
When he and we were armed, and fit to ride,
The nearest way seemed best, ore hoult and heath
We went, through deserts waste and forests wide,
The streets and ways he opens as he goes,
And sets each land, free from intruding foes.
13
Now want of food, now dangerous ways we find,
Now open war, now ambush closely laid;
Yet past we forth, all perils left behind,
Our foes or dead, or run away afraid,
Of victory so happy blew the wind,
That careless all, and heedlesse to it maid:
Until one day his tents he hapt to rear,
To Palestine when we approached near,
14
There did our scoutes return, and bring us news
That dreadful noise of horse and arms they hear,
And that they deemed by sundry signs and shows,
There was some mighty host of Pagans near.
At these sad tidings many changed their hewes,
Some looked pale for dread, some shook for fear,
Only our noble Lord was alterd naught,
In look, in face, in gesture or in thought.
15
But said, a crown prepare you to possess
Of martyrdom, or happy victory;
For this I hope, for that I wish no less,
Of greater merit, and of greater glory.
Brethren, this camp will shortly be I guess,
A temple, sacred to our memory,
To which the holy men of future age,
To view our graves shall come in pilgrimage.
16
This said, he set the watch in order right
To guard the camp, along the trenches deep,
And as he armed was, so every knight
He willed on his back his arms to keep.
Now had the stillness of the quiet night
Drowned all the world in silence and in sleep,
When suddenly we heard a dreadful sound,
Which deaft the earth, and tremble made the ground:
17
Arm, arm they cride, Prince Sweno at the same,
Glistring in shining steel leapt foremost out,
His visage shone, his noble looks did flame,
With kindled brand of courage bold and stout,
When lo the Pagans to assault us came,
And with huge numbers hemmed us round about,
A forest thick of spears about us grew,
And over us a cloud of arrows flew:
18
Uneven the fight, unequal was the fray,
Our enemies were twenty men to one,
On every side the slain and wounded lay,
Unseen, where naught but glistring weapons shone:
The number of the dead could no man say,
So was the place with darkness ouergone,
The night her mantle black upon us spreedes,
Hiding our losses, and our valiant deeds.
19
But hardy Sweno, midst the other train,
By his great acts was well descride I wot,
No darkness could his valors day light stain,
Such wondrous blows on every side he smote;
A stream of blood, a bank of bodies slain,
About him made a bulwark and a mote,
And when so ere he turned his fatal brand,
Dread in his looks, and death sat in his hand,
20
Thus fought we till the morning bright appeared,
And strowed roses on the azure sky,
But when her lamp had nights thick darkness cleared,
Wherein the bodies dead did buried lie,
Then our sad cries to heaven for grief we reared,
Our loss apparent was, for we descrie
How all our camp destroyed was almost,
And all our people well nie slain and lost.
21
Of thousands twain an hundredth scant suruiued,
When Sweno murdered saw each valiant knight,
I know not if his heart in sunder riued,
For dear compassion, of that woeful sight;
He showed no change, but said, since so deprived
We are of all our friends by chance of fight,
Come follow them, the path to heaven their blood
Marks out, now angels made, of martyrs good.
22
This said, and glad I think of death at hand,
The signs of heavenly joy shone through his eyes,
Of Sarracines against a mighty band,
With fearelesse heart, and constant breast he flies;
No steel could shield them from his cutting brand,
But whom he hits without recure he dies,
He never stroke but feld or killed his foe,
And wounded was himself from top to toe.
23
Not strength, but courage now, preserved on live
This hardy champion, fortress of our faith,
Stricken he strikes, still stronger more they strive,
The more they hurt him, more he does them scaith,
When toward him a furious knight can drive,
Of members huge, fierce looks, and full of wraith,
That with the aid of many a Pagan crew,
After long fight, at last Prince Sweno slew.
24
Ah heavy chance! down fell the valiant yuth,
Nor among us all did one so strong appear,
As to revenge his death, that this is truth,
By his dear blood and noble bones I swear,
That of my life I had nor care nor ruth,
No wounds I shoun'd, no blows I would off bear,
And had not heaven my wished end denied,
Even there I should, and willing should have died.
25
Alive I fell among my fellows slain,
Yet wounded so that each one thought me dead,
Nor what our foes did since can I explain,
So sore amazed was my heart and head;
But when I opened first mine eyes again,
Nights curtain black upon the earth was spread,
And through the darkness to my feeble sight,
Appeared the twinkling of a slender light.
26
Not so much force or judgment in me lies,
As to discern things seen and not mistake,
I saw like them, who open and shut their eyes
By turns, now half asleep, now half awake,
My body eeke another torment tries,
My wounds began to smart, my hurtes to ache,
For every sore, each member pinched was,
With nights sharp air, heavens frost, and earthes cold gras.
27
But still the light approached near and near,
And with the same a whispring murmur run,
Till at my side arrived both they wear,
When I to spread my feeble eyes begone:
Two men behold in vestures long appear,
With each a lamp in hand, who said, O son
In that dear Lord who helps his servants, trust,
Who ere they ask grants all things to the just.
28
This said, each one his sacred blessing flings
Upon my coarse, with broad out stretched hand,
And mumbled hymns and psalms and holy things,
Which I could neither hear, nor understand;
Arise (quoth they) with that as I had wings,
All whole and sound I leapt up from the land,
O miracle, sweet, gentle, strange and true!
My lims new strength received, and vigor new.
29
I gazde on them like one, whose heart denai'th
To think that done, he sees so strangely wrought;
Till one said thus, O thou of little faith,
What doubts perplex thy unbelieving thought?
Each one of us aliuing body haith,
We are Christ's chosen servants, fear us naught,
Who to avoid the worlds allurements vain,
In wilful penance, hermits poor remain.
30
Us messengers to comfort thee elect
That Lord has sent that rules both heaven and hell;
Who often does his blessed will effect,
By such weak means, as wonder is to tell;
He will not that this body lie neglect,
Wherein so noble soul did lately dwell,
To which again when it vprisen is,
It shall united be, in lasting blis.
31
I say Lord Swenoes corpse, for which prepared
A tomb there is according to his worth,
By which his honor shall be far declared,
And his just praises spread from south to north:
But lift thine eyes up to the heavens ward,
Mark yonder light that like the sun shines forth,
That shall direct thee with those beams so clear,
To find the body of thy master dear.
32
With that I saw from Cinthias silver face,
Like to a falling star a beam down slide,
That bright as golden line marked out the place,
And lightened with clear streams the forest wide,
So Latmos shone when Phebe left the chase,
And laid her down by her Endimions side;
Such was the light, that well discern I could
His shape, his wounds, his face (though dead) yet bold.
33
He lay not groueling now, but as a knight
That ever had to heavenly things desire,
So toward heaven the Prince lay bolt upright,
Like him, that upward still sought to aspire,
His right hand closed held his weapon bright,
Ready to strike and execute his ire,
His left upon his breast was humbly laid,
That men might know, that while he did he praid.
34
Whilst on his wounds with bootlesse tears I wept,
That neither helped him, nor eased my care,
One of those aged fathers to him stepped,
And forced his hand that needless weapon spare:
This sword (quoth he) has yet good token kept,
That of the Pagans blood he drunk his share,
And blusheth still, he could not save his Lord,
Rich, strong and sharp, was never better sword.
35
Heaven therefore will not, though the Prince be slain,
Who used erst to weild this precious brand,
That so brave blade unused should remain;
But that it pass from strong, to stronger hand,
Who with like force can weild the same again,
And longer shall in grace of fortune stand,
And with the same shall bitter vengeance take,
On him that Sweno slew, for Swenoes sake.
36
Great Soliman killed Sweno, Soliman
For Swenoes sake, upon this sword must die.
Here take the blade and with it haste thee than
Thither where Godfrey does encamped lie,
And fear not thou that any shall or can
Or stop thy way, or lead thy steps awrie;
For he that does thee on this message send,
Thee with his hand shall guide, keep and defend.
37
Arrived there it is his blessed will,
With true report that thou declare and tell
The zeal, the strength, the courage, and the skill
In thy beloved Lord, that late did dwell,
How for Christ's sake he came his blood to spill,
And sample left to all of doing well,
That future ages may admire his deed,
And courage take when his brave end they reed.
38
It rests now, thou know that gentle knight,
That of this sword shall be thy masters hair,
It is Rinaldo young, with whom in might
And martial skill, no champion may compaire,
Give it to him and say; the heavens bright
Of this revenge to him commit the caire.
While thus I list'ned what this old man said,
A wonder new from further speech us staid;
39
For there whereas the wounded body lay,
A stately tomb with curious work (behold)
And wondrous art was built out of the clay,
Which rising round the carkas did enfold,
With words engraven in the marble gray,
The warriors name, his worth and praise that told,
On which I gazing stood, and often read
That epitaph of my dear master dead.
40
Among his soldiers (quoth the hermit) hear
Must Swenoes corpse remain in marble chest,
While up to heaven are flowne their spirits dear,
To live in endless joy for ever blessed,
His funeral thou have with many a tear
Accompaned, its now high time to rest,
Come be my guest, until the morning ray
Shall light the world again, then take thy way.
41
This said, he led me over holts and hags,
Through thorns and bushes scant my legs I drew,
Till underneath an heap of stones and crags
At last he brought me to a secret mew,
Among the bears, wild boares, the wolves and stags,
There dwelt he safe with his disciple true,
And feared no treason, force, nor hurt at all,
His guiltless conscience was his castles wall.
42
My supper, roots; my bed, was moss and leaves;
But weariness in little rest found ease:
But when the purple morning night bereaues
Of late usurped rule, on lands and seas,
His loathed couch each wakefull hermit leaves,
To pray rose they, and I, for so they please,
I congee took when ended was the same,
And hitherward, as they advised me, came.
43
The Dane his woeful tale had done, when thus
The good Prince Godfrey answered him, sir knight,
Thou bring tidings sad and dolorous,
For which our heavy camp laments of right,
Since so brave troops and so dear friends to us,
One hour has spent, in one unlucky fight;
And so appeared has thy master stout,
As lightning does, now kindled, now quenched out.
44
But such a death and end exceeds all
The conquests vain of realms, or spoils of gold,
Nor aged Romes proud stately capital,
Did ever triumph yet like theirs behold,
They sit in heaven on thrones celestial,
Crowned with glory, for their conquest bold,
Where each his hurtes I think to other shows,
And glory in those bloody wounds and blows.
45
But thou who have part of thy race to run,
With haps and hazards of this world itost,
Rejoice, for those high honors they have won,
Which cannot be by chance or fortune crossed:
But for thou ask for Bertoldoes son,
Know, that he wandreth, banished from this host,
And till of him new tidings some man tell,
Within this camp I deem it best thou dwell.
46
These words of theirs in many a soul renewed
The sweet remembrance of fair Sophias child,
Some with salt tears for him their cheeks bedewed,
Least evil betide him among the Pagans wild,
And every one his valiant prowess showed,
And of his battles stories long compilde,
Telling the Dane his acts and conquests past,
Which made his ears amazed, his heart aghast.
47
Now when remembrance of the youth had wrought
A tender pity in each softened mind,
Behold returned home with all they cought,
The bands that were to forage late assinde,
And with them in abundance great they brought
Both flocks and herds of every sort and kind,
And corn although not much, and hay to feed
Their noble steads and coursers when they need.
48
They also brought of misaduenture sad
Tokens and signs, seemed too apparent true,
Rinaldoes armor frusht and hackt they had,
Often pearsed through, with blood besmeared new,
About the camp, (for always rumors bad,
Are furthest spread) these woeful tidings flew,
Thither assembled straight both hie and low,
Longing to see what they were loath to know.
49
His heavy hawberke was both seen and known,
And his broad shield, wherein displaied flies
The bird, that proves her chickens for her own,
By looking against the sun with open eyes,
That shield was to the Pagans often shown
In many a hard and hardy enterpries,
But now with many a gash and many a stroke,
They see (and sigh to see it) frusht and broke.
50
While all his soldiers whispred under hand,
And here and there the fault and cause do lay,
Godfrey before him called Aliprand
Captain of those that brought of late this pray,
A man who did on points of virtue stand,
Blameless in words, and true what ere he say,
Say (quoth the Duke) where you this armor had,
Hide not the truth, but tell it good or bad.
51
He answered him, as far from hence think I
As on two days a speedy post well rides,
To Gaza ward a little plain does lie,
It self among the steepie hills which hides,
Through it slow falling from the mountains hie,
A rolling brook twixt bush and bramble glideth,
Clad with thick shade of boughs of broad leau'd treene,
Fit place for men to lie in wait unseen.
52
Thither, to seek some flocks or herds, we went
Perchance close hid under the green wood shaw,
And found the springing grass with blood besprent,
A warrior tumbled in his blood we saw,
His arms though dustie, bloody, hackt and rent,
Yet well we knew, when near the coarse we draw;
To which (to view his face) in vain I started,
For from his body his fair head was parted;
53
His right hand wanted eeke, with many a wound
The trunk through pearsed was from back to breast,
A little by his empty helm we found
The silver Eagle shining on his crest,
To spy at whom to ask we gazed round,
A churl toward us his steps addressed,
But when us armed by the coarse he spide,
He ran away his fearful face to hide,
54
But we pursued him, took him, spoke him fair,
Till comforted at last he answer made,
How that the day before, he saw repair
A band of soldiers from that forests shade,
Of whom one carried by the golden hair
A head, but late cut off with murdring blade,
The face was fair and young, and on the chin
No sign of beard to bud did yet begin.
53
And how in sindall wrapped away he bore
That head with him hung at his saddle bow,
And how the murth'rers by the arms they wore,
For soldiers of our camp he well did know;
The carcass I disarmed and weeping sore,
Because I guest who should that harness owe;
Away I brought it, but first order gave,
That noble body should be laid in grave.
56
But if it be his trunk whom I believe,
A nobler tomb his worth deserves well,
This said good Aliprando took his leeue,
Of certain troath he had no more to tell.
Sore sighed the Duke, so did these news him grieve,
Fears in his heart, doubts in his bosom dwell,
He earnd to know, to sinde, and learn the truth,
And punish would them that had slain the yuth.
57
But now the night despred her lazy wings,
Ore the broad fields of heavens bright wilderness,
Sleep the souls rest, and ease of careful things,
Buried in happy peace, both more and less,
Thou Argillan alone, whom sorrow stings
Still wakest, musing on great deeds I guess,
Nor suffrest in thy watchful eyes to creep,
The sweet repose, of mild and gentle sleep.
58
This man was strong of lims, and all his says
Were bold, of ready tongue, and working spright,
Nere Trento borne, bred up in braules and fraies,
In iarres, in quarrels, and in civil fight,
For which exiled, the hills and public ways
He filled with blood, and robb'ries day and night,
Until to Asiaes wars at last he came,
And boldly there he served, and purchased fame.
59
He closed his eyes at last when day drew near,
Yet slept he not, but senseless lay oppressed,
With strange amazednes, and sudden fear,
Which false Alecto breathed in his breast,
His working powers within deluded wear,
Stone still he quiet lay, yet took no rest,
For to his thought the feend her self presented,
And with strange visions his weak brain tormented.
60
A murdered body huge beside him stood,
Of head and right hand both, but lately spoiled,
His left hand bore the head, whose visage good,
Both pale and wan, with dust and gore defoiled,
Yet spoke, though dead, with whose sad words, the blood
Forth at his lips, in huge abundance boiled,
Fly Argillan from this false camp fly far,
Whose guide, a traitor; captains, murdrers ar.
61
Godfrey has murdered me by treason vile,
What favor than hope you my trusty friends?
His villain heart is full of fraud and guile,
To your destruction all his thoughts he bends,
Yet if thou thirst, of praise for noble style,
If in thy strength thou trust, thy strength that ends
All hard assaies, fly not, first with his blood
Appease my ghost wandering by Lethe flood;
62
I will thy weapon whet, inflame thine ire,
Arm thy right hand, and strengthen every part.
This said; even while she spoke she did inspire
With fury, rage, and wrath his troubled heart:
The man awakte, and from his eyes like fire
The poys'ned sparks of headstrong madness start,
And armed as he was forth is he gone,
And gathered all The Italian bands in one.
63
He gathered them where lay the arms that late
Were good Rinaldoes; then with semblance stout,
And furious words, his fore conceived hate
In bitter speeches, thus he vomits out;
Is not this people barbarous and ingrate,
In whom troath finds no place, faith takes no rout?
Whose thirst unquenched is of blood and gold,
Whom no yoke boweth, bridle none can hold.
64
So much we suffered have these seven years long,
Under this servile and unworthy yoke,
That through Rome and Italy our wrong
A thousand years hereafter shall be spoke:
I count not how Cilicias kingdom strong,
Subdued was by Prince Tancredies stroke,
Nor how false Baldwine him that land bereaues
Of virtues harvest, fraud there reapt the sheaues:
65
Nor speak I how each hour, at every need
Quick, ready, resolute at all assaies,
With fire and sword we hasted forth with speed,
And bore the brunt of all their fights and fraies;
But when we had performed and done the deed,
At ease and leisure they divide the prays,
We reaped naught but travail for our toil,
Their was the praise, the realms, the gold, the spoil.
66
Yet all this season were we willing blind,
Offended, unrevenged, wronged, but vnwroken,
Light greefes could not provoke our quiet mind,
But now (alas) the mortal blow in stricken,
Rinaldo have they slain, and law of kind,
Of arms, of nations and of high heaven broken,
Why does not heaven kill them with fire and thunder?
To swallow them why cleaues not earth asunder?
67
They have Rinaldo slain the sword and sheeld
Of Christ's true faith, and unrevenged he lies,
Still unrevenged lies in the feeld
His noble corpse, to feed the crows and pies:
Who murdered him? who shall us certain yield?
Who sees not that although he wanted eyes?
Who knows not how The Italian chivalry
Proud Godfrey, and false Baldwine both envy?
68
What need we further proof? heaven, heaven I swear,
Will not consent herein we be beguiled,
This night I saw his murdered sprite appear,
Pale, sad and wan, with wounds and blood defiled,
A spectacle full both of grief and fear,
Godfrey for murdring him, the ghost reviled.
I saw it was no dream, before mine eyes,
How ere I look, still still me thinks it flies.
69
What shall we do? shall we be governed still,
By this false hand, contaminate with blood?
Or else depart and travail forth, until
To Euphrates we come, that sacred flood?
Where dwells a people void of martial skill,
Whose cities rich, whose land is fat and good,
Where kingdoms great we may at ease provide,
Far from these French men's malice, from their pride.
70
Than let us go, and no reuengement take
For this brave knight, though it lie in our power,
No, no, that courage rather newly wake,
Which never sleeps in fear and dread one hour,
And this pestifrous serpent, poys'ned snake,
Of all our knights that has destroi'd the flower,
First let us slay, and his deserved end
Ensample make to him that kills his friend.
71
I will, I will, if your courageous force,
Dares so much as it can well perform,
Tear out his cursed heart without remorse?
The neast of treason false and guile enorme.
Thus spoke the angry knight, with headlong corse
The rest him followed like a furious storm,
Arm, arm, they cride, to arms the soldiers ran,
And as they ron, arm, arm, cride every man.
72
Among them Alecto strowed wastefull fire,
Enuenoming the hearts of most and least,
Folly, disdain, madness, strife, rancour, ire,
Thirst to shed blood, in every breast encreast,
This ill spread far, and till it set on fire
With rage, The Italian lodgings never ceast,
From thence unto the Switzers camp it went,
And last infected every English tent.
73
Not public loss of their beloved knight,
Alone stirred up their rage and wrath untamed,
But fore-conceiued greefes, and quarrels light,
Their ire still nourished, and still enflamed,
Awaked was each former cause of spright,
The Frenchmen cruel and unjust they named,
And with bold threats they made their hatred known,
Hate seeld kept close, and often unwisely shown:
74
Like boiling liquor in a seething pot,
That fumeth, swells hie, and bubbleth fast,
Till ore the brimmes among the embers hot,
Part of the broth and of the scum it cast,
Their rage and wrath those few appeased not,
In whom of wisdom yet remained some taste,
Camillo, William, Tancred were away,
And all whose greatness might their madness stay.
75
Now headlong ran to harness in this heat
These furious people, all on heaps confused,
The roaring trumpets battle began to threat,
As it in time of mortal war is used,
The messengers ran to Godfredo great,
And bod him arm, while on this noise he mused,
And Baldwin first well clad in iron hard,
Stepped to his side, a sure and faithful guard.
76
Their murmurs heard, to heaven he lift his eine
As was his wont, to God for aid he fled;
O Lord, thou know this right hand of mine
Abhorred ever civil blood to shed,
Illumine their dark souls with light divine,
Repress their rage, by hellish fury bred,
The innocence of my guiltless mind
Thou know, and make these know, with fury blind.
77
This said, he felt infused in each vain,
A sacred heat from heaven above distilled,
A hear in man that courage could constrain,
That his grave look with awful boldness filled,
Well guarded forth he went to meet the train
Of those that would revenge Rinaldo killed;
And though their threats he heard, and saw them bent
To arms on every side, yet on he went.
78
Above his hawberke strong a cote he ware,
Embrodred fair with pearl and rich stone,
His hands were naked, and his face was bare,
Wherein a lamp of majesty bright shone;
He shook his golden mace wherewith he dare
Resist the force of his rebellious fone:
Thus he appeared, and thus he began them teach
In shape an angel, and a God in speech:
79
What foolish words? what threats be these I hear?
What noise of arms? who dares these tumults move?
Am I so honored? stand you so in fear?
Where is your late obedience? where your love?
Of Godfreys falsehood who can witness bear?
Who dare or will these accusations prove?
Perchance you look I should entreaties bring,
Sue for your favors, or excuse the thing.
80
Ah God forbid, these lands should hear or see
Him so disgrast, at whose great name they quake;
This scepter and my noble acts for me,
A true defense before the world can make:
Yet for sharp justice governed shall be
With clemency, I will no vengeance take
For this offense, but for Rinaldoes love,
I pardon you, hereafter wiser prove.
81
But Argillanoes guilty blood shall wash
This stain away, who kindled this debate,
And led by hasty rage and fury rash,
To these disorders first undid the gate:
While thus he spoke the lightning beams did flash
Out of his eyes of majesty and state,
That Argillan (who would have thought it) shook
For fear and terror, conqu'red with his look.
82
The rest with indiscreet and foolish wrath
Who threatened late, with words of shame and pride,
Whose hands so ready were to harm and scath,
And brandished bright swords on every side;
Now hushed and still attend what Godfrey sath,
With shame and fear their bashful looks they hide,
And Argillan they let in chains be bound,
Although their weapons him enuiron'd round.
83
So when a lion shakes his dreadful maine,
And beats his tail, with courage proud and wroth,
If his commander come, who first took pain
To tame his youth, his lofty crest down go'th,
His threats he fears and obaies the rain
Of thraldom base, and seruiceage, though loath,
Nor can his sharp teeth nor his armed paws,
Force him rebel against his rulers laws.
84
Fame is a winged warrior they beheild,
With semblant fierce and furious look that stood,
And in his left hand had a splendant shield,
Wherewith he covered safe their chieftaine good,
His other hand a naked sword did weild,
From which distilling fell the lukewarm blood,
The blood pardie of many a realm and town,
Whereon the Lord his wrath had powered down.
85
Thus was the tumult (without bloodshed) ended,
Their arms laid down, strife into exile sent,
Godfrey his thoughts to greater actions bended,
And homeward to his rich pauilion went,
For to assault the fortress he intended,
Before the second or third day were spent;
Meane-while his timber wrought he often suruaid,
Where of his rams and engines great he maid.
The ninth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Alecto false great Soliman does move
By night the Christians in their tents to kill:
But God who their intents saw from above,
Sends Michael down from his sacred hill:
The spirits foul to hell the angel drove;
The knights deliu'red from the witch at will
Destroy the Pagans, scatter all their host:
The Sultan flies when all his bands are lost.
1
THe grisly child of Herebus the grim,
(Who saw these tumults done and tempests spent,
Against stream of grace who ever strove to swim,
And all her thoughts against heavens wisdom bent)
Departed now, bright Titans beams were dim,
And fruitful lands waxt barren as she went,
She sought the rest of her infernal crew,
New storms to raise, new broiles, and tumults new.
2
She (that well wist her sisters had entised,
By their false arts, far from the Christian host,
Tancred, Rinaldo, and the rest, best prised
For martial skill, for might esteemed most)
Said, (of these discords and these strifes advised)
Great Solman, when day his light has lost,
These Christians shall assail with sudden war,
And kill them all, while thus they strive and iar.
3
With that where Soliman remained she flew,
And found him out with his Arabian bands,
Great Soliman, of all Christ's foes untrue,
Boldest of courage, mightiest of his hands,
Like him was none of all that earth-bred crew
That heaped mountains on th'Aemonian sands,
Of Turks he sovereign was, and Nice his seat,
Where late he dwelt, and ruled that kingdom great.
4
The lands forenenst the Greekish shore he held,
From Sangars mouth to crookt Meanders fall,
Where they of Phrygia, Misia, Lidia dweld,
Bythinias towns, and Pontus cities all:
But when the hearts of Christian Princes sweld,
And rose in arms to make proud Asia thrall,
Those lands were won where he did scepter weild,
And he twice beaten was, in pitched field.
5
When fortune of the had in vain assaid,
And spent his forces, which auaild him naught,
To Egypts king himself he close conuaid;
Who welcomd him as he could best have thought,
Glad in his heart and inly well appaid,
That to his court so great a lord was brought:
For he decreed his armies huge to bring,
To succor Judah land, and Iudaes king.
6
But (ere he open war proclam'de) he would
That Soliman should kindle first the fire,
And with huge sums of false entising gould,
The Arabian thieves he sent him forth to hire,
While he the Asian Lords and Morians bold
Unites; the Sultan won to his desire
Those outlawes, ready aie for gold to fight:
The hope of gain has such alluring might.
7
Thus made their captain, to destroy and burn
In Judah land he entered is so fat,
That all the ways whereby he should return,
By Godfreys people, kept and stopped ar,
And now he began his former losses murne,
This wound had hit him on an elder scar,
On great adventures run his hardy thought,
But not assur'de, he yet resolved on naught.
8
To him Alecto came, and semblant bore
Of one, whose age was great, whose looks were grave,
Whose cheeks were bloodlesse, and whose locks were hoar,
Mustachoes strouting long, and chin close shave,
A steepled Turbant, on her head she wore,
Her garment side, and by her side, her glaue,
Her guilden quiver at her shoulders hong,
And in her hand a bow was, stiff and strong.
9
We have (quoth she) through wildernesses gone,
Through sterill sands, strange paths, and uncouth ways,
Yet spoil or booty have we gotten none,
Nor victory, deserving fame or praise.
Godfrey meane-while to ruin stick and stone
Of this fair town, with battrie sore, assaies;
And if a while we rest, we shall behold
This glorious city smoking lie in mold.
10
Are sheep coats burnt, or prays of sheep or kine,
The cause why Soliman these bands did arm?
Can thou that kingdom lately lost of thine
Recover thus, or thus redress thy harm?
No, no, when heavens small candles next shall shine,
Within their tents give them a bold alarm;
Believe Araspes old, whose grave advice
Thou have in exile proved, and proved in Nice.
11
He fears naught, he doubts no sudden broile,
From these ill armed, and worse hearted, bands,
He thinks this people, used to rob and spoil,
To such exploit dares not lift up their hands;
Up than and with thy courage put to foil
This fearelesse camp, while thus secure it stands.
This said, her poison in his breast she hides,
And than to shapelesse air unseen, she glides.
12
The Sultan cride, O thou, which in my thought
Increased have, my rage and fury so,
Nor seem a wight of mortal metal wrought,
I follow thee, where so thee list to go,
Mountains of men by dint of sword down brought
Thou shall behold, and seas of red blood floe
Where ere I go; only be thou my guide,
When sable night the azure skies shall hide.
13
When this was said, he mustred all his crew,
Reprou'd the cowards, and allowed the bold:
His forward camp, inspired with courage new,
Was ready dight to follow, where he would:
Alectoes self the warning trumpet blew,
And to the wind his standard great vnrould,
Thus on they marched, and thus on they went,
Of their approach their speed the news prevent.
14
Alecto left them, and her person dight,
Like one, that came some tidings new to tell:
It was the time, when first the rising night
Her sparkling dimonds, powers forth to sell,
When (into Sion come) she marched right
Where Iudais aged tyrant used to dwell,
To whom of Solimans designment bold,
The place, the manner, and the time she told.
15
Their mantle dark the grisly shadows spread,
Stained with spots of deepest sanguine hew,
Warm drops of blood, on earthes black visageshed,
Supplide the place of pure and precious dew,
The moon and stars for fear of sprites were fled,
The shriking gobblings each where howling flew,
The Furies roar, the ghosts and Fairies yell,
The earth was filled with devils, and empty hell.
16
The Sultan fierce (through all this horror) went
Toward the camp of his redouted foes,
The night was more than half consumed and spent;
Now headlong down the westren hill she goes,
When distant scant a mile from Godfreys tent
He let his people there a while repose,
And victail'd them, and then he boldly spoke
These words, which rage and courage might provoke:
17
See there a camp, full stuffed of spoils and prays,
Not half so strong, as false report records;
See there the storehouse, where their captain lays
Our treasures stolen, where Asiaes wealth he hordeth;
Now chance the ball unto our racket plays,
Take than the vantage which good luck affords,
For all their arms, their horses, gold and treasure
Are ours, ours without loss, harm or displeasure.
18
Nor is this camp that great victorious host
That flew the Persian Lords, and Nice has won;
For those in this long war are spent and lost,
These are the dregs, the wine is all out run,
And these few left, are drowned and dead almost
In heavy sleep, the labor half is done,
To send them headlong to Auernus deep,
For little differs death and heavy sleep.
19
Come, come, this sword the passage open shall
Into their camp, and on their bodies slain
We will pass ore their rampire and their wall;
This blade, as sithes cut down the fields of grain,
Shall cut them so, Christ's kingdom now shall fall,
Asia her freedom, you shall praise obtain:
Thus he enflamed his soldiers to the fight,
And led them on through silence of the night.
20
The Sentinel by star light (lo) descride
This mighty Sultan, and his host draw near,
Who found not as he hopte the Christians guide
Unware, ne yet unready was his gear:
The scout when this huge army they descride
Ran back, and began with shoutes the larum rear,
The watch start up and drew their weapons bright,
And buskt them bold to battle and to fight.
21
Th'Arabians wist they could not come unseen,
And therefore loud their iarring trumpets sound,
Their yelling cries to heaven up heaued been,
The horses thundered on the solid ground,
The mountains roared, and the valleies green,
The Echo sighed from the caves around,
Alecto with her brand (kindled in hell)
Tokened to them, in David's tower that dwell.
22
Before the rest forth pricked the Sultan fast,
Against the watch, not yet in order just,
As swift as hideous Bore as hasty blast
From hollow rocks when first his storms out brust,
The raging floods, that trees and rocks down cast,
Thunders, that towns and towers drive to dust:
Earthquakes, to tear the world in twain that threat,
Are naught, compared to his fury great.
23
He stroke no blow, but that his foe he hit;
And never hit, but made a grievous wound:
And never wounded, but death followed it;
And yet no peril, hurt or harm he found,
No weapon on his hardened helmet bit,
No puissant stroke his senses once astound,
Yet like a bell his tinkling helmet rong,
And thence flew flames of fire and sparks among.
24
Himself well nie had put the watch to flight,
A iollie troop of French men strong and stout,
When his Arabians came by heaps to fight,
Covering (like raging floods) the fields about;
The beaten Christians ran away full light,
The Pagans (mingled with the flying rout)
Entered their camp, and filled (as they stood)
Their tents with ruin, slaughter, death and blood.
25
High on the Soldans helm enameled laid
An hideous dragon, armed with many ascaile,
With iron paws, and leathren wings displaid,
Which twisted on a knot her forked tail,
With triple tongue it seemed she hist and braid,
About her jaws the froth and venom traile,
And as he stirred, and as his foes him hit,
So flames to cast, and fire she seemed to spit.
26
With this strange light, the Sultan fierce appeared
Dreadful to those that round about him been,
As to poor sailers (when huge storms are reared)
With lightning flash the raging seas are seen,
Some fled away, because his strength they feared,
Some bolder against him bent their weapons keen,
And froward night (in evils and mischiefs pleased)
Their dangershid, and dangers still increased.
27
Among the rest (that strove to merit praise)
Was old Latinus, borne by Tibersbanke,
To whose stout heart (in fights and bloody fraies)
For all his eeld, base fear yet never sanke;
Five sons he had, the comforts of his days,
That from his side in no adventure shranke,
But long before their time, in iron strong
They clad their members, tender, soft and young.
28
The bold ensample of their fathers might
Their weapons whetted, and their wrath encreast,
Come let us go (quoth he) where yonder knight
Upon our soldiers makes his bloody feast,
Let not their slaughter once your hearts affright,
Where danger most appears, there fear it least;
For honor dwells in hard attemptes (my sons)
And greatest praise, in greatest peril, wonnes.
29
Her tender brood the forests savage queen
(Ere on their crestes their rugged maines appear,
Before their mouths by nature armed been,
Or paws have strength a seely lamb to tear)
So leads forth to pray, and makes them keen,
And learnes by her ensample, naught to fear
The hunter, in those desert woods that takes
The lesser beasts, whereon his feast he makes.
30
The noble father and his hardy crew
Fierce Soliman on every side invade,
At once all six upon the Sultan flew,
With lances sharp, and strong encounters made,
His broken spear the eldest boy down threw,
And boldly (over boldly) drew his blade,
Wherewith he strove (but strove therewith in vain)
The Pagans stead (unmarked) to have slain.
31
But as a mountain or a cape of land
Assailed with storms and seas on every side,
Does unremoved, steadfast, still withstand
Storm, thunder, lightning, tempest, wind and tide:
The Sultan so withstood Latinus band,
And vnremou'd did all their iustes abide,
And of that hapless youth (who hurt his stead)
Down to the chin he cleft in twain the head.
32
Kind Aramante (who saw his brother slain)
To hold him up stretched forth his friendly arm,
O foolish kindness, and O pity vain,
To add our proper loss, to others harm!
The Prince let fall his sword and cut in twain
(About his brother twinde) the childs weak arm,
Down from their saddles both together slide,
Together mourned they, and together did.
33
That done, Sabinos lance with nimble force
He cut in twain, and against the stripling bold
He spurred his stead, that underneath his horse
The hardy infant tumbled on the mold,
Whose soul (out squeased from his bruised corse)
With ougly painfulnes forsook her hold,
And deeply mourned, that of so sweet a cage
She left the bliss, and joys of youthful age.
34
But Picus yet and Laurence were on live,
Whom at one birth their mother fair brought out,
A pair whose likeness made the parents strive
Often which was which, and ioyed in their dout:
But what their birth did vndistinguisht give,
The Soldans rage made known, for Picus stout
Headless at one huge blow he laid in dust,
And through the breast his gentle brother thrust.
35
Their father, (but no father now, alas!
When all his noble sons at once were slain)
In their five deaths so often murdered was,
I know not how his life could him sustain,
Except his heart were forged of steel or bras,
Yet still he lived, pardie, he saw not plain
Their dying looks, although their deaths he knoes,
It is some ease, not to behold our woes.
36
He wept not, for the night her curtain spread
Between his cause of weeping and his eyes,
But still he mourned and on sharp vengeance fed,
And thinks he conquers, if revenged he dies;
He thirstes the Soldans heathenish blood to shed,
And yet his own at less then naught does prise,
Nor can he tell whether he leifer would,
Or die himself, or kill the Pagan bold.
37
At last, is this right hand (quoth he) so weak,
That thou disdainst against me to use thy might?
Can it naught do? can this tongue nothing speak
That may provoke thine ire, thy wrath, and spite?
With that he stroke (his anger great to wreake)
A blow, that pearst the maile and metal bright,
And in his flank set open a flood-gate wide,
Whereat the blood out streamed from his side.
38
Provoked with his cry, and with that blow
The Turk upon him began his blade discharge,
He cleft his breast plate, having first pearst throw
(Lined with seven bulls hides) his mighty targe,
And sheathed his weapon in his guts below,
Wretched Latinus at that issue large,
And at his mouth, powered out his vital blood,
And sprinkled with the same his murdered brood.
39
On Appenine like as a sturdie tree,
Against the winds that makes resistance stout,
If with a storm it ouerturned be,
Falls down and breaks the trees and plants about,
So Latin fell, and with him felled he
And slew the nearest of the Pagans root,
A worthy end, fit for a man of fame,
That dying, slew; and conqu'red, overcame.
40
Meane-while the Sultan strove his rage interne
To satisfy with blood of Christians spild,
Th'Arabians hartned by their captain stern,
With murder every tent and cabin filled,
Henry the English knight, and Olipherne,
O fierce Draguto by thy hands were killed!
Gilbert and Phillip were by Ariadene
Both slain, both borne upon the banks of Rhene.
41
Albazar with his mace Ernesto slew,
Under Algazell Engerlan down fell,
But the huge murder of the meaner crew,
Or manner of their deaths, what tongue can tell?
Godfrey, when first the heathen trumpets blew,
Awakt, which heard, no fear could make him dwell,
But he and his were up and armed ere long,
And marched forward with a squadron strong,
42
He that well heard the tumor and the cry,
And marked the tumult still grow more and more,
The Arabian thieves he judged by and by
Against his soldiers made this battle sore;
For that they forraid all the countries nie,
And spoiled the fields, the Duke knew well before,
Yet thought he not they had the hardiment
So to assail him in his armed tent.
43
All suddenly he heard (while on he went)
How to the city ward arm, arm, they cride,
The noise vpreared to the firmament
With dreadful howling filled the valleies wide:
This was Clorinda, whom the king forth sent
To battle, and Argantes by her side.
The Duke (this heard) to Guelpho turned, and prayed
Him, his lieutenant be, and to him said:
44
You hear this new alarm from yonder part,
That from the town breaks out with so much rage,
Us needs much your valor and your art
To calm their fury, and their heat to swage;
Go thither then, and with you take some part
Of these brave soldiers of mine equipage,
While with the res'due of my champions bold
I drive these wolves again out of our fold.
45
They parted (this agreed on them between)
By diverse paths, Lord Guelpho to the hill,
And Godfrey hasted where th'Arabians keen,
His men like seely sheep destroy and kill;
But as he went his troops increased been,
From every part the people flocked still,
That now grown strong enough, he proched nie
Where the fierce Turk caused many a Christian die.
46
So from the top of Vesulus the cold,
Down to the sandy valleies, tumbleth Poe,
Whose streams the further from their fountain rold
Still stronger wax, and with more puissance go;
And horned like a bull his forehead bold
He liftes, and ore his broken banks does floe,
And with his horns to pearse the sea assaies,
To which he profteth war, not tribute paies.
47
The Duke his menfast flying did epsy,
And thither ran, and thus (displeased) spoke,
What fear is this? O whither do you fly?
See who they be that this pursuit do make,
A hartlesse band, that dare no battle try,
Who wounds before dare neither give nor take,
Against them turn your stern eyes threatening sight,
An angry look will put them all to flight.
48
This said, he spurred forth where Soliman
Destroi'd Christ's vineyard like a savage bore,
Through streams of blood, through dust and dirt, he ran,
Ore heaps of bodies wallowing in their gore,
The squadrons close his sword to open began,
He brake their ranks, behind, beside, before,
And (where he goes) under his feet he treades
The armed Sarracines, and barbed steades.
49
This slaughterhouse of angry Mars he past,
Where thousands dead, half dead, and dying wear.
The hardy Sultan saw him come in have,
Yet neither stepped aside nor shrunk for fear,
But buskt him bold to fight, aloft he cast
His blade, prepared to strike, and stepped near,
These noble Princes twain (so fortune wrought)
From the worlds ends here met, and here they fought:
50
With virtue, fury; strength with courage strove,
For Asias mighty empire, who can tell
With how strange force their cruel blows they drove?
How sore their combat was, how fierce, how fell?
Great deeds they wrought, each others harness cloue;
Yet still in darkness (more the ruth) they dwell.
The night their acts her black veil covered under,
Their acts whereat the sun, the world might wonder.
51
The Christians (by their guides ensample) hearted,
Of their best armed made a squadron strong,
And to defend their chieftaine forth they started:
The Pagans also saved their knight from wrong,
Fortune her favors twixt them eu'nly parted,
Fierce was the encounter, bloody, doubtful, long,
These won, those lost; these lost, those won again,
The loss was equal, even the number slain.
52
With equal rage as when the southren wind
Meets in battle strong the northren blast,
The sea and air to neither is resinde,
But cloud against cloud, and wave against wave they cast:
So from this skirmish neither part declinde,
But fought it out, and kept their footings fast,
And often with furious shocke together rush,
And shield against shield, and helm against helm they crush.
53
The battle eeke to Sion ward grew hot,
The soldiers slain the hardy knights were killed,
Legions of sprites from Limboes prisons got,
The empty air the hills and valleies filled,
Harting the Pagans that they shrinked not,
Till where they stood their dearest blood they spild,
And with new rage, Argantes they inspire,
Whose heat no flames, whose burning need no fire.
54
Where he came in he put to shameful flight
The fearful watch, and ore the trenches leapt,
Even with the ground he made the rampires hight,
And murdered bodies in the ditch up heapt,
So that his greedy mates with labor light,
Amid the tents, a bloody harvest reapt:
Clorinda went the proud Circassian bie,
So from a piece two chained bullets fly.
55
Now fled the French men, when in luckie hour
Arrived Guelpho, and his helping band,
He made them turn against this stormy shower,
And with bold face their wicked foes withstand.
Sternly they fought, that from their wounds down power
The streams of blood, and run on either hand:
The Lord of heaven meane-while upon this fight,
From his hie throne bent down his gracious sight.
56
From whence, with grace and goodness compast round,
He rules, blesses, keeps all he wrought,
Above the air, the fire, the sea and ground,
Our sense, our wit, our reason and our thought,
Where persons three (with power and glory crowned)
Are all one God, who made all things of naught,
Under whose feet (subjected to his grace)
Sit nature, fortune, motion, time and place.
57
This is the place, from whence like smoke and dust
Of this frail world the wealth, the pomp and power,
He tosseth, tumbleth, turns as he lust,
And guides our life, our death, our end and hour:
No eye (how ever virtuous, pure and just)
Can view the brightness of that glorious bower,
On every side the blessed spirits be,
Equal in ioies, though diffring in degree.
58
With harmony of their celestial song
The palace ecchoed from the chambers pure,
At last he Michael called (in harness strong
Of never yielding dimonds armed sure)
Behold (quoth he) to do despite and wrong
To that dear flock my mercy has in cure,
How satan from hels loath some prison sends
His ghosts, his sorites, his furies and his fends.
59
Go bid them all depart, and leave the caire
Of war to soldiers, as does best pertain:
Bid them forbear t'infect the earth and air,
To darken heavens fair light, bid them refrain;
Bid them to Acherons black flood repair,
Fit house for them, the house of grief and pain,
There let their king himself and them torment,
So I command, go tell them mine intent.
60
This said, the winged warrior low inclinde
At his creators feet with reu'rence dew;
Then spread his golden feathers to the wind,
And swift as thought away the angel flew,
He past the light, and shining fire assinde
The glorious seat of his selected crew,
The mouer first and circle Christalline,
The firmament, where fixed stars all shine.
61
Unlike in working than, in shape and show,
At this left hand, Saturn he left and Jove,
And those untruly errant called I trow,
Since he erres not, who them does guide and move:
The fields he passed then, whence hail and snow,
Thunder and rain fall down from clouds above,
Where heat and cold, dryness and moisture strive,
Whose wars all creatures kill, and slain, revive.
62
The horrid darkness and the shadows dunne
Dispersed he with his eternal wings,
The flames (which from his heavenly eyes outrunne)
Beguilde the earth, and all her sable things;
After a storm so spreads forth the sun
His rays, and binds the clouds in golden strings,
Or in the stillness of a moone-shine eauen,
A falling star so glideth down from heaven.
63
But when the infernal troop he proched near,
That still the Pagans ire and rage provoke,
The angel on his wings himself did bear,
And shook his lance, and thus at last he spoke;
Have you not learned yet to know and fear
The Lords just wrath, and thunders dreadful stroke?
Or in the torments of your endless ill,
Are you still fierce, still proud, rebellious still?
64
The Lord has sworn to break the iron bands
The brazen gates of Sions fort which close,
Who is it that his sacred will withstands?
Against his wrath who dares himself oppose?
Go hence you cursed to your appointed lands,
The realms of death, of torments, and of woes,
And in the deepes of that infernal lake
Your battles fight, and there your triumphs make,
65
There tyrannise upon the souls you find
Condemned to woe, and double still their pains,
Where some complain, where some their teeth do grind,
Some howl and weep, some clinke their iron chains:
This said, they fled, and those that staid behind
With his sharp lance he drives and constraines,
They sighing left the lands, his silver sheep
Where Hesperus does lead, does feed, does keep,
66
And toward hell their lazy wings display,
To wreake their malice on the damned gostes,
The birds that follow Titans hottest ray,
Pass not by so great flocks to warmer costs,
Nor leaves by so great numbers fall away,
When winter nips them with his new-come frostes,
The earth (deliu'red from so foul annoy)
Recalled her beauty, and resumed her joy.
67
But not for this (in fierce Argantes breast)
Less'ned the rancour or decai'd the ire,
Although Alecto left him to infest,
With the hot brands of her infernal fire,
His armed head with his sharp blade he blessed,
And those thick ranks which seemed most entire
He broke, the strong, the weak, the high, the low,
Were equallized by his murdring blow.
68
Not far from him, amid the blood and dust,
Heads, arms, and legs Clorinda strowed wide,
Her sword through Berengarios breast she thrust,
Quite through his heart where life does chiefly bide,
And that fell blow she stroke so sure and just,
That at his back his blood and life forth glide,
Even in the mouth she smote Albinus than,
And cut in twain the visage of the man;
69
Gerniers right hand she from his arm divided,
Whereof but late she had received a wound,
The hand his sword still held, although not guided,
The fingers (half on live) stirt'd on the ground,
So from a serpent slain the tail divided
Moves in the grass, rolleth and tumbleth round.
The Championess so wounded left the knight,
And against Achilles turned her weapon bright:
70
Upon his neck light that unhappy blow
And cut the sinews and the throat in twain,
The head fell down upon the earth below,
And soiled with dust the visage on the plain;
The headless trunk (a woeful thing to know)
Still in the saddle seated did remain,
Until his stead (that felt the raines at large)
With leapes and flings that burden did discharge.
71
While thus this fair and fierce Bellona slew
The westren Lords, and put their troops to flight,
Gildippes raged among the Pagan crew,
And low in dust laid many a worthy knight:
Like was their sex, their beauty and their hew,
Like was their youth, their courage and their might;
Yet fortune would they should the battle try,
Of mightier foes; for both were framed to die.
72
Yet wished they often, and strove in vain to meet,
So great betwixt them was the prease and throng.
But hardy Guelpha against Clorinda sweet
Ventred his sword, to work her harm and wrong,
And with a cutting blow so did her greet,
That from her side the blood streamed down along;
But with a thrust an answer sharp she made,
And twixt his ribs colored some-deale her blade.
73
Lord Guelpho stroke again, but hit her not,
For strong Osmida happily passed bie,
And not meant him, another wound he got,
That cleft his front in twain above his eye:
Near Guelpho now the battle waxed hot,
For all the troops he led began thither hie,
And thither drew eeke many a Painim knight,
That fierce, stern, bloody, deadly waxt the fight.
74
Meane-while the purple morning peeped ore
The eastren threshold, to our half of land,
And Argillano in this great uproar
From prison loosed was, and what he fand,
Those arms he hent, and to the field them bore,
Resolved to take his chance what came to hand,
And with great acts amid the Pagan host
Would win again his reputation lost.
75
As a fierce stead scapte from his stall at large,
Where he had long been kept for warlike need,
Runs through the fields unto the flowrie marge
Of some green forest, where he vs'de to feed,
His curled maine his shoulders broad does charge,
And from his lofty crest does spring and spreed,
Thunder his feet, his nostrels fire breath out,
And with his neie the world resoundes about:
76
So Argillan rusht forth, sparkled his eyes,
His front high lifted was, no fear therein,
Lightly he leapes and skips, it seems he flies,
He left no sign in dust imprinted thin,
And coming nere his foes, he sternly cries,
(As one that forced not all their strength a pin,
You outcasts of the world, you men of naught,
What has in you this boldness newly wrought?
77
Too weak are you to bear an helm or shield,
Unfit to arm your breast in iron bright,
You run half naked, trembling through the field,
Your blows are feeble and your hope in flight,
Your factes and all the actions that you weild,
The darkness hides, your bulwark is the night,
Now she is gone, how will your fights succeed?
Now better arms and better hearts you need.
78
While thus he spoke he gave a cruel stroke
Against Algazells throat with might and maine,
And as he would have answered him, and spoke,
He stopped his words, and cut his jaws in twain;
Upon his eyes death spread his mistie cloak,
A chilling frost congealed every vain,
He fell, and with his teeth the earth he tore,
Raging in death, and full of rage before.
79
Then by his puissance mighty Salddine,
Proud Agricalt and Muleasses did,
And at one wondrous blow his weapon fine,
Did Adiazell in two parts divide,
Then through the breast he wounded Ariadine,
Whom dying with sharp taunts he began deride,
He lifting up uneath his feeble eyes,
To his proud scorns thus answ'reth, ere he dies:
80
Not thou (who ere thou art) shall glory long
Thy happy conquest in my death, I trow,
Like chance awaites thee from a hand more strong,
Which by my side will shortly lay thee low:
He smilde, and said, of mine hour short or long
Let heaven take care; but here meane-while die thou,
Pasture for woolues and crow, on him his fout
He set, and drew his sword and life both out.
81
Among this squadron rode a gentle page,
The Soldans minion, darling and delight,
On whose fair chin the springtime of his age
Yet blossomed out her flowers, small or lite;
The sweat (spread on his cheeks with heat and rage)
Seemed pearls or morning dewes, on lillies white,
The dust therein vprold, adorned his hair,
His face seemed fierce and sweet, wrathful and fair.
82
His stead was white, and white as purest snow
That falls on tops of aged Appenine,
Lightning and storm are not so swift I trow
As he, to run, to stop, to turn and twine,
A dart his right hand shaked, pressed to throw,
His curtlax by his thigh, short, hooked, fine,
And brauing in his Turkish pomp he shone,
In purple robe ore fret with gold and stone.
83
The hardy boy (while thirst of warlike praise
Bewitched so his unadvised thought)
Against every band his childish strength assaies,
And little danger found, though much he sought,
Till Argillan (that watched fit time always
In his swift turns to strike him as he fought)
Did unawares his snowe-white courser slay,
And under him his master tumbling lay:
84
And against his face (where love and pity stand,
To pray him that rich throne of beauty spare)
The cruel man stretched forth his murdring hand,
To spoil those gifts, whereof he had no share:
It seemed remorse and sense was in his brand,
Which lighting flat, to hurt the lad forbear;
But all for naught, against him the point he bent,
That (what the edge had spared) pearst and rent.
85
Fierce Soliman, that with Godfredo striued
Who first should enter conquests glorious gate,
Left off the fray, and thither headlong driued,
When first he saw the lad in such estate;
He brake the prease and soon enough arrived
To take revenge, but to his aid too late,
Because he saw his Lesbine slain and lost,
Like a sweet flower nipt with untimely frost:
86
He saw wax dim the starre-light of his eyes,
His iuorie neck upon his shoulders fell,
In his pale looks kind pities image lies,
That death even mourned, to hear his passing bell,
His marble heart such soft impression tries,
That midst his wrath, his manly tears outwell,
Thou weepest Soliman) thou that beheild
Thy kingdoms lost, and not one tear could yield.
87
But when the murdrers sword he hapt to view
Dropping with blood of his Lesbino dead,
His pity vanished, ire and rage renew,
He had no leisure bootlesse tears to shead;
But with his blade on Argillano flew,
And cleft his shield, his helmet, and his head,
Down to his throat; and worthy was that blow
Of Soliman, his strength and wrath to show:
88
And not content with this, down from his horse
He light, and that dead carkas rent and tore,
Like a fierce dog that takes his angry corse
To bite the stone, which had him hit before.
O comfort vain! for grief of so great force,
To wound the senseless earth, that feels no sore.
But mighty Godfrey against the Soldans train
Spent not (this while) his force and blows in vain.
89
A thousand hardy Turks afront he had
In sturdie iron armed from head to fout,
Resolved in all adventures good or bad,
In actions wise, in execution stout,
Whom Soliman into Arabia lad
When from his kingdom he was first cast out,
Where living wild with their exiled guide,
To him in all extremes they faithful bide;
90
All these in thickest order sure unite,
For Godfreys valor small or nothing shranke,
Corcutes first he on the face did smite,
Then wounded strong Rosteno in the flank,
At one blow Selims head he stroke off quite,
Then both Rossanoes arms, in every rank
The boldest knights (of all that chosen crew)
He felled; maimed, wounded, hurt and slew.
91
While thus he killed many a Sarracine,
And all their fierce assaults unhurt sustained,
Ere fortune wholly from the Turks decline,
While still they hoped much, though small they gained,
Behold a cloud of dust, wherein does shine
Lightning of war, in midst thereof contained,
Whence unawares burst forth a storm of swords,
Which tremble made the Pagan knights and Lords.
92
These fifty champions were, among whom there stands
(In silver field) the ensign of Christ's death,
If I had mouths and toongs as Briareus hands,
If voice as iron tough, if iron breath,
What harm this troop wrought to the heathen bands,
What knights they slew, I could recount uneath,
In vain the Turks resist, th'Arabians fly;
For if they fly, they are slain; if fight, they die.
93
Fear, cruelty, grief, horror, sorrow, pain,
Run through the field, disguised in diverse shapes,
Death might you see triumphant on the plain,
Drowning in blood him that from blows escapes.
The king meane-while with parcel of his train,
Comes hastly out, and for sure conquest gapes,
And from a bank whereon he stood beheild,
The doubtful hazard of that bloody field.
94
But when he saw the Pagans shrink away,
He sounded the retreat, and began desire
His messengers in his behalf to pray
Argantes and Clorinda to retire;
The furious couple both at once said nay,
Even drunk with shedding blood, and mad with ire,
At last they went and to recomfort thought,
And stay their troops from flight, but all for naught.
95
For who can govern cowardice or fear?
Their host already was begone to fly,
They cast their shields and cutting swords arreare,
As not defended, but made slow thereby,
A hollow dale the cities bulwarks near,
From west to south out stretched long does lie,
Thither they fled, and in a mist of dust,
Toward the walls they run, they throng, they thrust.
96
While down the bank disordred thus they ran,
The Christian knights huge slaughter on them maid;
But when to clime the other hill they began,
Old Aladine came fiercely to their aid:
On that steep bray Lord Guelpho would not than
Hazard his folk, but there his soldiers staide,
And safe within the cities walls the king
The relics small of that sharp fight did bring:
97
Meane-while the Sultan in this latest charge
Had done as much, as humane force was able,
All sweat and blood appeared his members large,
His breath was short, his courage waxt unstable,
His arm grew weak, to bear his mighty targe,
His hand to rule his heavy sword unable,
Which bruised, not cut, so blunted was the blade,
It lost the use for which a sword was made.
98
Feeling his weakness, he began musing stand,
And in his troubled thought this question tossed,
If he himself should murder with his hand,
(Because none else should of his conquest bost)
Or he should save his life, when on the land
Lay slain the pride of his subdued host,
At last to fortunes power (quoth he) I yield,
And on my flight let her her trophies beild.
99
Let Godfrey view my flight, and smile to see
This mine unworthy second banishment,
For armed again soon shall he hear of me,
From his proud head th'vnsetled crown to rent,
For (as my wrongs) my wrath eterne, shall be,
And every hour (the bow of war new bent)
I will arise again, a foe, fierce, bold,
Though dead, though slain, though burnt to ashes cold.
The tenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Ismen from sleep awakes the Sultan great,
And into Sion brings the Prince by night,
Where the sad king sits fearful on his seat,
Whom he embold'neth and excites to fight:
Godfredo hears his Lords and knights repeat
How they escapt Armidaes wrath and spite:
Rinaldo known to live, Peter foresaies
His ofsprings virtue good deserts and prays.
1
A Gallant stead (while thus the Sultan said)
Came trotting by him, without Lord or guide,
Quickly his hand upon the raines he laid,
And weak and weary climbed up to ride;
The snake (that on his crest hot fire out braid,
Was quite cut off, his helm had lost the pride,
His coat was rent, his harness hackt and cleft,
And of his kingly pomp no sign was left.
2
As when a savage woolfe chased from the fold
(To hide his head) runs to some holt or wood,
Who though he filled have while it might hold
His greedy panch, yet hungreth after food,
With sanguine tongue forth of his lips out rold
About his jaws that lickes up foam and blood;
So from this bloody fray the Sultan hied,
His rage vnquencht, his wrath unsatisfied.
3
And (as his fortune would) he escaped free
From thousand arrows which about him flew,
From swords and lances, instruments that be
Of certain death, himself he safe withdrew,
Unknown, unseen, disguised, trauail'd he
By desert paths, and ways but used by few,
And rode reuoluing in his troubled thought
What course to take, and yet resolved on naught.
4
Thither at last he meant to take his way,
Where Egypts king assembled all his host,
To join with him, and once again assay
To win by fight, by which so often he lost:
Determined thus he made no longer stay,
But thither ward spurred forth his steed in post,
Nor need he guide, the way right well he could,
That leads to sandy plains of Gaza old.
5
Nor though his smarting wounds torment him often,
His body weak and wounded back and side,
Yet rested he, nor once his armor doft,
But all day long ore hills and dales does ride:
But when the night cast up her shade aloft,
And all earthes colors strange in sables did
He light, and as he could his wounds vpbound,
And shook ripe dates down from a palm he found.
6
On them he supped, and amid the field
To rest his weary lims a while he sought,
He made his pillow of his broken shield,
To ease the griefs of his distempred thought,
But little ease could so hard lodging yield,
His wounds so smarted that he slept right naught,
And (in his breast) his proud heart rent in twain,
Two inward vultures, sorrow and disdain.
7
At length when midnight with her silence deep
Did heaven and earth hushed, still and quiet make,
Sore watched and weary, he began to steep
His cares and sorrows in obliuions lake,
And in a little, short, unquiet sleep
Some small repose his fainting spirits take,
But (while he slept) a voice grave and seueare
At unawares thus thundered in his ear:
8
O Soliman! thou far renowned king
Till better season serve, forbear thy rest;
A stranger does thy lands in thraldom bring,
Nice is a slave, by Christian yoke oppressed,
Sleep thou here, forgetful of this thing,
That here thy friends lie slain, not laid in chest?
Whose bones bear witness of thy shame and scorn,
And will thou idly here attend the morn?
9
The king awakt, and saw before his eyes
A man whose presence seemed grave and old,
A writhen staff his steps unstable guies,
Which served his feeble members to uphold,
And what art thou? (the Prince in scorn replies)
What sprite to vex poor passengers so bold,
To break their sleep? or what to thee belongs
My shame, my loss, my vengeance, or my wrongs?
10
I am the man; of thine intent (quoth he)
And purpose new, that sure conjecture has,
And better than thou weenest know I thee,
I proffer thee my service and my faith,
My speeches therefore sharp and biting be,
Because quick words the whetstones are of wrath,
Accept in gree (my Lord) the words I spoke,
As spurs thine ire and courage to provoke.
11
But now to visit Egypts mighty king,
Unless my judgment fail you are prepared,
I prophecy about a needless thing
You suffer shall a voyage long and hard:
For though you stay the monarch great will bring
His new assembled host to Judah ward,
No place of service there, no cause of fight,
Nor against our foes to use your force and might.
12
But if you follow me, within this wall
(With Christian arms hemmed in on every side)
Withouten battle, fight or stroke at all,
(Even at noone day) I will you safely guide,
Where you delight, rejoice and glory shall
In perils great, to see your prowess tried.
That noble town you may preserve and shield,
Till Egypts host come to renew the field.
13
While thus he parled of this aged guest,
The Turk the words and looks did both admire,
And from his hearty eyes and furious breast
He laid apart his pride, his rage and ire,
And humbly said, I willing am and pressed
To follow where thou leadest (reverend fire)
And that advise best fits my angry vain,
That tells of greatest peril, greatest pain.
14
The old man praised his words, and for the air
His late received wounds to worse disposes,
A quintessence therein he powered fair,
That stops the bleeding, and incision closes:
Beholding than before Apolloes chair
How fresh Aurora violets straw'd and roses,
Its time he says to wend, for Titan bright
To wonted labor, sommons every wight.
15
And to a chariot (that beside did stand)
Ascended he, and with him Soliman,
He took the raines, and with a maistring hand
Ruled his steades and whipped them now and than,
The wheels or horses feet upon the land
Had left no sign nor token where they ran,
The coursers pant and smoke with lukewarm sweat,
And (foming cream) their iron mouthfuls eat.
16
The air about them round (a wondrous thing)
It self on heaps in solid thicknes drew,
The chariot hiding and enuironing
The subtle mist no mortal eye could view,
And yet no stone from engine cast or sling
Could pearse the cloud, it was of proof so true;
Yet seen it was to them within which ride,
And heaven and earth without, all clear beside.
17
His beetle brows the Turk amazed bent,
He wrinkled up his front, and wildly stared
Upon the cloud and chariot, as it went,
For speed to Cinthias carre right well compared:
The other seeing his astonishment
How he bewondred was, and how he fared,
All suddenly by name the Prince began call,
By which awaked thus he spoke withal.
18
Who ere thou art above all worldly wit
That have these high and wondrous maruailes wrought,
And know the deep intents which hidden sit
In secret closet of man's private thought,
If in thy skillful heart this lore be writ
To tell the event of things to end vnbrought;
Then say, what issue and what end the stars
Allot to Asias troubles, broiles and wars.
19
But tell me first thy name, and by what art
Thou do these wonders strange, above our skill;
For full of marvel is my troubled heart,
Tell then and leave me not amazed still.
The wisard smiled and answ'red, in some part
Easy it is to satisfy thy will,
Ismen I hight, called an enchanter great,
Such skill have I in magikes secret feat.
20
But that I should the sure events unfold
Of things to come, or destinies foretell,
Too rash is your desire, your wish too bold,
To mortal heart such knowledge never fell;
Our wit and strength on us bestowed I hold,
To shun th'euils and harms, among which we dwell,
They make their fortune who are stout and wise,
Wit rules the heavens, discretion guides the skies.
21
That puissant arm of thine that well can rend
From Godfreys brow the new usurped crown,
And not alone protect, save and defend
From his fierce people, this besieged town,
Against fire and sword with strength and courage bend,
Adventure, suffer, trust, tread perils down,
And to content and to encourage thee,
Know this, which I as in a cloud foresee
22
I guess (before the ouer-gliding son
Shall many years meet out by weeks and days)
A Prince that shall in fertile Egypt won
Shall fill all Asia with his prosperous fraies;
I speak not of his acts in quiet done,
His policy, his rule, his wisdoms praise,
Let this suffice, by him these Christians shall
In fight subdued fly, and conquered fall.
23
And their great empire and usurped state
Shall overthrown in dust and ashes lie,
Their woeful remnant in an angle strate
Compast with sea themselves shall fortify,
From thee shall spring this Lord of war and fate,
Whereto great Soliman began thus reply;
O happy man to so great praise ibore,
Thus he reiois'd, but yet envied more;
24
And said, let chance with good or bad aspect
Upon me look as sacred heavens decree,
This heart to her I never will subject,
Nor ever conqu'red shall she look on me;
The moon her chariot shall awrie direct,
Ere from this course I will diuerted be,
While thus he spoke it seemed he breathed fire,
So fierce his courage was, so hot his ire.
25
Thus talked they, till they arrived been
Nie to the place where Godfreys tents were reared,
There was a woeful spectacle iseene,
Death in a thousand ougly forms appeared,
The Sultan changed hew for grief and teene,
On that sad book his shame and loss he leared,
Ah with what grief his men, his friends he found,
And standards proud, inglorious lie on ground!
26
And saw on visage of some well known friend
(In foul despite) a rascal French man tread,
And there another ragged peasant rend
The arms and garments from some champion dead,
And there with stately pomp by heaps they wend,
And Christians slain roll up in webs of lead;
Lastly the Turks and slain Arabians (brought
On heaps) he saw them burn with fire to naught.
27
Deeply he sighed, and with naked sword
Out of the coach he leaped in the mire,
But Ismen called again the angry Lord,
And with grave words appeased his foolish ire.
The Prince content remounted at his word,
Toward a hill on drove the aged sire,
And hasting forward up the bank they pass,
Till far behind the Christian leaguer was.
28
There they alight and took their way on fout,
The empty chariot vanished out of sight,
Yet still the cloud enuiron'd them about,
At their left hand down went they from the hight
Of Sions hill, till they approcht the rout,
On that side where to west he looks right,
There Ismen stayed and his eie-sight bent
Upon the bushie rocks, and thither went.
29
A hollow cave was in the craggie stone,
Wrought out by hand a number years to fore,
And for of long that way had walked none,
The vault was hid with plants and bushes hoar,
The wisard stooping in thereat to gone,
The thorns aside and scratching brambles bore,
His right hand sought the passage through the cleft,
And for his guide he gave the Prince his left.
30
What (quoth the Sultan) by what privy mine?
What hidden vault behooues it me to creep?
This sword can find a better way than thine,
Although our foes the passage guard and keep.
Let not (quoth he) thy princely foot repine
To tread this seeret path, though dark and deep;
For great king Herod used to tread the same,
He that in arms had whilome so great fame.
31
This passage made he, when he would suppress
His subjects pride, and them in bondage hold;
By this he could from that small forteresse
Antonia called, of Antonie the bold,
Convey his folk unseen of more and less
Even to the midst of the temple old,
Thence, hither; where these privy ways begin,
And bring unseen whole armies out and in.
32
But now save I in all this world lives none
That knows the secret of this darksome place,
Come then where Aladine sits on his throne,
With Lords and princes set about his grace,
He fears more then fitteth such an one,
Such signs of doubt show in his cheer and face;
Fitly you come, hear, see, and keep you still,
Till time and season serve, then speak your fill.
33
This said, that narrow entrance past the knight,
(So creepes a camel through a needles eye)
And through the ways as black as darkest night
He followed him, that did him rule and guie;
Strait was the way at first, withouten light,
But further in did further amplify;
So that upright walked at ease the men
Ere they had passed half that secret den,
34
A privy door Ismen unlocked at last,
And up they clombe a little used staire,
Thereat the day a feeble beam in cast,
Dim was the light, and nothing cleene the air;
Out of the hollow cave at length they past,
Into a goodly hall, high, broad and fair,
Where crowned with gold and all in purple clad
Sat the sadking, among his nobles sad.
35
The Turk (close in his hollow cloud imbard)
Unseen, at will did all the prease behold,
These heavy speeches of the king he hard,
Who thus from lofty siege his pleasure told;
My Lords, last day our state was much empard,
Our friends were slain, killed were our soldiers bold,
Great helps and greater hopes are us bereft,
Nor ought but aid from Egypt land is left:
36
And well you see far distant is that aid,
Upon our heels our danger treads still,
For your advise was this assembly maid,
Each what he thinks speak, and what he will.
A whisper soft arose when this was said,
As gentle winds the groves with murmur fill,
But with bold face, high looks and merry cheer
Argantes rose, the rest their talk forbear.
37
O worthy sovereign (thus began to say
The hardy young man to the tyrant wise)
What words be these? what fears do you dismay?
Who knows not this, you need not our advise?
But on our hands your hope of conquest lay,
And, for no loss true virtue damnifies,
Make her our shield, pray her us succors give,
And without her let us not wish to live.
38
Nor say I this for that I ought misdeeme
That Egypts promised succors fail us might,
Doubtful of my great masters words to seem,
To me were neither lawful, just, nor right:
I speak these words, for spurs I them esteem
To waken up each dull and fearful spright,
And make our hearts resolved to all assaies,
To win with honor or to die with praise,
39
Thus much Argantes said, and said no more,
(As if the case were clear of which he spoke.)
Orcano rose, of princely stemibore,
Whose presence among them bore a mighty stroke,
A man esteemed well in arms of yore;
But now was coupled new in marriage yoke,
Young babes he had, to fight which made him loath,
He was a husband and a father both.
40
My Lord (quoth he) I will not reprehend
The earnest zeal of this audacious speech,
From courage sprung, which seld is close ipend
In swelling stomach without violent breach;
And though to you our good Circassian friend,
In terms too bold and seruent often does preach,
Yet hold I that for good, in warlike feat
For his great deeds respond his speeches great.
41
But if it you beseem (whom grauer age
And long experience has made wise and sly)
To rule the heat of youth and hardy rage,
Which somewhat have misled this knight awrie,
In equal balance ponder than and gage
Your hopes far distant, with your perils nie;
This towns old walls and rampires new compare,
With Godfreys forces, and his engines rare.
42
But (if I may say what I think vnblamed)
This town is strong, by nature, site and art,
But engines huge and instruments are framed
Against these defenses by our adverse part,
Who thinks him most secure is eathest shamed;
I hope the best, yet fear unconstant Mart,
And with this siege if we be long up pent,
Famine I doubt, our store will all be spent.
43
For all that store of cattle and of grain
Which yesterday within these walls you brought,
While your proud foes triumphant through the plain
On naught but shedding blood, and conquest thought,
Too little is this city to sustain,
To raise the siege, unless some means be sought;
And it must last, till the prefixed hour,
That it be raised by Egypts aid and power.
44
But what if that appointed day they mis?
Or else (ere we expect) what if they came?
The victory yet is not ours for this,
Oh save this town from ruin, us from shame!
With that same Godfrey still our watfare is,
These armies, soldiers, captains are the same,
Who have so often amid the dustie plain,
Turks, Persians, Syrians and Arabians slain:
45
And thou Argantes wottest what they be,
Often have thou fled from that victorious host,
Thy shoulders often have thou let them see,
And in thy feet has been thy sauegard most,
Clorinda bright and I fled eeke with thee,
None than his fellows had more cause to bost,
Nor blame I any; for in every fight
We showed courage, valor, strength and might:
46
And though this hardy knight the certain threat
Of near approaching death to hear disdain;
Yet to this state of loss and danger great,
From this strong foe I see the tokens plain;
No fort how strong so ere by art or seat,
Can hinder Godfrey why he should not rain:
This makes me say (to witness heaven I bring)
Zeal, to this state; love, to my Lord and king.
47
The king of Tripolie was well advised
To purchase peace and so preserve his crown:
But Soliman (who Godfreys love despised)
Is either dead or deep in prison thrown;
Else fearful is he run away disguised,
And scant his life is left him for his own,
And yet with gifts, with tribute and with gold,
He might in peace his empire still have hold.
48
Thus spoke Orcanes, and some inkling gave
In doubtful words of that he would have said,
To sue for peace or yield himself a slave,
He durst not openly his king persuade:
But at those words the Sultan began to rave,
And against his will wrapped in the cloud he staid,
Whom Ismen thus bespake, how can you bear
These words, my Lord? or these reproaches hear?
49
Oh let me speak (quoth he) with ire and scorn
I burn, and against my will thus hid I stay!
This said, the smokie cloud was cleft and torn,
Which like a veil upon them stretched lay,
And up to open heaven forthwith was borne,
And left the Prince in view of lightsome day,
With princely look amid the prease he shin'de,
And on a sudden, thus declared his mind.
50
Of whom you speak behold the Sultan here,
Neither afraid nor ron away for dread,
And that these slanders, lies and fables were,
This hand shall prove upon that cowards head,
I, who have shed a sea of blood well nere,
And heapt up mountains high of Christians dead,
I in their camp who still maintained the fray,
(My men all murdered) I that ron away.
51
If this, or any coward vile beside,
False to his faith and country, dares reply;
And speak of concord with yond men of pride,
By your good leave (sir king) here shall he die,
The lambs and wolves shall in one fold abide,
The doves and serpents in one nest shall lie,
Before one town us and these Christians shall
In peace and love, unite within one wall.
52
While thus he spoke, his broad and trenchant sword
His hand held high aloft, in threatening guise;
Dombe stood the knights, so dreadful was his word;
A storm was in his front, fire in his eyes,
He turned at last to Sions aged Lord,
And calmed his visage stern in humbler wise:
Behold (quoth he) good Prince, what aid I bring,
Since Soliman is joined with Iudaes king.
53
King Aladine from his rich throne vpstart,
And said, oh how I joy thy face to view,
My noble friend! it less'neth in some part
My grief, for slaughter of my subjects true,
My weak estate to stablish come thou art,
And may thine own again in time renew,
If heavens consent: with that the Sultan bold
In dear embracements did he long enfold.
54
Their greetings done, the king resinde his throne
To Solman, and set himself beside,
In a rich seat adorned with gold and stone,
And Ismen sage did at his elbow bide,
Of whom he asked what way they two had gone,
And he declared all what had them betide:
Clorinda bright to Soliman addressed
Her salutations first, then all the rest.
55
Among them rose Ormusses valiant knight,
Whom late the Sultan with a conuoy sent,
And when most hot and bloody was the fight,
By secret paths and blind by-waies he went,
Till aided by the silence and the night
Safe in the cities walls himself he pent,
And there refresht with come and cattle store
The pined soldiers, famisht nie before.
56
With surly countenance and disdainful grace
Sullen and sad, sat the Circassian stout,
Like a fierce lion grombling in his place,
His fiery eyes that turns and rolls about;
Nor durst Orcanes view the Soldans face,
But still upon the floor did pore and tout:
Thus with his Lords and peers in counselling,
The Turkish monarch sat with Iudaes king.
57
Godfrey this while gave victory the rain,
And following her the streits he opened all;
Then for his soldiers and his captains slain,
He celebrates a stately funeral,
And told his camp within a day or twain
He would assault the cities mighty wall,
And all the heathen there enclosed does threat,
With fire and sword, with death and danger great.
58
And for he had that noble squadron known,
In the last fight which brought him so great aid,
To be the Lords and Princes of his own,
Who followed late the sly entising maid,
And with them Tancred (who had late been thrown
In prison deep, by that false witch betrayed)
Before the hermit and some private friends,
For all those worthies, Lords and knights, he sends;
59
And thus he said, some one of you declare
Your fortunes, whether good or to be blamed,
And to assist us with your valors rare,
(In so great need) how was your coming framed?
They blush and on the ground amazed stare,
(For virtue is of little guilt ashamed)
At last the English Prince with countenance bold,
The silence broke, and thus their errors told:
60
We (not elect to that exploit by lot)
With secret flight from hence our selves withdrew,
Following false Cupid, I deny it not,
Entised forth by love, and beauties hew,
A jealous fire burnt in our stomachs hot,
And by close ways we passed least in view,
Her words, her looks (alas I know too late)
Nursed our love, our jealousy, our hate.
61
At last we began approach that woeful clime,
Where fire and brimstone down from heaven was sent,
To take revenge for sin and shameful crime
Against kind commit, by those who nould repent;
A loathsome lake of brimstone, pitch and lime,
Oregoes that land, erst sweet and redolent,
And when it moves, thence stinch and smoke up flies,
Which dim the welkin, and infect the skies.
62
This is the lake in which yet never might
Ought that has weight sink to the bottom down,
But like to cork, to leaves or feathers light,
Stones, iron, men there fleet, and never drown,
Therein a castle stands, to which by sight
But ore a narrow bridge no way is known,
Hither us brought, here welcomd us the witch,
The house within was stately, pleasant, rich.
63
The heavens were clear, and wholesome was the air,
High trees, sweet meadows, waters pure and good;
For there in thickest shade of Mirtles fair
A crystal spring powered out a silver flood;
Amid the herbs, the grass and flowers rare,
The falling leaves down pattred from the wood;
The birds sung hymns of love, yet speak I naught
Of gold and marble rich, and richly wrought.
64
Under the curtain of the greene-wood shade,
Beside the brook, upon the velvet grass,
In massy vessel of pure silver made,
A banquet rich and costly furnished was,
All beasts, all birds beguiled by fowlers trade,
All fish were there in floods or seas that pass,
All dainties made by art, and at the table
An hundredth virgins served, for husbands able.
65
She with sweet words and false entising smiles,
Infused love among the dainties set,
And with empoys'ned cups our souls beguiles,
And made each knight himself, and God forget:
She rose, and turned again within short whiles,
With changed looks where wrath and anger met,
A charming rod, a book with her she brings,
On which she mumbled strange and secret things.
66
She red, and change I felt my will and thought,
I longed to change my life, and place of biding,
That virtue strange in me no pleasure wrought,
I leapt into the flood my self there hiding,
My legs and feet both into one were brought,
Mine arms and hands into my shoulders sliding,
My skin was full of scales, like shields of bras,
Now made a fish, where late a knight I was.
67
The rest with me like shape, like garments wore,
And diu'de with me in that quicksiluer stream,
Such mind (to my remembrance) then I bore,
As when on vain and foolish things men dream;
At last our shape it pleased her to restore,
Then full of wonder and of fear we seame,
And with an irefull look the angry maid
Thus threat'ned us, and made us thus afraid.
68
You see (quoth she) my sacred might and skill,
How you are subject to my rule and power,
In endless thraldom damned if I will,
I can torment and keep you in this tower,
Or make you birds, or trees on craggie hill,
To bide the bitter blastes of storm and shower;
Or harden you to rocks on mountains old,
Or melt your flesh and bones to rivers cold:
69
Yet may you well avoid mine ire and wraith,
If to my will your yielding hearts you bend,
You must forsake your Christendom and faith,
And against Godfredo false my crown defend.
We all refused, for speedy death each prai'th,
Save false Rambaldo, he became her friend,
We in a dungeon deep were helpless cast,
In misery and iron chained fast.
70
Then (for alone they say falls no mishap)
Within short while Prince Tancred thither came,
And was unawares, surprised in the trap:
But there short while we staid, the wily dame
In other foldes our mischiefs would vpwrap.
From Hidraort an hundredth horsemen came,
Whose guide a Baron bold to Egypts king
Should us disarmed, and bound in fetters, bring:
71
Now on our way the way to death we ride,
But providence divine thus for us wrought,
Rinaldo (whose high virtue is his guide
To great exploits, exceeding humane thought)
Met us, and all at once our guard defide,
And ere he left the fight to earth them brought,
And in their harness armed us in the place,
Which late were ours, before our late disgrace.
72
I, and all these, the hardy champion knew,
We saw his valor, and his voice we hard;
Then is the rumor of his death untrue,
His life is safe, good fortune long it guard,
Three times the golden sun has risen new,
Since us he left and rode to Antioch ward;
But first his armours broken, hackt and cleft,
Unfit for service there he doft and left.
73
Thus spoke the Briton prince, with humble cheer
The Hermit sage to heaven cast up his eine,
His color and his countenance changed wear,
With heavenly grace his looks and visage shine,
Ravished with zeal his soul approached near
The seat of angels pure, and saints divine,
And there he learnd of things and haps to come
To give foreknowledge true, and certain dome;
74
At last he spoke (in more then humane sound)
And told what things his wisdom great foresaw,
And at his thundering voice the folk around
Attentive stood, with trembling and with awe:
Rinaldo lives, he said, the tokens found
From women's craft their false beginnings draw,
He lives and heaven will long preserve his days,
To greater glory, and to greater praise.
75
These are but trifles yet, though Asias kings
Shrink at his name and tremble at his view,
I well foresee he shall do greater things,
And wicked emprours conquer and subdew;
Under the shadow of his eagles wings,
Shall holy church preserve her sacred crew,
From Caesar's bird he shall the sable train
Pluck off, and break her talons sharp in twain.
76
His childrens children at his hardiness,
And great attempts shall take ensample fair,
From emperors unjust in all distress
They shall defend the state of Peter's chair,
To raise the humble up, pride to suppress,
To help the innocents shall be their caire.
This bird of East, shall fly with conquest great,
As far as moon gives light, or sun gives heat;
77
Her eyes behold the truth and purest light,
And thunders down in Peter's aid she brings,
And where for Christ and christian faith men fight,
There forth she spreads her victorious wings,
This virtue Nature gives her and this might,
Then lure her home, for on her presence hings
The happy end of this great enterpries,
So heaven decrees, and so command the skies.
78
These words of his, of Prince Rinaldoes death
Out of their troubled hearts, the fear had raced;
In all this joy yet Godfrey smiled uneath,
In his wise thought such care and heed was placed.
But now from deepes of regions underneath
Nights veil arose, and suns bright luster chaced,
When all full sweetly in their cabbins slept,
Save he, whose thoughts his eyes still open kept.
The eleventh Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
With grave procession, songs and psalms devout
Heavens sacred aid the Christian Lords inuoke;
That done, they soale the wall which kept them out;
The fort is almost won, the gates nie broke:
Godfrey is wounded by Clorinda stout,
And lost is that days conquest by the stroke;
The Angel cures him, he returns to fight,
But lost his labor for day lost his light.
1
THe Christian armies great and puissant guide,
T'assault the town that all his thoughts had bent,
Did ladders, rams, and engines huge provide,
When reverent Peter to him gravely went,
And drawing him with sober grace aside,
With words severe thus told his high intent;
Right well (my Lord) these earthly strengthes you move,
But let us first begin from heaven above:
2
With public prayer, zeal, and faith devout,
The aid, assistance, and the help obtain
Of all the blessed of the heavenly root,
With whose support you conquest sure may gain;
First let the priests before thine armies stout,
With sacred hymns their holy voices strain,
And thou and all thy Lords and peers with thee,
Of godliness and faith ensamples be.
3
Thus spoke the hermit grave in words seueare:
Godfrey allowed his counsel, sage and wise,
Of Christ the Lord (quoth he) thou servant dear,
I yield to follow thy divine advise,
And while the Princes I assemble hear,
The great procession, songs and sacrifice,
With Bishop William, thou and Ademare,
With sacred and with solemn pomp, prepare.
4
Next morn the Bishops twain, the heremite,
And all the clarks and priests of less estate,
Did in the midst of the camp unite
Within a place for prayer consecrate,
Each priest adorned was in a surplesse white,
The Bishops dond their albes and copes of state,
Above their rockets buttoned fair before,
And miters on their heads, like crowns they wore.
5
Peter alone (before) spread to the wind
The glorious sign of our salvation great,
With easy pace the quire come all behind,
And hymns and psalms in order true repeat,
With sweet respondence in harmonious kind
Their humble song the yielding air does beat;
Lastly together went the reverend pare
Of prelates sage, William and Ademare:
6
The mighty Duke came next, as Princes do,
Without companion, marching all alone,
The Lords and captains came by two and two,
The soldiers for their guard were armed each one;
With easy pace thus ordered, passing throw
The trench and rampire, to the fields they gone,
No thundering drum, no trumpet shrill they heat,
Their godly music psalms and prayers wear.
7
To thee, O Father, Son and sacred Spright,
One true, eternal, everlasting king,
To Christ's dear mother Marie virgin bright,
Psalms of thanks giving and of praise they sing,
To them that angels down from heaven to fight
Against the blasphemous beast and dragon bring,
To him also that of our Savior good,
Washed the sacred front in Iordans flood.
8
Him likewise they inuoke, called the rock
Whereon the Lord (they say) his Church did rear,
Whose true successors close or else unlock
The blessed gates of grace and mercy dear,
And all th'elected twelve the chosen flock,
Of his triumphant death who witness bear,
And them by torment, slaughter, fire and sword
Who martyrs died, to confirm his word:
9
And them also whose books and writings tell
What certain path to heavenly bliss us leads,
And hermits good, and ancresses that dwell,
Mewed up in walls and mumble on their beads,
And virgin nuns in close and private cell,
Where (but shrift fathers) never mankind treades,
On these they called and on all the rout
Of angels, martyrs, and of saints devout.
10
Singing and saying thus the camp devout
Spread forth her zealous squadrons broad and wide,
Toward mount Oliuet went all this rout,
So called of Olive trees the hill which hide,
A mountain known by fame the world throughout,
Which rises on the cities eastren side,
From it divided by the valley green
Of Iosaphat, that fills the space between.
11
Hither the armies went, and chanted shrill,
That all the deep and hollow dales resound,
From hollow mounts and caves in every hill,
A thousand Echoes also sung around,
It seemed some quire (that sung with art and skill)
Dwelt in those savage dens and shadie ground,
For often resounded from the banks they hear,
The name of Christ and of his mother dear.
12
Upon the walls the Pagans old and young
Stood hushed and still, amated and amassed,
At their grave order and their humble song,
At their strange pomp and customs new they gased:
But when the show they had beholden long,
An hideous yell the wicked miscreants rased,
That with vile blasphemies the mountains hoare,
The woods, the waters and the valleis roar.
13
But yet with sacred notes the hosts proceed,
Though blasphemies they hear and cursed things;
So with Apolloes harp Pan tunes his reed,
So adders hiss, where Philomela sings,
Nor flying darts nor stones the Christians dreed,
Nor arrows shot, nor quarries cast from flings;
But with assured faith as dreading naught
The holy work begun to end they brought.
14
A table set they on the mountains hight
To minister thereon the Sacrament,
In golden candlesticks a hallowed light,
At either end of virgin wax there brent:
In costly vestments sacred William dight,
With fear and trembling to the altar went,
And prayer there and service loud begins,
Both for his own and all the armies sins;
15
Humbly they heard his words that stood him nie,
The rest far off upon him bent their eyes,
But when he ended had the service hie,
You servants of the Lord depart he cries:
His hands he lifted than up to the sky,
And blessed all those warlike companies;
And they dismissed returned the way they came,
Their order as before, their pomp the same.
16
Within their camp arrived, this voyage ended,
Toward his tent the Duke himself withdrew,
Upon their guide by heaps the bands attended,
Till his pauilions stately door they view,
There to the Lord his welfare they commended,
And with him left the worthies of the crew,
Whom at a costly and rich feast he placed,
And with the highest room old Raimond graced.
17
Now when the hungry knights sufficed ar
With meat, with drink, with spices of the best,
Quoth he, when next you see the morning star,
Tassault the town be ready all and pressed:
Tomorrow is a day of pains and war,
This of repose, of quiet, peace and rest;
Go, take your ease this evening, and this night,
And make you strong against tomorrowes fight.
18
They took their leave, and Godfreys haralds road
To intimate his will on every side,
And published it through all the lodgings broad,
That against the morn each should himself provide,
Meane-while they might their hearts of cares unload,
And rest their tired limbs that evening tide;
Thus fared they till night their eyes did close,
Night friend to gentle rest and sweet repose.
19
With little sign as yet of springing day
Out peept, not well appeared the rising morn,
The plough yet tore not up the fertile lay,
Nor to their feed the sheep from folds return,
The birds sat silent on the green wood spray
Amid the groves, unheard was hound and horn,
When trumpets shrill true signs of hardy fights,
Called up to arms the soldiers, called the knights:
20
Arm, arm at once an hundredth squadrons cride,
And with their cry to arm them all begin,
Godfrey arose, that day he laid aside
His hawberke strong he wontes to combat in,
And dond a brestplate fair, of proof untried,
Such one as footmen use, light, easy, thin:
Scantly their Lord thus clothed had his gromes,
When aged Raimond to his presence comes,
21
And furnished thus when he the man beheild,
By his attire his secret thought he guest,
Where is (quoth he) your sure and trusty shield?
Your helm, your hawberke strong? where all the rest?
Why be you half disarmed? why to the field
Approach you in these weak defenses dressed?
I see this day you mean a course to run,
Wherein may peril much, small praise be won.
22
Alas, do you that idle praise expect,
To set first foot this conquered wall above?
Of less account some knight thereto object,
Whose loss so great and harmfull cannot prove,
My Lord, your life with greater care protect,
And love your self because all us you love,
Your happy life is spirit, soul and breath
Of all this camp, preserve it than from death.
23
To this he answered thus, you know (he sade)
In Clarimont by mighty Vrbans hand
When I was girded with this noble blade,
For Christ's true faith to fight in every land,
To God even than a secret vow I made,
Not as a captain here this day to stand,
And give directions, but with shield and sword
To fight, to win or die for Christ my Lord.
24
When all this camp in battle strong shall be
Ordained and ordered, well disposed all,
And all things done which to the high degree
And sacred place I hold, belongen shall;
Then reason is it, nor dissuade thou me,
That I likewise assault this sacred wall,
Least from my vow to God late made I swerue,
He shall this life defend, keep and preserve.
25
Thus he concludes, and every hardy knight
His sample followed, and his brethren twain,
The other Princes put on harness light,
As footmen use: but all the Pagan train
Toward that side bent their defensive might,
That lies exposed to view of Charles waine,
And Zephirus sweet blastes, for on that part
The town was weakest, both by site and art.
26
On all parts else the fort was strong by site,
With mighty hills defenst from foreign rage,
And to this part the tyrant began unite,
His subjects borne and bands that serve for wage,
From this exploit he spared nor great nor lite,
The aged men and boys of tender age,
To fire of angry war, still brought new fuel,
Stones, darts, lime, brimstone and bitumen cruel.
27
All full of arms and weapons was the wall,
Under whose basis that fair plain does run,
There stood the Sultan like a giant tall,
(So stood at Rhodes the Coloss of the son)
Wast high Argantes showed himself withal,
At whose stern looks the French to quake begone,
Clorinda on the corner tower alone,
In silver arms like rising Cinthia shone.
28
Her rattling quiver at her shoulders hong,
Therein a flash of arrows feathered we will,
In her left hand her bow was bended strong,
Therein a shaft headed with mortal steel,
So fit to shoot she singled forth among
Her foes, who first her quarries strength should feel,
So fit to shoot Latonas daughter stood,
When Niobe she killed and all her brood.
29
The aged tyrant trotted on his feet
From gate to gate, from wall to wall he flew,
He comforts all his bands with speeches sweet,
And every fort and bastion does reuew,
For every need prepared in every street
New regiments he plast, and weapons new.
The matrons grave within their temples hie,
To idols false for succors call and cry;
30
O Macon, break in twain the steeled lance
Of wicked Godfrey, with thy righteous hands,
Against thy name he does his arm advance,
His rebel blood power out upon these sands,
These cries within his ears no entrance
Could find; for naught he hears, naught understands.
While thus the town for her defense ordaines,
His armies Godfrey ordreth on the plains,
31
His forces first on foot he forward brought,
With goodly order, providence and art,
And against these towers which t'assaile he thought,
In battles twain his strength he does depart,
Between them crosbowes stood and engines wrought
To cast a stone, a quarrie or a dart,
From whence like thunders dint or lightnings new,
Against the bulwarks stones and lances flew.
32
His men at arms did back his bands on fout,
The light horse ride far off and serve for wings,
He gave the sign, so mighty was the rout
Of those that shot with bows and cast with slings,
Such storms of shaftes and stones flew all about,
That many a Pagan proud to death it brings,
Some did, some at the loopes durst scant outpeepe,
Some fled and left the place they took to keep.
33
The hardy Frenchmen (full of heat and have)
Ran boldly forward to the ditches large,
And ore their heads an iron pentise vast
They built, by joining many a shield and targe,
Some with their engines ceaseless shot and cast,
And vollies huge of arrows sharp discharge,
Upon the ditches some emploi'd their pain,
To fill the mote and even it with the plain.
34
With slime or mud the ditches were not soft,
But dry and sandy, void of waters clear,
Though large and deep the Christians fill them often,
With rubbish, faggots, stones and trees they bear:
Adrastus first aduanst his crest aloft,
And boldly began a strong scalado rear,
And through the falling storm did upward clime
Of stones, darts, arrows, fire, pitch and lime:
35
The hardy Switzer now so far was gone,
That half way up with mickle pain he got,
A thousand weapons he sustained alone,
And his audacious climbing ceased not;
At last upon him fell a mighty stone,
As from some engine great it had been shot,
It broke his helm, he tumbled from the height,
The strong Circassian cast that wondrous weight;
36
Not mortal was the blow, yet with the fall
On earth sore brus'd the man lay in a swoune.
Argantes began with boasting words to call,
Who comes next? this first is tumbled down,
Come hardy soldiers, come assault this wall,
I will not shrink, nor fly, nor hide my crown,
If in your trench your selves for dread you hold,
There shall you die, like sheep killed in their fold.
37
Thus boasted he, but in their trenches deep
The hidden squadrons kept themselves from scath,
The curtain made of shields did well off keep
Both darts and shot, and scorned all their wrath.
But now the ram upon the rampires steep
On mighty beams his head advanced has,
With dreadful horns of iron tought tree-great,
The walls and bulwarks trembled at his threat.
38
An hundred able men meane-while let fall
The weights behind, the engine tumbled down,
And battred flat the battlements and wall,
(So fell Taigerus hill on Sparta town)
It crushed the steeled shield in pieces small,
And beat the helmet to the wearers crown,
And on the ruins of the walls and stones,
Dispersed left their blood, their brains, and bones.
39
The fierce assailants kept no longer close
Under the shelter of their targets fine,
But their bold fronts to chance of war expose,
And against those towers let their virtue shine,
The scaling ladders up to skies arose,
The groundworks deep some closely undermine,
The walls before the Frenchmen shrink and shake,
And gaping sign of headlong falling make:
40
And fallen they had, so far the strength extends
Of that fierce ram and his redoubted stroke,
But that the Pagans care the place defends,
And saved by warlike skill the wall nie broke:
For to what part so ere the engine bends,
There sacks of wool they place the blow to choke,
Whose yielding breaks the strokes thereon which light,
So weakness often subdues the greatest might.
41
While thus the worthies of the westren crew
Maintained their brave assault and skirmish hot,
Her mighty bow Clorinda often drew,
And many a sharp and deadly arrow shot;
And from her bow no steeled shaft there flew,
But that some blood the cursed engine got,
Blood of some valiant knight or man of fame,
For that proud shootresse scorned weaker game.
42
The first she hit among the Christian Peers,
Was the bold son of Englands noble king,
Above the trench himself he scantly reares,
But she an arrow loosed from the string,
The wicked steel his gantled breaks and tears,
And through his right hand thrust the pearsing sting;
Disabled thus from fight, he began retire,
Groaning for pain, but fretting more forire.
43
Lord Stephen of Amboise on the ditches brim,
And on a ladder high, Clotharious did,
From back to breast an arrow pearsed him,
The other was shot through from side to side:
Then as he menag'd brave his courser trim
On his left arm she hit the Flemmings guide,
He stopped, and from the wound the reed out twinde,
But left the iron in his flesh behind.
44
As Ademare stood to behold the fight
High on abanke, withdrawn to breathe a space,
A fatal shaft upon his forehead light,
His hand he lifted up to feel the place,
Whereon a second arrow chanced right,
And nailed his hand unto his wounded face,
He fell, and with his blood distained the land,
His holy blood shed by a virgins hand.
45
While Palamede stood nere the battlement,
Despising perils all and all mishap,
And upward still his hardy footings bent,
On his right eye he caught a deadly clap,
Through his right eye Clorindaes seu'nth shaft went,
And in his neck broke forth a bloody gap;
He underneath that bulwark dying fell,
Which late to scale and win he trusted well.
46
Thus shot the maid: the Duke with hard assay
And sharp assault, meane-while the town oppressed,
Against that part which to his camp ward lay,
An engine huge and wondrous he addressed,
A tower of wood built for the towns decay,
As high as were the walls and bulwarks best,
A turret full of men and weapons pent,
And yet on wheels it rolled, moved and went.
47
This rolling fort his nie approches made,
And darts and arrows spit against his foes,
As ships are wont in fight; so it assade
With the strong wall to grapple and to close:
The Pagans on each side the piece invade,
And all their force against this mass oppose,
Sometimes the wheels, sometimes the battlement
With timber, logs and stones, they broke and rent.
48
So thick flew stones and darts, that no man sees
The azure heavens, the sun his brightness lost,
The clouds of weapons, like two swarms of bees,
Met in the air, and there each other crossed:
And look how falling leaves drop down from trees,
When the moist sap is nipt with timely frost,
Or apples in strong winds from branches fall;
The Saracines so tumbled from the wall.
49
For on their part the greatest slaughter light,
They had no shelter against so sharp a shower,
Some left on live betook themselves to flight,
So feared they this deadly thundering tower:
But Soliman staide like a valiant knight,
And some with him, that trusted in his power,
Argantes with a long beach tree in hand,
Ran thither, this huge engine to withstand:
50
With this he pusht the tower and back it drives
The length of all his tree, a woondrous way,
The hardy virgin by his side arriues,
To help Argantes in this hard assay:
The band that used the ram, this season strives
To cut the cords, wherein the woolpacks lay,
Which done, the sackes down in the trenches fall,
And to the battrie naked left the wall.
51
The tower above, the ram beneath does thunder,
What lime and stone such puissance could abide?
The wall began (now brus'd and crushed asunder)
Her wounded lap to open broad and wide,
Godfrey himself and his brought safely under
The shattred wall, where greatest breach he spide,
Himself he saues behind his mighty targe,
A shield not used but in some desperate charge.
52
From hence he sees where Soliman descends
Down to the threshold of the gaping breach,
And there it seems the mighty Prince entends
Godfredoes hoped entrance to impeach:
Argantes (and with him the maid) defends
The walls above, to which the tower does reach,
His noble heart, when Godfrey this beheld,
With courage new, with wrath and valor sweld.
53
He turned about and to good Sigiere spoke,
Who bare his greatest shield and mighty bow,
That sure and trusty target let me take,
Impenetrable is that shield I know,
Over these ruins will I passage make,
And enter first, the way is eath and low,
And time requires that by some noble feat
I should make known my strength and puissance great:
54
He scant had spoken, scant received the targe,
When on his leg a sudden shaft him hit,
And through that part a hole made wide and large,
Where his strong sinnewes fastened were and knit.
Clorinda, thou this arrow did discharge,
And let the Pagans bless thy hand for it,
For by that shot thou sauedst them that day
From bondage vile, from death and sure decay.
55
The wounded Duke, as though he felt no pain,
Still forward went, and mounted up the breach,
His high attempt at first he nould refrain,
And after called his Lords with cheerful speech;
But when his leg could not his weight sustain,
He saw his will did far his power out reach,
And more he strove his grief increast the more,
The bold assault he left at length therefore:
56
And with his hand he beckned Guelpho near,
And said, I must withdraw me to my tent,
My place and person in mine absence bear,
Supply my want, let not the fight relent,
I go and will ere long again be hear,
I go and straight return, this said, he went,
On a light stead he lept, and ore the green
He road, but road not (as he thought) unseen.
57
When Godfrey parted, parted eeke the heart,
The strength and fortune of the Christian bands,
Courage increased in their adverse part,
Wrath in their hearts and vigor in their hands:
Valor, success, strength, hardines, and art
Faild in the Princes of the Westren lands,
Their swords were blunt, faint was their trumpets blast,
Their sun was set, or else with clouds orecast.
58
Upon the bulwarks now appeered bold
That fearful band that late for dread was fled;
The women that Clorindaes strength behold,
Their countries love to war encouraged,
They weapons got and fight like men they would,
Their gowns tuckt up, their locks were loose and spread,
Sharp darts they cast, and without dread or fear
Exposed their breasts to save their fortress dear.
59
But that which most dismayed the christian knights,
And added courage to the Pagans most,
Was Guelphos sudden fall, in all men's sights
Who tumbled headlong down, his footing lost,
A mighty stone upon the worthy lights,
But whence it came none wist, nor from what coast;
And with like blow, which more their hearts dismayed,
Beside him low in dust old Raimond laid:
60
And Eustace eeke within the ditches large,
To narrow shifts and last extremes they drive,
Upon their foes so fierce the Pagans charge,
And with good fortune so their blows they give,
That whom they hit, in spite of helm or targe,
They deeply wound, or else of life deprive.
At this their good success Argantes proud,
Waxing more fell, thus roard and cried loud:
61
This is not Antioch, nor the evening dark,
Can help your privy sleights with friendly shade,
The sun yet shines, your falsehood can we mark,
In other wise this bold assault is made,
Of praise and glory quenched is the spark
That made you first these eastern lands invade,
Why cease you now? why take you not this fort?
What are you weary for a charge so short?
62
Thus raged he, and in such hellish sort
Encreast the fury in the brainsicke knight,
That he esteemd that large and ample fort
To strait a field, wherein to prove his might,
There where the breach had framed a new made port,
Himself he plast, with nimble skips and light,
He cleared the passage out, and thus he cride
To Soliman, that fought close by his side:
63
Come Soliman, the time and place behold,
That of our valors well may judge the doubt,
What staiest thou? among these Christians bold,
First leap he forth that houlds himself most stout:
While thus his will the mighty champion told,
Both Soliman and he, at once leapt out,
Fury the first prouokt, disdain the last,
Who scorned the challenge ere his lips it past.
64
Upon their foes unlooked for they flew,
Each spited other for his virtues sake,
So many soldiers this fierce couple slew,
So many shieldes they cleft and helmes they brake,
So many ladders to the earth they threw,
That well they seemed a mount thereof to make,
Or else some vamure fit to save the town,
In stead of that the Christians late bet down.
65
The folk that strove with rage and haste before
Who first the wall and rampire should ascend,
Retire, and for that honor strive no more,
Scantly they could their limbs and lives defend,
They fled, their engines lost the Pagans tore
In pieces small, their rams to naught they rend,
And all unfit for further service make,
With so great force and rage their beams they brake.
66
The Pagans ran transported with their ire,
Now here now there, and woeful slaughters wrought,
At last they called for devouring fire,
Two burning pines against the tower they brought,
So from the palace of their hellish Sire
(When all this world they would consume to naught)
The fury sisters come with fire in hands,
Shaking their snakie locks and sparkling brands.
67
But noble Tancred, who this while applied
Grave exhortations to his bold Latins,
When of these knights the wondrous acts he spied,
And saw the champions with their burning pines,
He left his talk and thither forthwith hied,
To stop the rage of those fell Saracines,
And with such force the fight he there renewed,
That now they fled and lost, who late pursewed.
68
Thus changed the state and fortune of the fray,
Meane-while the wounded Duke in grief and teene,
Within his great pauilion rich and gay,
Good Sigiere and Baldwine stood between;
His other friends whom his mishap dismay,
With grief and tears about assembled been,
He strove in haste the weapon out to wind:
And broke the reed, but left the head behind.
69
He bod them take the speediest way they might,
Of that unlucky hurt to make him sound,
And to lay open the depth thereof to sight,
He willed them open, search and lance the wound,
Send me again (quoth he) to end this fight,
Before the sun be sunken under ground,
And leaning on a broken spear, he thrust
His leg straight out, to him that cure it must.
70
Erotimus, borne on the banks of Poe,
Was he that undertook to cure the knight,
All what green herbs or waters pure could do,
He knew their power, their virtue and their might,
A noble poet was the man also;
But in this scilence had a more delight,
He could restore to health death wounded men,
And make their names immortal with his pen.
71
The mighty Duke yet never changed cheer,
But grieved to see his friends lamenting stand;
The leach prepared his clothes and clensing gear,
And with a belt his gown about him band,
Now with his herbs the steely head to tear
Out of the flesh he proved, now with his hand,
Now with his hand, now with his instrument
He shakt and plucked it, yet not forth it went;
72
His labor vain, his art prevailed naught,
His luck was ill, although his skill were good,
To such extremes the wounded Prince he brought,
That with fell pain he swouned as he stood:
But th'angell pure (that kept him) went and sought
Divine Dictamnum, out of Ida wood,
This herb is rough and bears a purple flower,
And in his budding leaves lies all his power.
73
Kind nature first upon the craggie clift
Bewrai'd this herb unto the mountain goat,
That when her sides a cruel shaft has rift,
With it she shakes the reed out of her cote,
This in a moment fetched the angel swift,
And brought from Ida hill, though far remote,
The ruice whereof in a prepared bath
Unseen the blessed spirit powered has:
74
Pure Nectar from that spring of Lidia than,
And Panaces divine therein he threw,
The cunning leach to bathe the wound began,
And of it self the steely head out flew,
The bleeding stancht, no vermile drop out-ran,
The leg again waxt strong with vigor new:
Erotimus cride out, this hurt and wound
No humane art, or hand so soon makes sound;
75
Some angel good I think come down from skies
Thy surgeon is, for here plain tokens ar
Of grace divine, which to thy help applies,
Thy weapon take and haste again to war;
In precious clothes his leg the chieftaine ties,
Naught could the man from blood and fight debar,
A sturdie lance in his right hand he braced,
His shield he took, and on his helmet laced:
76
And with a thousand knights and Barons bold,
Toward the town he hasted from his camp,
In clouds of dust was Titans face enrold,
Trembled the earth whereon the worthies stamp,
His foes far off his dreadful looks behold,
Which in their hearts of courage quenched the lamp,
A chilling fear ran cold through every vain,
Lord Godfrey showted thrice and all his train:
77
Their sovereigns voice his hardy people knew,
And his loud cries, that cheered each fearful heart,
Thereat new strength they took and courage new,
And to the fierce assault again they start.
The Pagans twain this while themselves withdrew
Within the breach, to save that battred part,
And with great loss a skirmish hot they hold,
Against Tancredie and his squadron bold.
78
Thither came Godfrey armed round about
In trusty plate, with fierce and dreadful look,
At first approach against Argantes stout
Headed with poinant steel a lance he shook,
No casting engine with such force throws out
A knottie spear, and as the way it took,
It whistled in the air, the fearelesse knight
Opposed his shield against that weapons might,
79
The dreadful blow quite through his target drove,
And bored through his brestplate strong and thick,
The tender skin it in his bosom roue,
The purple blood outstreamed from the quick,
To wrest it out the wounded Pagan strove,
And little leisure gave it there to stick;
At Godfreys head the lance again he cast,
And said, lo there again thy dart thou have:
80
The spear flew back the way it lately came,
And would revenge the harm it self had done,
But mist the mark whereat the man did ame,
He stepped aside the furious blow to shun:
But Sigiere in his throat received the same,
The murdring weapon at his neck outrunne,
Nor ought it grieved the man to loose his breath,
Since in his Princes stead he suffered death.
81
Even then the Souldan struck with monstrous maine
The noble leader of the Norman band,
He reeld a while and staggred with the pain,
And wheeling round fell groueling on the sand:
Godfrey no longer could the grief sustain
Of these displeasures, but with flaming brand,
Up to the breach in heat and have he goes,
And hand to hand there combats with his foes,
82
And there great wonders surely wrought he had,
Mortal the fight, and fierce had been the fray,
But that dark night, from her pauilion sad,
Her cloudy wings did on the earth display,
Her quiet shades she interposed glad,
To cause the knights their arms aside to lay;
Godfrey withdrew, and to their tents they wend,
And thus this bloody day was brought to end.
83
The weak and wounded ere he left the field
The godly Duke to safety thence conuaid,
Nor to his foes his engines would he yield,
In them his hope to win the fortress laid;
Then to the tower he went, and it beheild,
The tower that late the Pagan Lords dismayed,
But now stood bruised, broken, cracked and shiuered,
From some sharp storm as it were late delivered,
84
From dangers great escapt but late it was,
And now to safety brought welnie it seames,
But as a ship that under sail does pas
The roaring billows and the raging streams,
And drawing nie the wished port (alas)
Breaks on some hidden rock her ribs and beams;
Or as a stead rough ways that well has past,
Before his Inn stumbleth, and falls at last:
85
Such hap befell that tower for on that side
Against which the Pagans force and battrie bend,
Two wheels were broke whereon the piece should ride,
The maimed engine could no further wend,
The troop that guarded it that part provide
To underprop, with posts, and it defend,
Till carpenters and cunning workmen came,
Whose skill should help and rear again the same.
86
Thus Godfrey bids, and that ere springing day
The cracks and bruses all amend they should,
Each open passage and each privy way
About the piece, he kept with soldiers bold:
But the loud rumor both of that they say,
And that they do, is heard within the hold,
A thousand lights about the tower they view,
And what they wrought all night both saw and knew.
The twelfth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Clorinda hears her Eunuch old report
Her birth, her of spring, and her native land;
Disguised she fireth Godfreys rolling fort,
The burned piece falls smoking on the sand:
With Tancred long unknown in desperate sort
She fights, and falls through pearsed with his brand:
Christened she dies; with sighs, with plaints, and tears,
He wailes her death; Argant reuengement swears.
1
NOw in dark night was all the world imbard;
But yet the tired armies took no rest,
The careful French keptheedfull watch and ward,
While their high tower the workmen newly dressed,
The Pagan crew to reinforce prepared
The weak'ned bulwarks, late to earth down kest,
Their rampires broke and bruised walls to mend,
Lastly their hurts the wounded knights attend.
2
Their wounds were dressed; part of the work was brought
To wished end, part left to other days,
A dull desire to rest deep midnight wrought,
His heavy rod sleep on their eyelids lays:
Yet rested not Clorindaes working thought,
Which thirsted still for fame and warlike praise,
Argantes eeke accompaned the maid,
From place to place, which to her self thus said:
3
This day Argantes strong and Soliman
Strange things have done, and purchased great renown,
Among our foes out of the walls they ran,
Their rams they broke and rent their engines down;
Ivs'd my bow, of naught else boast I can,
My self stood safe meane-while within this town,
And happy was my shot and prosperous too,
But that was all a woman's hand could do.
4
On birds and beasts in forests wild that feed,
It were more fit mine arrows to bestow,
Than for a feeble maid in warlike deed,
With strong and hardy knights her self to show,
Why take I not again my virgins weed?
And spend my days in secret cell unknow?
Thus thought, thus mused, thus devised the maid,
And turning to the knight, at last thus said:
5
My thoughts are full (my Lord) of strange desire,
Some high attempt of war to undertake,
Whether high God my mind therewith inspire,
Or of his will his God mankind does make,
Among our foes behold the light and fire,
I will among them wend and burn or brake
The tower, God grant therein I have my will,
And that performed, betide me good or ill.
6
But if it fortune such my chance should be,
That to this town I never turn again,
Mine Eunuch (whom I dearly love) with thee
I leave, my faithful maids, and all my train,
To Egypt then conducted safely see
Those woeful damsels, and that aged swain,
Help them (my Lord) in that distressed case,
Their feeble sex, his age deserves grace.
7
Argantes wondering stood, and felt the effect
Of true renown pierce through his glorious mind,
And will thou go (quoth he) and me neglect,
Disgras'd, despised, leave in this fort behind?
Shall I while these strong walls my life protect,
Behold thy flames and fires tossed in the wind,
No, no, thy fellow have I been in arms,
And will be still, in praise, in death, in harms:
8
This heart of mine deaths bitter stroke despises,
For praise this life, for glory take this breath,
My soul the more (quoth she) thy friendship priseth,
For this thy profer'd aid required uneath,
I but a woman am, no loss arises
To this besieged city by my death,
But if (as Gods forbid) this night thou fall,
Ah who shall then, who can, defend this wall?
9
Too late these scuces vain (the knight replide)
You bring, my will is firm, my mind is set,
I follow you where so you list me guide,
Or go before if you my purpose let.
This said, they hasted to the palace wide
About their prince where all his Lords were met,
Clorinda spoke for both, and said, sir king,
Attend my words, hear, and allow the thing.
10
Argantes here this bold and hardy knight,
Will undertake to burn the wondrous tower,
And I with him, only we stay till night
Bury in sleep our foes at deadest hour.
The king with that cast up his hands on hight,
The tears for joy upon his cheeks down power,
Praised (quoth he) be Macon whom we serve,
This land I see he keeps and will preserve:
11
Nor shall so soon this shaken kingdom fall,
While such unconquered hearts my state defend:
But for this act what praise or guerdon shall
I give your virtues, which so far extend?
Let fame your praises sound through nations all,
And fill the world therewith to either end,
Take half my wealth and kingdom for your meed?
You are rewarded half even with the deed.
12
Thus spoke the Prince, and gently began distraine
Now him, now her, between his friendly arms:
The Sultan by, no longer could refrain
That noble envy which his bosom warmes,
Nor I (quoth he) bear this broad sword in vain,
Nor yet inexpert am in night alarmes,
Take me with you: ah (quoth Clorinda) noe!
Whom leave we here of prowess if you go?
13
This spoken, ready with a proud refuse
Argantes was his proffred aid to scorn,
Whom Aladine preuents, and with excuse
To Soliman thus began his speeches torn:
Right noble Prince, as aie has been your use,
Your self so still you bear and long have borne,
Bold in all acts, no danger can affright
Your heart, nor tired is your strength with fight.
14
If you went forth great things perform you would,
In my conceit yet far unfit it seames,
That you (who most excel in courage bold)
At once should leave this town in these extremes,
Nor would I that these twain should leave this sold,
My heart their noble lives far worthier deames,
If this attempt of less importance wear,
Or weaker posts so great a weight could bear.
15
But for well guarded is the mighty tower
With hardy troops and squadrons round about,
And cannot harmed be with little power,
Nor fits the time to send whole armies out,
This pair, who past have many a dreadful stowre,
And proffer now to prove this venture stout,
Alone to this attempt let them go forth,
Alone then thousands of more price and worth.
16
Thou (as it best beseemes a mighty king)
With ready bands beside the gate attend,
That when this couple have performed the thing,
And shall again their footsteps homeward bend,
From their strong foes upon them following
Thou may them keep, preserve, save and defend:
Thus said the king, the Sultan must consent,
Silent remained the Turk, and discontent.
17
Then Ismen said, you twain that undertake
This hard attempt, a while I pray you stay,
Till I a wilde-fire of fine temper make,
That this great engine burn to ashes may;
Happily the guard that now does watch and wake,
Will then lie tumbled sleeping on the lay;
Thus they conclude, and in their chambers sit,
To wait the time for this adventure fit.
18
Clorinda there her silver arms off rent
Her helm, her shield, her hawberke shining bright,
An armor black as ieat or cole she hent,
Wherein withouten plume her self she dight;
For thus disguised amid her foes she meant
To pass unseen, by help of friendly night,
To whom her Eunuch old Arsetes came,
That from her cradle nursed and kept the Dame.
19
This aged fire had followed far and near
(Through lands and seas) the strong and hardy maid,
He saw her leave her arms and wonted gear,
Her danger nie that sudden change foresaid:
By his white locks from black that changed wear
In following her, the woeful man her praid,
By all his service and his taken pain,
To leave that fond attempt, but praid in vain.
20
At last (quoth he) since hardn'd to thine ill,
Thy cruel heart is to thy loss prepared,
That my weak age, nor tears that down distill,
Nor humble suit, nor plaint, thou list regard;
Attend a while, strange things unfold I will,
Hear both thy birth and high estate declared;
Follow my counsel or thy will, that done,
She fit to hear, the Eunuch thus begone:
21
Senapus ruled, and yet perchance does rain
In mighty Ethiope and her deserts waste,
The lore of Christ both he and all his train
Of people black, has kept and long imbraste,
To him a Pagan was I sold for gain,
And with his queen (as her chief Eunuch) plaste;
Black was this queen as ieat, yet on her eyes
Sweet loveliness (in black attired) lies.
22
The fire of love and frost of jealousy
Her husbands troubled soul alike torment,
The tide of fond suspicion flowed hie,
The foe to love and plague to sweet content,
He mewed her up from sight of mortal eye,
Nor day he would his beams on her had bent:
She (wise and lowly) by her husbands pleasure,
Her joy, her peace, her will, her wish did measure.
23
Her prison was a chamber, painted round
With goodly purtraites and with stories old,
As white as snow there stood a virgin bound,
Besides a dragon fierce, a champion bold
The monster did with poinant spear through wound,
The gored beast lay dead upon the mold;
The gentle queen before this image laid,
She plained, she mourned, she wept, she sighed, she praid:
24
At last with child she proved, and forth she brought
(And thou art she) a daughter fair and bright,
In her thy color white new terror wrought,
She wondered on thy face with strange affright,
But yet she purposed in her fearful thought
To hide thee from the king thy fathers sight,
Least thy bright hew should his suspect approve,
For seld a crow begets a silver dove.
25
And to her spouse to show she was disposed
A Negrose babe, late borne, in room of thee,
And for the tower wherein she lay enclosed,
Was with her damsels only wond and me,
To me, on whose true faith she most reposed,
She gave thee, ere thou could christened be,
Nor could I since find means thee to baptize,
In Pagan lands thou know its not the guise.
26
To me she gave thee, and she wept withal,
To foster thee in some far distant place,
Who can her griefs and plaints to reckoning call,
How often she swouned at the last embrace?
Her streaming tears amid her kisses fall,
Her sighs, her dire complaints did enterlace:
And looking up at last, O God (quoth she)
Who do my heart and inward mourning see,
27
If mind and body spotless to this day,
If I have kept my bed still vndefilde,
(Not for my self a sinful wretch I pray,
That in thy presence am an abject vilde)
Preserve this babe, whose mother must denay
To nourish it, preserve this harmless child,
Oh let it live, and chaste like me it make,
But for good fortune elsewhere sample take.
28
Thou heavenly soldier which deliu'red have
That sacred virgin from the serpent old,
If on thine Altars I have offerings plast,
And sacrifis'd Myrrh, Frankinscence and gold,
On this poor child thy heavenly looks down cast,
With gracious eye this seely babe behold,
This said, her strength and living sprite was fled,
She sighed, she groaned, she swouned in her bed.
29
Weeping I took thee, in a little chest,
Cou'red with herbs and leaves, I brought thee out
So secretly, that none of all the rest
Of such an act suspicion had or dout,
To wilderness my steps I first addressed,
Where horride shades enclosed me round about,
A tygresse there I met, in whose fierce eyes
Fury and wrath, rage, death and terror lies:
30
Up to a tree I leapt, and on the grass
(Such was my sudden fear) I left thee lying,
To thee the beast with furious course did pass,
With curious looks upon thy visage prying,
All suddenly both meek and mild she was,
With friendly cheer thy tender body eying,
At last she lickt thee, and with gesture mild
About thee played, and thou upon her smilde.
31
Her fearful muzlefull of dreadful threat
In thy weak hand thou took'st withouten dreed,
The gentle beast with milk out stretched teat;
(As nurses custom) proffred thee to feed,
As one that wondreth on some marvel great,
I stood this while amazed at the deed,
When thee she saw well filled and satisfied
Unto the woods again the tygresse hied.
32
She gone, down from the tree I came in have,
And took thee up and on my journey wend,
Within a little thorpe I staid at last,
And to a nurse the charge of thee commend,
And sporting with thee there long time I past
Till term of sixteen months were brought to end,
And thou begone (as little children do)
With half clipped words to prattle, and to go.
33
But having past the August of mine age,
When more than half my tap of life was run,
Rich by rewards given by your mother sage
For merits past, and service yet undone,
I longed to leave this wandering pilgrimage,
And in my native soil again to won,
To get some seely home I had desire,
Loath still to warm me at another fire:
34
To Egypt ward (where I was borne) I went,
And bore thee with me, by a rolling flood
Till I with savage thieves well nie was hent,
Before, the brook; the thieves, behind me stood:
Thee to forsake I never could consent,
And gladly would I escape those outlawes wood,
Into the flood I leapt far from the brim,
My left hand bore thee, with the right I swim.
35
Swift was the current, in the middle stream
A whirlpoole gaped with devouring jaws,
The gulf (on such mishap ere I could dream)
Into his deep abyss my carcass draws,
There I forsook thee, the wild waters seame
To pity thee, a gentle wind there blows,
Whose friendly puffes safe to the shore thee drive,
Where wet and weary I at last arrive:
36
I took thee up and in my dream that night
(When buried was the world in sleep and shade)
I saw a champion clad in armor bright,
That ore my head shaked a flaming balde,
He said I charge thee execute aright
That charge this enfants mother on thee laid,
Baptize the child, high heaven esteems her dear,
And I her keeper will attend her near:
37
I will her keep, defend, save and protect,
I made the waters mild, the tygresse tame,
O wretch that heavenly warnings do reject!
The warrior vanished having said the same.
Irose and iournayd on my way direct,
When blushing morn Tithons bed forth came,
But for my faith is true and sure I ween,
And dreams are false, you still unchristened been.
38
A Pagan therefore thee I fostred have,
Nor of thy birth the truth did ever tell,
Since you increased are in courage brave,
Your sex and natures self you both excel,
Full many a realm have you made bond and slave,
Your fortunes last your self remember well,
And how in peace and war, in joy and teene,
I have your servant, and your tutor been.
39
Last morn, from skies eric stars exiled wear,
In deep and deathlike sleep my senses dround,
The selfsame vision did again appear,
With stormy wrathful looks, and thundering sound,
Villain (quoth he) within short while thy dear
Must change her life, and leave this sinful ground,
Thine be the loss, the torment and the caire,
This said, he fled through skies, through clouds and air.
40
Hear then my joy, my hope, my darling, hear
High heaven some dire misfortune threatened has,
Displeasd pardie, because I did thee leare
A lore, repugnant to thy parents faith;
Ah, for my sake, this bold attempt forbear;
Put off these sable arms, appease thy wrath.
This said, he wept, she pensive stood and sad,
Because like dream herself but lately had.
41
With cheerful smile she answered him at last,
I will this faith observe, it seems me true,
Which from my cradle age thou taught me have;
I will not change it for religion new,
Nor with vain shows of fear and dreed aghast,
This enterprise forbear I to pursew,
No, not if death in his most dreadful face
Wherewith he scareth mankind, kept the place.
42
Approchen began the time (while thus she spoke)
Wherein they ought that dreadful hazard try,
She to Argantes went, who should partake
Of her renown and praise, or with her die.
Ismen with words more hasty still did make
Their virtue great, which by it self did fly,
Two balls he gave them made of hollow bras,
Wherein enclosed fire, pitch and brimston was.
43
And forth they went, and over dale and hill
They hasted forward with a speedy pace,
Unseen, unmarked, vndeseride, until
Beside the engine close themselves they place,
New courage there their swelling hearts did fill,
Rage in their breasts, fury shone in their face,
They earnd to blow the fire, and draw the sword,
The watch descride them both, and gave the word.
44
Silent they passed on, the watch begone
To rear a huge alarm with hideous cries,
Therewith the hardy couple forward run
To execute their valiant enterpries;
So from a cannon or a roaring gonne
At once the noise, the flame and bullet flies,
They run, they give the charge, begin the fray,
And all at once their foes break, spoil and slay.
45
They passed first through thousand thousand blows,
And then performed their designment bold,
A fiery ball each on the engine throws,
The stuff was dry, the fire took quickly hold,
Furious upon the timber work it grows,
How it increased cannot well be told,
How it crept up the piece, and how to skies
The burning sparks, and towering smoke vp-flies.
46
A mass of sollid fire burning bright
Rolled up in smouldring fumes there brusteth out,
And there the blustering winds add strength and might,
And gather close the sparsed flames about:
The Frenchmen trembled at the dreadful light,
To arms in haste and fear ran all the rout,
Down fell the piece dreaded so much in war,
Thus, what long days does make, one hour does mar.
47
Two christian bands, this while came to the place
With speedy haste, where they beheld the fire,
Argantes to them cride, with scornful grace,
Your blood shall quench these flames and quench mine ire:
This said, the maid and he with sober pace
Drew back, and to the bank themselves retire,
Faster then brooks which falling showers increase,
Their foes augment, and faster on them prease.
48
The guilden port was opened, and forth stepped
With all his soldiers bold, the Turkish king,
Ready to aid them two his force he kept,
When Fortune should them home with conquest bring,
Over the bars the hardy couple lept,
And after them a band of Christians fling,
Whom Soliman drove back with courage stout,
And shut the gate but shut Clorinda out.
49
Alone was she shut forth, for in that hour
Wherein they closed the port, the virgin went
And full of heat and wrath, her strength and power
Gaint Arimon (that stroke her erst) she bent,
She slew the knight, nor Argant in that stowre
Wist of her parting, or her fierce intent,
The fight, the prease, the night and darksome skies,
Care from his heart had taken, sight from his eyes.
50
But when appeased was her angry mood,
Her fury calmed, and settled was her head,
She saw the gates were shut, and how she stood
Amid her foes, she held her self for dead;
While none her marked, at last she thought it good
To save her life some other path to tread,
She feigned her one of them, and close her drew
Amid the prease that none her saw nor knew:
51
Then as a wolf guilty of some misdeed
Flies to some grove to hide himself from view,
So favored with the night, with secret speed
Disseured from the prease the damsel flew:
Tancred alone of her escape took heed,
He on that quarter was artiued new,
When Arimon she killed, he thither came,
He saw it, marked it, and pursued the dame,
52
He deemed she was some man of mickle might,
And on her person would he worship win,
Over the hills the nymph her journey dight
Toward another port, there to get in:
With hideous noise fast after spurred the knight,
She heard and staide, and thus her words begin,
What haste have thou? ride softly, take thy breath,
What bring thou? he answered, war and death.
53
And war and death (quoth she) here may thou get
If thou for battle come, with that she staid:
Tancred to ground his foot in haste down set,
And left his stead, on foot he saw the maid,
Their courage hot, their ire and wrath they whet,
And either champion drew a trenchant blaid,
Together ran they, and together stroke,
Like two fierce bulls, whom rage and love provoke.
54
Worthy of royal listes and brightest day,
Worthy a golden trompe and laurel crown,
The actions were and woonders of that fray,
Which sable night did in dark bosom drown:
Yet night, consent that I their acts display,
And make their deeds to future ages known,
And in records of long enduring story,
Enroll their praise, their fame, their worth and glory.
55
They neither shrunk, nor vantage sought of ground,
They trauerst not, nor skipt from part to part,
Their blows were neither false nor feigned found,
The night, their rage, would let them use no art,
Their swords together clash with dreadful sound,
Their feet stand fast, and neither stir nor start,
They move their hands, steadfast their feet remain,
Nor blow nor foine they stroke or thrust in vain.
56
Shame bred desire a sharp revenge to take,
And vengeance taken gave new cause of shame:
So that with haste and little heed they struck,
Fuel enough they had to feed the flame,
At last so close their battle fierce they make,
They could not weild their swords, so nie they came,
They used the hilts, and each on other rusht,
And helm to helm, and shield to shield they crushed.
57
Thrice his strong arms he fouldes about her waste,
And thrice was forced to let the virgin go,
For she disdained to be so embraste,
No lover would have strained his mistress so:
They took their swords again, and each enchaste
Deep wounds in the soft flesh of his strong foe,
Till weak and weary, faint, alive uneath,
They both retirde at once at once took breath;
58
Each other long beheild, and leaning stood
Upon their swords, whose points in earth were pight,
When day break rising from the Eastren flood
Put forth the thousand eyes of blindfold night,
Tancred beheild his foes out streaming blood,
And gaping wounds, and waxt proud with the sight,
O vanity of man's unstable mind,
Puffed up with every blast of friendly wind!
95
Why ioi'st thou wretch? O what shall be thy gain?
What trophie for this conquest is it, thou reares?
Thine eyes shall shed (in case thou be not slain)
For every drop of blood a sea of tears:
The bleeding warriors leaning thus remain,
Each one to speak one world long time forbeares,
Tancred the silence broake at last, and said,
(For he would know with whom this fight he maid:)
60
Evil is our chance, and hard our fortune is,
Who here in silence and in shade debate,
Where light of sun and witness all we mis,
That should our prowess and our praise dilate:
If words in arms find place, yet grant me this,
Tell me thy name, thy country and estate,
That I may know (this dangerous combat done)
Whom I have conquered, or who has me won.
61
What I nill tell, you ask (quoth she) in vain,
Nor moved by prayer, nor constraind by power,
But thus much know, I am one of those twain
Which late with kindled fire destroi'd the tower.
Tancred at her proud words sweld with disdain,
That have thou said (quoth he) in evil hour,
Thy vaunting speeches, and thy silence both,
(Uncivil wretch) has made my heart more wroth.
62
Ire in their chafed breasts renewed the fray,
Fierce was the fight, though feeble were their might,
Their strength was gone, their cunning was away,
And fury in their stead maintained the fight,
Their swords both points and edges sharp embay
In purple blood, where so they hit or light,
And if weak life yet in their bosoms lie,
They lived because they both disdained to die.
63
As Egeans seas when storms be calmed again,
That rolled their tumbling waves with troublous blasts,
Do yet of tempests past some shows retain
And here and there their swelling billows casts;
So, though their strength were gone, and might were vain,
Of their first fiercenes still the fury lasts,
Wherewith sustained, they to their tackling stood,
And heaped wound on wound, and blood on blood.
64
But now alas, the fatal hour arriues,
That her sweet life must leave that tender hold,
His sword into her bosom deep he drives,
And bathed in lukewarm blood his iron cold,
Between her breasts the cruel weapon riues
Her curious square, embost with swelling gold,
Her knees grow weak, the pains of death she feels,
And like a falling Cedar bends and reeles.
65
The Prince his hand upon her shield does streach,
And low on earth the wounded damsel laith,
And while she fell, with weak and woeful speech,
Her prayers last, and last complaints she says,
A spirit new did her those prayers teach,
Spirit of hope, of charity, and faith;
And though her life to Christ rebellious wear,
Yet died she his child and handmaide dear.
66
Friend thou have won, I pardon thee, nor save
This body, that all torments can endure,
But save my soul, baptism I dying crave,
Come wash away my sins with waters pure:
His heart relenting nigh insunder rave,
With woeful speech of that sweet creature,
So that his rage, his wrath and anger did,
And on his cheeks salt tears for ruthe down slide.
67
With murmur loud down from the mountains side
A little runnell tumbled near the place,
Thither he ran and filled his helmet wide,
And quick returned to do that work of grace,
With trembling hands her beauer he untied,
Which done he saw, and seeing, knew her face,
And lost therewith his speech and moving quight,
O woeful knowledge, ah unhappy sight!
68
He died not, but all his strength unites,
And to his virtues gave his heart in guard,
Brideling his grief, with water he requites
The life, that he bereft with iron hard;
And while the sacred words the knight recites,
The Nymphe to heaven with joy her self prepared;
And as her life decaies, her joys increase,
She smild and said, farewell, I die in peace.
69
As Violets blew among Lillies pure men throw,
So palenes midst her native white begone.
Her looks to heaven she cast, their eyes I trow
Downward for pity bent both heaven and sun,
Her naked hand she gave the knight, in show
Of love and peace, her speech (alas) was done,
And thus the virgin fell on endless sleep,
Love, beauty, virtue, for your darling weep.
70
But when he saw her gentle soul was went,
His manly courage to relent began,
Grief, sorrow, anguish, sadness, discontent,
Free empire got, and lordship on the man,
His life within his heart they close up pent,
Death through his senses and his visage ran:
Like his dead Lady, dead seemed Tancred good,
In palenesse, stillness, wounds and streams of blood.
71
And his weak sprite (to be unbodied
From fleshly prison free that ceaselesse striued)
Had followed her fair soul but lately fled,
Had not a Christian squadron there arrived,
To seek fresh water thither happily led,
And found the Princess dead, and him deprived
Of signs of life, yet did the knight remain
On live, nigh dead, for her himself had flaine.
72
Their guide far off the Prince knew by his shield,
And thither hasted full of grief and fear,
Her dead, him seeming so, he there behield,
And for that strange mishap shed many a tear;
He would not leave the corses fair in field
For food to wolves, though she a Pagan wear,
But in their arms the soldiers both vphent,
And both lamenting brought to Tancreds tent:
73
With those dear burdens to their camp they pass,
Yet would not that dead seeming knight awake,
At last he deeply groaned, which token was
His feeble soul had not her flight yet take:
The other lay a still and heavy mass,
Her spirit had that earthen cage forsake,
Thus were they brought, and thus they placed wear
In sundry rooms, yet both adjoining near.
74
All skill and art his careful servants used
To life again their dying Lord to bring,
At last his eyes vnclos'd, with tears suffused,
He felt their hands and heard their whispering,
But how he thither came long time he mused,
His mind astonished was with every thing;
He gazed about, his squites in fine he knew,
Then weak and woeful thus his plaints our threw:
75
What live I yet? and do I breathe and see
Of this accursed day the hateful light?
This spiteful ray which still vpbraideth me
With that accursed deed, I did this night,
Ah coward hand! afraid why should thou be?
(Thou instrument of death, shame and despite)
Why should thou fear, with sharp and trenchant knife,
To cut the thread of this blood-guiltie life?
76
Pierce through this bosom, and my cruel heart
In pieces cleave, break every string and vain;
But thou to slaughters vile which used art,
Think it were pity so to ease my pain:
Of lucklesse love therefore in torments smart,
A sad example must I still remain,
A woeful monster of unhappy love,
Who still must live, least death his comfort prove:
77
Still must I live in anguish, grief and caire,
Furies my guilty conscience that torment,
The ougly shades, dark night, and troubled air
In grisly forms her slaughter still present,
Madness and death about my bed repair,
Hell gapeth wide to swallow up this tent;
Swift from my self I run, my self I fear,
Yet still my hell within my self I bear:
78
But where (alas) where be those relics sweet,
Wherein dwelt late all love, all joy, all good?
My fury left them cast in open street,
Some beast has torn her flesh and lickt her blood,
Ah noble pray! for savage beast unmeet,
Ah sweet! too sweet, and far too precious food,
Ah seely Nymph! whom night and darksome shade
To beasts, and me (far worse than beasts) betrade.
79
But where you be, if still you be, I wend
To gather up those relics dear at least,
But if some beast has from the hills descend,
And on her tender bowels made his feast,
Let that self monster me in pieces rend,
And deep entombe me in his hollow cheast:
For where she buried is, there shall I have
A stately tomb, a rich and costly grave.
80
Thus mourned the knight, his squires him told at last,
They had her there for whom those tears he shed;
A beam of comfort his dim eyes out cast,
Like lightning through thick clouds of darkness spread,
The heavy burden of his lims in have
With mickle pain, he drew forth of his bed,
And scant of strength to stand, to move or go,
Thither he staggred, reeling to and froe:
81
When he came there, and in her breast espide
(His handiworke) that deep and cruel wound,
And her sweet face with leaden palenesse did,
Where beauty late spread forth her beams around,
He trembled so, that nere his squires beside
To hold him up, he had sunk down to ground,
And said, O face in death still sweet and fair!
Thou can not sweeten yet my grief and caire:
82
O fair right hand, the pledge of faith and love!
Given me but late, too late, in sign of peace,
How haps it now thou can not stir nor move?
And you dear lims now laid in rest and ease,
Through which my cruel blade this flood-gate roue,
Your pains have end, my torments never cease,
O hands! O cruel eyes accursed alike!
You gave the wound, you gave them light to strike.
83
But thither now run forth my guilty blood,
Whither my plaints, my sorrows cannot wend,
He said no more, but, as his passion wood
Enforced him, he began to tear and rend
His hair, his face, his wounds, a purple flood
Did from each side in rolling streams descend,
He had been slain, but that his pain and woe
Bereft his senses, and preserved him so.
84
Cast on his bed his squires recalled his spright,
To execute again her hateful charge,
But tattling fame the sorrows of the knight,
And hard mischance had told this while at large:
Godfrey and all his Lords of worth and might,
Ran thither, and the duty would discharge
Of friendship true, and with sweet words the rage
Of bitter grief and woe, they would assuage.
85
But as a mortal wound the more does smart
The more it searched is, handled or sought;
So their sweet words to his afflicted heart
More grief, more anguish, pain and torment brought:
But reverend Peter that nould set apart
Care of his sheep, as a good shepherd ought,
His vanity with grave advise reproved,
And told what mourning Christian knights behooued:
86
O Tancred, Tancred, how far different
From thy beginnings good these follies be?
What makes thee deaf? what has thy eiesight blent?
What mist, what cloud thus ouershadeth thee?
This is a warning good from heaven down sent,
(Yet his advise thou can not hear nor see)
Who calls and conducts thee to the way,
From which thou willing do and witting stray:
87
To worthy actions and atchiuements fit
For Christian knights, he would thee home recall;
But thou have left that course and changed it,
To make thy self a heathen damsels thrall;
But see, thy grief and sorrows painful fit
Is made the rod to scourge thy sins withal,
Of thine own good thy self the means he makes,
But thou his mercy, goodness, grace forsakes.
88
Thou do refuse of heaven the profred grace,
And against it still rebel with sinful ire,
O wretch! O whither does thy rage thee chase?
Refrain thy grief, bridle thy fond desire,
At hels wide gate vain sorrow does thee place,
Sorrow, misfortunes son, despaires foul sire:
O see thine evil, thy plaint and woe refrain,
The guides to death, to hell, and endless pain.
89
This said, his will to die the patient
Abandoned, that second death he feared,
These words of comfort to his heart down went,
And that dark night of sorrow somewhat cleared;
Yet now and then his grief deep sighs forth sent,
His voice shrill plaints and sad laments often reared,
Now to himself, now to his murdered love,
He spoke, who heard perchance from heaven above.
90
Till Phoebus rising from his evening fall
To her, for her, he mournes, he calls, he cries;
The nightingall so when her children small
Some churl takes before their parents eyes,
Alone, dismayed, quite bare of comforts all,
Tires with complaints the seas, the shores, the skies,
Till in sweet sleep against the morning bright
She fall at last; so mourned, so slept the knight.
91
And clad in starrie vale amid his dream,
(For whose sweet sake he mourned) appeard the maid,
Fairer than erst, yet with that heavenly beam,
Not out of knowledge was her lovely shaid,
With looks of ruth, her eyes celestial seame
To pity his sad plight, and thus she said,
Behold how fair, how glad thy love appears,
And for my sake (my dear) forbear these tears.
92
Thine be the thanks, my soul thou made flit
At unawares out of her earthly nest,
Thine be the thanks thou have advanced it
In Abraham's dear bosom long to rest,
There still I love thee, there for Tancred fit
A seat prepared is, among the blessed;
There in eternal joy eternal light,
Thou shall thy love enjoy, and she her knight:
93
Unless thy self, thy self heavens ioies envy,
And thy vain sorrow thee of bliss deprive,
Live, know I love thee, that I nill deny,
As angels, men; as saints may wights on live:
This said, of zeal and love forth of her eye
An hundredth glorious beams bright shining drive,
Amid which rays her self she closed from sight,
And with new joy, new comfort left her knight.
94
Thus comforted he wakt, and men discreet
In surgerie to cure his wounds were sought,
Meane-while of his dear love the relics sweet
(As best he could) to grave with pomp he brought:
Her tomb was not of viride Spartane greet,
Nor yet by cunning hand of Scopas wrought,
But built of polisht stone, and thereon laid
The lively shape and purtrait of the maid.
95
With sacred burning lamps in order long
And mournful pomp the corpse were brought to ground,
Her arms upon a leauelesse pine were hong,
The hearse, with cypress; arms, with laurel crowned:
Next day the Prince (whose love and courage strong
Drew forth his limbs, weak, feeble and unsound)
To visit went, with care and reu'rence meet,
The buried ashes of his mistress sweet:
96
Before her new made tomb at last arrived,
The woeful prison of his living spright,
Pale, cold, sad, comfortless, of sense deprived,
Upon the marble gray he fixed his sight,
Two streams of tears were from his eyes derived:
Thus with a sad alas, began the knight,
Oh marble dear on my dear mistress plast!
My flames within, without my tears thou have.
97
Not of dead bones art thou the mournful grave,
But of quick love the fortress and the hold,
Still in my heart thy woonted brands I have
More bitter far (alas) but not more cold,
Receive these sighs, these kisses sweet recaue,
In liquid drops of melting tears enrold,
And give them to that body pure and chaste
Which in thy bosom cold entombd thou have.
98
For if her happy soul her eye does bend
On that sweet body which it lately dressed,
My love, thy pity, cannot her offend,
Anger and wrath is not in angels blessed,
She pardon will the trespass of her friend,
That hope relieues me with these griefs oppressed,
This hand she knows has only sinned, not I,
Who living loved her, and for love now die:
99
And loving will I die, O happy day
When ere it chances! but O far more blessed
If as about thy polisht sides I stray,
My bones within thy hollow grave might rest,
Together should in heaven our spirits stay,
Together should our bodies lie in chest;
So happy death should join, what life does sever,
O death, O life! sweet both, both blessed ever.
100
Meanewhile the news in that besieged town
Of this mishap was whispred here and there,
Forthwith it spread, and for too true was known,
Her woeful loss was talked every where,
Mingled with cries and plaints to heaven up thrown,
As if the cities self new taken were
With conquering foes, or as if flame and fire,
Nor house nor church, nor street had left entire.
101
But all men's eyes were on Arsetes bent,
His sighs were deep, his looks full of despair,
Out of his woeful eyes no tear there went,
His heart was hardened with his too much care,
His silver locks with dust he foul besprent,
He knocked his breast, his face he rent and tare,
And while the prease flockt to the Eunuch old,
Thus to the people spoke Argantes bold,
102
I would, when first I knew the hardy maid
Excluded was among her Christian foes,
Have followed her to give her timely aid,
Or by her side this breath and life to lose,
What did I not, or what left I unsaid
To make the king the gates again unclose?
But he denide, his power did are restrain
My will, my suit was waste, my speech was vain:
103
Ah, had I gone, I would from danger free
Have brought to Sion that sweet nymph again,
Or in the bloody fight, where killed was she,
In her defense there nobly have been slain:
But what could I do more? the counsels be
Of God and man against my designments plain,
Dead is Clorinda fair, laid in cold grave,
Let me revenge her whom I could not save.
104
Jerusalem, hear what Argantes says,
Hear heaven (and if he break his oath and word,
Upon this head cast thunder in thy wrath)
I will destroy and kill that Christian Lord,
Who this fair dame by night thus murdered has,
Nor from my side I will vngird this sword,
Till Tancreds heart it cleave and shed his blood,
And leave his corse to wolves and crows for food.
105
This said, the people with a joyful shoute
Applaud his speeches and his words approve,
And calmed their grief in hope the boaster stout
Would kill the Prince, who late had slain his love.
O promise vain! it otherwise fell out:
Men purpose, but high Gods dispose above,
For underneath his sword this boaster did,
Whom thus he scorned and threat'ned in his pride.
The thirteenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Ismeno sets to guard the forest old
The wicked sprites, whose ougly shapes affray
And put to flight the men, whose labor would
To their dark shades let in heavens golden ray:
Thither goes Tancred hardy faithful, bold,
But foolish pity lets him not assay
His strength and courage: heat the Christian power
Annoies, whom to refresh Gods sends a shower.
1
But scant dissolved into ashes cold
The smoking tower fell on the scorched grass,
When new devise found out th'enchanter old,
By which the town besieged, secured was,
Of timber fit his foes deprive he would:
Such terror bred that late consumed mass,
So that the strength of Sions walls to shake,
They should no turrets, rams, nor engines make.
2
From Godfreyes camp a grove a little way
Amid the valleys deep grows out of sight,
Thick with old trees whose horrid arms display
An ougly shade, like everlasting night;
There when the sun spreads forth his clearest ray,
Dim, thick, uncertain, gloomie seems the light;
As when in eu'ning day and darkness strive,
Which should his foe from our horizon drive.
3
But when the sun his chair in seas does steep,
Night, horror, darkness thick, the place invade,
Which veil the mortal eyes with blindness deep,
And with sad terror make weak hearts affraide,
Thither no groom drives forth his tender sheep
To brouze, or ease their faint in cooling shade,
Nor trauellor, nor pilgrim there to enter
(So awful seems that forest old) dare venture.
4
United there the ghostes and gobblins meet
To frolic with their mates in silent night,
With dragons wings some cleave the welkin fleet,
Some nimbly run ore hills and valleys light,
A wicked troop, that with allurement sweet
Draws sinful man from that is good and right,
And there with hellish pomp, their bankets brought
They solemnise, thus the vain Pagans thought.
5
No twist, no twig, no bough nor branch therefore,
The Saracines cut from that sacred spring;
But yet the Christians spared nere the more,
The trees to earth with cutting steel to bring:
Thither went Ismen old with tresses hoar,
When night on all this earth spread forth her wing,
And there in silence deaf and mirksome shade,
His characters and circles vain he made:
6
He in the circle set one foot unshod,
And whispred dreadful charms in ghastly wise,
Three times (for witchcraft loves numbers od)
Toward the east he gaped, westward thrice,
He stroke the earth thrice with his charmed rod,
Wherewith dead bones he makes from graves to rise,
And thrice the ground with naked foot he smote,
And thus he cried loud, with thundering note.
7
Hear, hear, you spirits all that whilome fell,
Cast down from heaven with dint of roaring thunder,
Hear, you amid the empty air that dwell,
And storms and showers power on these kingdoms under;
Hear, all you devils that lie in deepest hell,
And rend with torments damned ghostes asunder,
And of those lands of death, of pain and fear,
Thou monarch great, great Dis, great Pluto, hear.
8
Keep you this forest well, keep every tree,
Numbered I give you them and truly told;
As souls of men in bodies clothed be,
So every plant a sprite shall hide and hold,
With trembling fear make all the Christians flee,
When they presume to cut these Cedars old:
This said, his charms he began again repeat,
Which none can say but they that use like feat.
9
At those strange speeches, still nights splendant fires
Quenched their lights, and shrunk away for doubt,
The feeble moon her silver beams retires,
And wrapped her horns with foulding clouds about,
Ismen his sprites to come with speed requires,
Why come you not you ever damned rout?
Why tarry you so long? pardie you stay
Till stronger charms and greater words I say.
10
I have not yet forgot for want of use,
What dreadful terms belong this sacred feat,
My tongue (if still your stubburne hearts refuse)
That so much dreaded name can well repeat,
Which heard great Dis cannot himself excuse,
But hither run from his eternal seat,
O great and fearful! more he would have said,
But that he saw the sturdie sprites obaid.
11
Legions of devils by thousands thither come,
Such as in sparsed air their biding make,
And thousands also which by heavenly dome
Condemned lie in deep Auemus lake,
But slow they came, displeased all and some,
Because those woods they should in keeping take,
Yet they obai'd and took the charge in hand,
And under every branch and leaf they stand.
12
When thus his cursed work performed was,
The wisard to his king declared the feat,
My Lord, let fear, let doubt and sorrow pas,
Henceforth in safety stands your regal seat,
Your foe (as he supposed) no mean now has
To build again his rams and engines great:
And then he told at large from part to part,
All what he late performed by wondrous art.
13
Besides this help, another hap (quoth he)
Will shortly chance that brings not profit small,
Within few days Mars and the Sun I see
Their fi rye beams unite in Leo shall;
And then extreme the scorching heat will be,
Which neither rain can quench, nor dewes that fall,
So placed are the Planets high and low,
That heat, fire, burning all the heavens forshow:
14
So great with us will be the warmth therefore,
As with the Garamantes or those of Inde;
Yet nill it grieve us in this town so sore,
We have sweet shade and waters cold by kind:
Our foes abroad will be tormented more,
What shield can they or what refreshing find?
Heaven will them vanquish first, then Egypts crew
Destroy them quite, weak, weary, faint and few;
15
Thou shall sit still and conquer, prove no more
The doubtful hazard of uncertain fight.
But if Argantes bold (that hates so sore
All cause of quiet peace, though just and right)
Provoke thee forth to battle (as before)
Find means to calm the rage of that fierce knight,
For shortly heaven will send thee ease and peace,
And war and trouble among thy foes increase,
16
The king assured by these speeches fair,
Held Godfreyes power, his might and strength in scorn,
And now the walls he began in part repair,
Which late the ram had brus'd with iron horn,
With wise foresight and well advised caire,
He fortifide each breach and bulwark torn,
And all his folk, men, women, children small,
With endless toil again repaired the wall.
17
But Godfrey nould this while bring forth his power
To give assault against that fort in vain,
Till he had builded new his dreadful tower,
And reared high his downe-falne rams again:
His workmen therefore he dispatched that hour,
To hew the trees out of the forest maine,
They went, and scant the wood appeared in sight,
When wonders new their fearful hearts affright:
18
As seely children dare not bend their eye
Where they are told strange Bugbeares haunt the place,
Or as new monsters while in bed they lie,
Their fearful thoughts present before their face;
So feared they, and fled, yet wist not why,
Nor what pursued them in that fearful chase,
Except their fear perchance while thus they fled,
New Chimeres, Sphinges, or like monsters bred;
19
Swift to the camp they turned back dismayed,
With words confused uncertain tales they told,
That all which heard them scorned what they said,
And those reports for lies and fables hold.
A chosen crew in shining arms arrai'd
Duke Godfrey thither sent of soldiers bold,
To guard the men, and their faint arms provoke
To cut the dreadful trees with hardy stroke:
20
These drawing near the wood, where close ipent
The wicked sprites in syluan pinfoldes wear,
Their eyes upon those shades no sooner bent,
But frosen dread pearst through their entrals dear;
Yet on they stalked still, and on they went,
Under bold semblance hiding coward fear,
And so far wandered forth with trembling pace,
Till they approcht nigh that enchanted place:
21
When from the grove a fearful sound out brakes,
As if some earthquake hill and mountain tore,
Wherein the southren wind a rumbling makes,
Or like sea waves against the craggie shore,
There lions gromble, there hiss scaly snakes,
There howl the woolues, the rugged bears there rore,
There trumpets shrill are heard and thunders fell,
And all these sounds one sound expressed well:
22
Upon their faces pale well might you note
A thousand signs of heart amating fear,
Their reason gone, by no devise they wot
How to prease nie, or stay still where they wear,
Against that sudden dread their breasts which smote,
Their courage weak no shield of proof could bear,
At last they fled, and one than all more bold,
Excused their flight, and thus the wonders told.
23
My Lord, not one of us there is, I grant,
That dares cut down one branch in yonder spring,
I think there dwells a sprite in every plant,
There keeps his court great Dis infernal king,
He has a heart of hardened Adamant
That without trembling dares attempt the thing,
And sense he wants who so hardy is,
To hear the forest thunder, roar and his.
24
This said, Aleasto to his words gave heed,
Alcasto leader of the Switzers grim,
A man both void of wit, and void of dreed,
Who feared not loss of life, nor loss of lim,
No savage beasts in deserts wild that feed,
Nor ougly monster could disharten him,
Nor whirle wind, thunder, earthquake, storm, or ougl*
That in this world is strange or fearful thought:
25
He shook his head, and smiling thus began say,
The hardiness have I that wood to fell,
And those proud trees low in the dust to lay,
Wherein such grisly feends and monsters dwell,
No roaring goast my courage can dismay,
No shrike of birds, beasts roar, or dragons yell;
But through and through that forest will I wend,
Although to deepest hell the paths descend.
26
Thus boasted he, and leave to go desired,
And forward went with joyful cheer and will,
He viewed the wood and those thick shades admired,
He heard the wondrous noise and rumbling shrill;
Yet not one foot th'audacious man retired,
He scorned the peril preasing forward still,
Till on the forests outmost marge he stepped,
A flaming fire from entrance there him kept.
27
The fire encreast, and built a stately wall
Of burning coals, quick sparks, and embers hot,
And with bright flames the wood enuiron'd all,
That there no tree nor twist Alcasto got,
The higher stretched flames seemed bulwarks tall,
Castles and turrets full of fiery shot,
With slinges and engines strong of every sort,
What mortal wight durst scale so strange a fort?
28
O what strange monsters on the battlement
In loathsome forms stood to defend the place?
Their frowning looks upon the knight they bent,
And threatened death with shot, with sword and mace:
At last he fled, and though but slow he went,
As lions do whom jolly hunters chase;
Yet fled the man and with sad fear withdrew,
Though fear till then he never felt nor knew.
29
That he had fled long time he never wist,
But when far run he had discou'red it,
Himself for wonder with his hand he blist,
A bitter sorrow by the heart him bit,
Amas'd, ashamed, disgras'd, sad, silent, trist,
Alone he would all day in darkness sit,
Nor durst he look on man of worth or fame,
His pride late-great, now greater made his shame.
30
Godfredo called him, but he found delays
And causes why he should his cabben keep,
At length perforce he comes, but naught he says,
Or talks like those that babble in their sleep.
His shamefastnes to Godfrey plain bewraies
His flight, so does his sighs and sadness deep:
Whereat amas'd, what chance is this (quoth he?)
These witchcrafts strange or natures wonders be.
31
But if his courage any champion move
To try the hazard of this dreedfull spring,
I give him leave th'aduenture great to prove,
Some news he may report us of the thing:
This said, his Lords attempt the charmed grove,
Yet nothing back but fear and flight they bring,
For them enforst with trembling to retire
The sight, the sound, the monsters and the fire.
32
This hapt when woeful Tancred left his bed,
To lay in marble cold his mistress dear,
The lively color from his cheek was fled,
His limbs were weak, his helm or targe to bear;
Nathlesse when need to heigh attemps him led,
No labor would he shun, no danger fear,
His valor, boldness, heart and courage brave,
To his faint body strength and vigor gave.
33
To this exploit forth went the ventrous knight,
Fearelesse, yet heedfull; silent, well advised,
The terrors of that forests dreadful sight,
Storms, earthquakes, thunders, cries, he all despised,
He feared nothing, yet a motion light
(That quickly vanished) in his heart arised,
When lo between him and the charmed wood,
A fiery city high as heaven up stood:
34
The knight stepped back and took a sudden pause,
And to himself, what help these arms, (quoth he?)
If in this fire or monsters gaping jaws
I headlong cast my self, what boots it me?
For common profit or my countries cause,
To hazard life before me none should be:
But this exploit of no such weight I hold,
For it to lose a Prince or champion bold.
35
But if I fly, what will the Pagans say?
If I retire, who shall cut down this spring?
Godfredo will attempt it every day.
What if some other knight perform the thing?
These flames vprisen to forestall my way,
Perchance more terror far than danger bring,
But hap what shall, this said, he forward stepped,
And through the fire (O wondrous boldness) lept!
36
He boulted through, but neither warmth nor heat
He felt, nor sign of fire or scorching flame;
Yet wist he not in his dismayed conceat,
If that were fire or no, through which he came;
For at first touch vanished those monsters great,
And in their steed the clouds black night did frame,
And hideous storms and showers of hail and rain,
Yet storms and tempests vanished straight again,
37
Amazed, but not afraid the champion good
Stood still, but when the tempest past he spied,
He entered boldly that forbidden wood,
And of the forest all the secrets eied,
In all his walk no sprite or fantasme stood,
That stopped his way or passage free denied,
Save that the growing trees so thick were set,
That often his sight, and passage often they let.
38
At length a fair and spacious green he spide,
Like calmest waters, plain, like velvet; soft,
Wherein a Cipresse clad in summers pride
Pyramide wise, lift up his tops aloft;
In whose smooth bark upon the ceuenest side,
Strange characters he found and viewed them often,
Like those which priests of Egypt erst in stead
Of letters used, which none but they could read,
39
Among them he picked out these words at last,
(Writ in the Syriake tongue, which well he could)
O hardy knight, who through these woods have past!
Where death his palace and his court does hold,
O trouble not these souls in quiet plast!
O be not cruel as thy heart is bold!
Pardon these ghoasts deprived of heavenly light,
With spirits dead why should men living fight?
40
This found he graven in the tender rind,
And while he mused on this uncouth writ,
Him thought he heard the softly whistling wind,
His blastes amid the leaves and branches knit,
And frame a sound like speech of human kind,
But full of sorrow, grief and woe was it,
Whereby his gentle thoughts all filled wear
With pity, sadness, grief, compassion, fear:
41
He drew his sword at last and gave the tree
A mighty blow, that made a gaping wound,
Out of the rift red streams he trickling see
That all bebled the verdant plain around,
His hair start up, yet once again stroke he,
He nould give over till the end he found
Of this adventure, when with plaint and moan,
(As from some hollow grave) he heard one groan.
42
Enough enough the voice lamenting said,
Tancred thou have me hurt, thou did me drive
Out of the body of a noble maid,
Who with me lived, whom late I kept on live,
And now within this woeful Cipresse laid,
My tender rind thy weapon sharp does riue,
Cruel, is it not enough thy foes to kill,
But in their graves will thou torment them still?
43
I was Clorinda, now imprisoned here,
(Yet not alone) within this plant I dwell,
For every Pagan Lord and Christian peer,
Before the cities walls last day that fell,
(In bodies new or graves I wot not clear)
But here they are confined by magikes spell,
So that each tree has life, and sense each bou,
A murdrer if thou cut one twist art thou.
44
As the sick man that in his sleep does see
Some oughly dragon or some chimere new,
Though he suspect or half persuaded be,
It is an idle dream, no monster true,
Yet still he fears, he quakes, and strives to flee,
So fearful is that wondrous form to view;
So feared the knight, yet he both knew and thought
All were illusions false by witchcraft wrought:
45
But cold and trembling waxt his frozen heart,
Such strange affects, such passions it torment,
Out of his feeble hand his weapon start,
Himself out of his wits nigh, after went:
Wounded he saw (he thought) for pain and smart
His Lady weep, complain, mourn and lament,
Nor could he suffer her dear blood to see,
Or hear her sighs that deep far fetched be.
46
Thus his fierce heart which death had scorned often,
Whom no strange shape, or monster could dismay,
With feigned shows of tender love made soft,
A spirit false did with vain plaints betray,
A whirling wind his sword heau'd up aloft,
And through the forest bare it quite away,
Overcome retired the Prince, and as he came
His sword he found and repossest the same:
47
Yet nould return, he had no mind to try
His courage further in those forests green,
But when to Godfreyes tent he proched nie,
His spirits wakte, his thoughts composed been,
My Lord (quoth he) a witness true am I
Of woonders strange, believed scant though seen,
What of the fire, the shades, the dreadful sound,
You heard, all true by proof my self have found,
48
A burning fire (so are those deserts charmed)
Built like a batled wall to heaven was reared,
Whereon with darts and dreadful weapons armed,
Of monsters foul mishapt whole bands appeared;
But through them all I past, unhurt, unharmed,
No flame or threatened blow I felt or feared,
Then rain and night I found, but straight again
To day, the night; to sunshine turned the rain,
49
What would you more? each tree through all that wood
Has sense, has life, has speech, like human kind,
I heard their words, as in that grove I stood,
That mournful voice still, still I bear in mind:
And (as they were of flesh) the purple blood,
At every blow streams from the wounded rind,
No, no, not I, nor any else (I trow)
Has power to cut one leaf, one branch, one brow.
50
While thus he said; the Christians noble guide
Felt uncouth strife in his contentious thought,
He thought, what if himself in person tried
Those witchcrafts strange, and bring those charms to naught,
For such he deemed them, or elsewhere provide
For timber easier got though further sought,
But from his study he at last abraid,
Called by the Hermit old that to him said,
51
Leave off thy hardy thought, an others hands
Of these her plants the wood dispoilen shall,
Now, now the fatal ship of conquest lands,
Her sails are struck, her silver anchores fall,
Our champion broken has his worthless bands,
And loses from the soil which held him thrall,
The time draws nie when our proud foes in field
Shall slaughtred lie, and Sions fort shall yield.
52
This said, his visage shone with beams divine
And more than mortal was his voices sound,
Godfredos thought to other acts incline,
His working brain was never idle found.
But in the Crabbe now did bright Titan shine,
And scorcht with scalding beams the parched ground,
And made unfit for toil or warlike feat,
His soldiers, weak with labor, faint with sweat:
53
The Planets mild their lamps benign quenched out,
And cruel stars in heaven did signories,
Whose influence cast fiery flames about,
And hot impressions through the earth and skies,
The growing heat still gathred deeper rout,
The noisome warmth through lands and kingdoms flies,
A harmefull night a hurtful day succeeds,
And worse than both next morn her light outspreeds.
54
When Phoebus rose he left his golden weed,
And dond a gite in deepest purple did,
His sanguine beams about his forhead spreed,
A sad presage of ill that should betide,
With vermile drops at eau'n his tresses bleed,
Foreshowes of future heat, from The Ocean wide
When next he rose, and thus increased still,
Their present harms with dread of future ill.
55
While thus he bent against earth his scorching rays,
He burnt the flowrets, burnt his Clitie dear,
The leaves grew wan upon the withred spraies,
The grass and growing herbs all parched wear,
Earth cleft in riftes, in floods their streams decaies,
The barren clouds with lightning bright appear,
And mankind feared least Climenes child again,
Had driven awry his fires il-guided waine;
56
As from a furnace, flew the smoke to skies,
Such smoke as that when damned Sodom brent,
Within his caves sweet Zephire silent lies,
Still was the air, the rack nor came nor went,
But ore the lands with lukewarm breathing flies
The southren wind, from sunburnt Afric sent,
Which thick and warm his interrupted blasts
Upon their bosoms, throats and faces casts.
57
Nor yet more comfort brought the gloomienight,
In her thick shades was burning heat vprold,
Her fable mantle was embrodred bright,
With blazing stars, and gliding fires for gold,
Nor to refresh (sad earth) thy thirsty spright,
The niggard Moon let fall her May-dewes cold,
And dried up the vital moisture was,
In trees, in plants, in herbs, in flowers, in grass.
58
Sleep to his quiet dales exiled fled,
From these unquiet nights, and often in vain
The soldiers restless sought the god in bed,
But most for thirst they mourned and most complain;
For Iudais tyrant had strong poison shed,
(Poison that breeds more woe and deadly pain,
Than Acheron or Stigian waters bring)
In every fountain, cestern, well, and spring:
59
And little Siloe that his store bestows
Of purest Crystal on the Christian bands,
The peebles naked in his channel shows,
And scantly glides above the scorched sands;
Nor Poe in May when ore his banks he flows,
Nor Ganges, watrer of the Indian lands,
Nor seven mouthed Nile that yields all Egypt drink,
To quench their thirst the men sufficient think.
60
He that the gilding rivers erst had seen,
Adowne their verdant channels gently rold,
Or falling streams which to the valleies green
Distilled from tops of Alpine mountains cold,
Those he desired in vain, new torments been,
Augmented thus, with wish of comforts old,
Those waters cool he drank in vain conceit,
Which more encreast his thirst, encreast his heat.
61
The sturdie bodies of the warriors strong,
Whom neither marching far, nor tedious way,
Nor weighty arms which on their shoulders hong,
Could weary make, nor death it self dismay;
Now weak and feeble cast their limbs along,
Vnweildie burdens, on the burned clay,
And in each vain a smouldring fire there dwelt,
Which dride their flesh, and sollid bones did melt.
62
Languisht the stead late fierce, and profred gras,
His fodder erst, despised, and from him kest,
Each step he stumbled, and which lofty was
And heigh aduanst before, now fell his crest,
His conquests gotten all forgotten pas,
Nor with desire of glory sweld his breast,
The spoils won from his foe, his late rewards,
He now neglects, despises, naught regards.
63
Languisht the faithful dog, and wonted caire
Of his dear Lord and cabben both forgot,
Panting he laid, and gathred fresher air
To cool the burning in his entrals hot:
But breathing (which wise Nature did prepare
To swage the stomachs heat) now booted not,
For little ease (alas) small help they win,
That breath forth air, and scalding fire suck in.
64
Thus languished the earth, in this estate
Lay woeful thousands of the Christians stout,
The faithful people grew nie desperate
Of hoped conquest, shameful death they dout,
Of their distress they talk and often debate,
These sad complaints were heard the camp throughout,
What hope has Godfrey? Shall we still here lie,
Till all his soldiers, all our armies die?
65
Alas, with what device, what strength, thinks he
To scale these walls, or this strong fort to get?
Whence has he engines new? does he not see,
How wrathful heaven against us his sword does whet?
These tokens shown true signs and witness be,
Our angry God our proud attempts does let,
And scorching sun so hot his beams outspreeds,
That not more cooling Inde nor AEthiop needs:
66
Or thinks he it an eath or little thing,
That us despised, neglected, and disdained,
Like abiects vile to death he thus should bring?
That so his Empire may be still maintained?
Is it so great a bliss to be a king,
When he that wears the crown with blood is stained,
And buies his scepter with his peoples lives?
See whither glory vain, fond mankind drives.
67
See, see the man, called holy, just and good,
That courteous, meek, and humble would be thought,
Yet never cared in what distress we stood,
If his vain honor were diminisht naught,
When dried up from us is spring and flood,
His water must from Jordan streams be brought,
And now he sits at feasts and bankets sweet,
And mingleth waters fresh, with wines of Creet.
68
The French thus murmour'd, but the Greekish knight
Tatine, that of this war was weary grown,
Why die we here (quoth he) slain without fight,
Killed, not subdued? murdered, not overthrown?
Upon the Frenchmen let the penance light
Of Godfreyes folly, let me save mine own,
And as he said, without farewell, the knight
And all his comet stole away by night:
69
His bad example many a troop prepares
To imitate, when his escape they know,
Clotharius his band, and Ademares,
And all, whose guides in dust were buried low,
Discharged of duties chains and bondage snares,
Free from their oath, to none they service owe,
But now concluded all on secret flight,
And shrunk away by thousands every night.
70
Godfredo this both heard and saw, and knew,
Yet nould with death them chastise though he might,
But with that faith wherewith he could remew
The steadfast hills, and seas dry up to naught,
He praid the Lord upon his flock to rue,
To open the springs of grace, and ease this drought,
Out of his looks shone zeal, devotion, faith,
His hands and eyes to heaven he heaues, and says;
71
Father and Lord, if in the deserts wast
Thou had compassion on thy children dear,
The craggie rock when Moses cleft and brast,
And drew forth flowing streams of waters clear,
Like mercy (Lord) like grace, on us down cast;
And though our merits less than theirs appear,
Thy grace supply that want, for though they be
Thy first borne son, thy children yet are we.
72
These prayers just from humble heart forth sent,
Were nothing slow to climb the starrie sky,
But swift as winged bird themselves present
Before the father of the heavens hie:
The Lord accepted them and gently bent
Upon the faithful host his gracious eye,
And in what pain and what distress it laid,
He saw, and grieved to see, and thus he said:
73
Mine armies dear till now have suffered woe,
Distress and danger, hels infernal power
Their enemy has been, the world their foe,
But happy be their actions from this hour,
What they begin to blessed end shall go,
I will refresh them with a gentle shower;
Rinaldo shall return, The Egyptian crew
They shall encounter, conquer and subdew.
74
At these high words great heaven began to shake,
The fixed stars, the planets wandering still,
Trembled the air, the earth and Ocean quake,
Spring, fountain, river, forest, dale and hill,
From north to east a lightning flash out-brake,
And coming drops presaged with thunders shrill:
With joyful shoutes the soldiers on the plain,
These tokens bless of long desired rain,
75
A sudden cloud, as when Helias praid,
(Not from dry earth exhail'd by Phoebus beams)
Arose, moist heaven his windows open laid,
Whence clouds by heaps out-rush, and watrie streams,
The world ore spread was with a gloomie shade,
That like a dark and mirksome even it seames;
The dashing rain, from molten skies down fell,
And ore their banks the brooks and fountains swell.
76
In summer season, when the cloudie sky
Upon the parched ground does rain down send,
As ducke and mallard in the furrows dry,
With merry noise the promised showers attend,
And spreading broad their wings displaied lie
To keep the drops that on their plumes descend,
And where the streams swell to a gathred lake
Therein they diue, and sweet refreshing take:
77
So they the streaming showers with showtes and cries
Salute, which heaven shed on the thirsty lands,
The falling liquor from the dropping skies
He catches in his lap, he barehead stands,
And his bright helm to drink therein unties,
In the fresh streams he dives his sweatie hands,
Their faces some, and some their temples wet,
And some to keep the drops large vessels set.
78
Nor man alone to ease his burning sore,
Herein does diue and wash, and hereof drinks,
But earth it self weak, feeble, faint before,
Whose solid limbs were cleft with rifts and chinks,
Received the falling showers and gathred store
Of liquor sweet, that through her veins down sinks,
And moisture new infused largely was
In trees, in plants, in herbs, in flowers, in gras.
79
Earth, like the patient was, whose lively blood
Has overcome at last some sickness strong,
Whose feeble limbs had been the bait and food,
Whereon his strange disease depastred long,
But now restored, in health and welfare stood,
As sound as erst, as fresh, as fair, as young;
So that forgetting all his grief and pain,
His pleasant robes, and crowns he takes again.
80
Ceased the rain, the sun began to shine,
With fruitful, sweet, benign, and gentle ray,
Full of strong power and vigor masculine,
As be his beams in April or in May.
O happy zeal, who trusts in help divine,
The worlds afflictions thus can drive away,
Can storms appease, and times and seasons change,
And conquer fortune, fate and dest'nie strange.
The fourteenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The Lord to Godfrey in a dream does show
His will; Rinaldo must return at last;
They have their asking who for pardon sew:
Two knights to find the Prince are sent in have,
But Peter who by vision all foreknew
Sends the searchers to a wisard, plast
Deep in a vault, who first at large declares
Armidaes trains, then how to shun those snanes.
1
NOw from the fresh, the soft and tender bed
Of her still mother, gentle night out flew,
The fleeting baulme on hills and dales she shed,
With honey drops of pure and precious dew,
And on the verdure of green forests spread
The virgin primrose and the violet blew,
And sweet breathed Zephire on his spreading wings
Sleep, ease, repose, rest, peace and quiet brings.
2
The thoughts and troubles of broad-waking day
They softly dipped in mild obliuions lake;
But he, whose Godhead heaven and earth does sway,
In his eternal light did watch and wake,
And bent on Godfrey down the gracious ray
Of his bright eye, still open for Godfreyes sake,
To whom a silent dream the Lord down sent.
Which told his will, his pleasure and intent.
3
Far in the east (the golden gate beside
Whence Phoebus comes) a crystal port there is,
And ere the sun his broad doors open wide,
The beam of springing day vncloseth this,
Hence come the dreams, by which heavens sacred guide
Reueales to man those high decrees of his,
Hence toward Godfrey ere he left his bed
A vision strange his golden plumes bespred:
4
Such semblances, such shapes, such purtraites fair
Did never yet in dream or sleep appear,
For all the forms in sea, in earth, or air,
The signs in heaven, the stars in every sphere,
All what was wondrous, uncouth, strange and raire,
All in that vision well presented wear,
His dream had plast him in a crystal wide,
Beset with golden fires, top, bottom, side.
5
There while he wondreth on the circles vast,
The stars, their motions, course and harmony,
A knight (with shining rays and fire embrast)
Presents himself unawares before his eye,
Who with a voice that far for sweetness past
All human speech, thus said approaching nie,
What Godfrey know thou not thy Hugo here?
Come and embrace thy friend and fellow dear:
6
He answ'red him, that glorious shining light
Which in thine eyes his glistring beams does place,
Estranged has from my foreknowledge quight
Thy countenance, thy favor, and thy face:
This said, three times he stretch his hands outright,
And would in friendly arms the knight embrace,
And thrice the spirit fled, that thrice he twinde
Naught in his folded arms, but air and wind.
7
Lord Hugo smiled, not as you think (quoth he)
I clothed am in flesh and earthly mould,
My spirit pure and naked soul you see,
A Citizen of this celestial hold,
This place is heaven, and here a room for thee
Prepared is, among Christ's champions bold:
Ah when (quoth he) (these mortal bonds unknit)
Shall I in peace, in ease, and rest there sit?
8
Hugo replide, ere many years shall run,
Amid the saints in bliss here shall thou rain;
But first great wars must by thy hand be done,
Much blood be shed, and many Pagans slain,
The holy city by assault be won,
The land set free from servile yoke again,
Wherein thou shall a Christian Empire frame,
And after thee shall Baldwine rule the same.
9
But to increase thy love and great desire
To heaven ward, this blessed place behold,
These shining lamps, these globes of living fire,
How they are turned, guided, moved and rould,
The Angels singing here and all their quire;
Then bend thine eyes on yonder earth and mould,
All in that mass, that globe, and compass see,
Land, sea, spring, fountain, man, beast, grass and tree,
10
How vile, how small, and of how slender price,
Is there reward of goodness, virtues gain;
A narrow room our glory vain vp-ties,
A little circle does our pride contain,
Earth like an Isle amid the water lies,
Which sea sometime is called, sometime the maine,
Yet naught therein responds a name so great,
Its but a lake, a pond, a marrish streat.
11
Thus said the one, the other bended down
His looks to ground, and half in scorn he smilde,
He saw at once earth, sea, flood, castle, town,
Strangely divided, strangely all compilde,
And wondered folly man so far should drown,
To set his heart on things so base and vilde,
That servile empire searches and dombe same,
And scorns heavens bliss, yet profreth heaven the same.
12
Wherefore he answred, since the Lord not yet
Will free my spirit from this cage of clay,
Least worldly error vain my voyage let,
Teach me to heaven the best and surest way:
Hugo replide, thy happy foot is set
In the true path, nor from this passage stray,
Only from exile young Rinaldo call,
This give I thee in charge, else naught at all.
13
For as the Lord of hoastes, the king of blis,
Has chosen thee to rule the faithful band;
So he thy stratagems appointed is
To execute, so both shall win this land,
The first is thine, the second place is his,
Thou art this armies head, and he the hand,
No other champion can his place supply,
And that thou do it does thy state deny.
14
Th'inchanted forest, and her charmed treene
With cutting steel shall he to earth down hew,
And thy weak armies which too feeble been
To scale again these walls r'inforced new,
And fainting lie dispersed on the green,
Shall take new strenght, new courage at his view,
The heigh built towers, the eastren squadrons all
Shall conquered be, shall fly, shall die, shall fall,
15
He held his peace: and Godfrey answred so,
O how his presence would recomfort me,
You that man's hidden thoughts perceive and kno,
(If I say truth, or if I love him) see,
But say, what messengers shall for him go?
What shall their speeches, what their errand be?
Shall I entreat or else command the man?
With credit neither well perform I can.
16
The Eternal Lord (the other knight replide)
That with so many graces has thee blessed,
Will, that among the troops thou have to guide,
Thou honored be and feared of most and lest:
Then speak not thou least blemish some betide
Thy sacred Empire, if thou make request;
But when by suit thou moved art to ruth,
Then yield, forgive, and home recall the youth.
17
Guelpho shall pray thee (God shall him inspire)
To pardon this offense, this fault commit
By hasty wrath, by rash and headstrong ire,
To call the knight again, yield thou to it:
And though the youth (enwrapt in fond desire)
Far hence in love and loosenes idle sit,
Yet fear it not he shall return with speed,
When most you wish him, and when most you need.
18
Your hermit Peter, to whose sapient heart
High heaven his secrets opens, tells, and shows,
Your messengers direct can to that part,
Where of the Prince they shall hear certain news,
And learn the way, the manner, and the art
To bring him back to these thy warlike crewes,
That all thy soldiers wandered and misgone,
Heaven may unite again and join in one.
19
But this conclusion shall my speeches end,
Know that his blood shall mixed be with thine,
Whence Barons bold and Worthies shall descend,
That many great exploits shall bring to fine.
This said, he vanished from his sleeping friend,
Like smoke in wind, or mist in Titans shine;
Sleep fled likewise, and in his troubled thought,
With wonder, pleasure; joy, with marvel fought.
20
The Duke looked up, and saw the Azure sky
With Argent beams of silver morning spread,
And started up, for praise and virtue lie
In toil and travel, sin and shame in bed:
His arms he took, his sword girt to his thie,
To his pauilion all his Lords them sped,
And there in counsel grave the Princes sit,
For strength by wisdom, war is ruled by wit.
21
Lord Guelpho there (within whose gentle breast
Heaven had infused that new and sudden thought)
His pleasing words thus to the Duke addressed;
Good prince, mild, though vnaskt, kind, vnbesought,
O let thy mercy grant my just request,
Pardon this fault by rage, not malice, wrought;
For great offense, I grant, so late commit,
My suit too hasty is, perchance unfit.
22
But since to Godfrey meek, benign and kind,
For Prince Rinaldo bold, I humbly sue,
And that the suitors self is not behind
Thy greatest friends, in state, or friendship true;
I trust I shall thy grace and mercy find
Acceptable to me and all this crew;
Oh call him home, this trespass to amend,
He shall his blood in Godfreyes service spend:
23
And if not he, who else dares undertake
Of this enchanted wood to cut one tree?
Against death and danger who dares battle make,
With so bold face, so fearlesse heart, as he?
Beat down these walls, these gates in pieces break,
Leap ore these rampires heigh, thou shall him see:
Restore therefore to this desirous band
Their wish, their hope, their strength, their shield, their hand;
24
To me my nephew, to thy self restore
A trusty help, when strength of hand thou needs,
In idleness let him consume no more,
Recall him to his noble acts and deeds.
Known be his worth as was his strength of yore,
Where ere thy standard broad her cross outspreeds,
O let his fame and praise, spread far and wide,
Be thou his Lord, his teacher, and his guide.
25
Thus he entreated, and the rest approve
His words, with friendly murmures whispred low,
Godfrey as though their suite his mind did move
To that, whereon he never thought till now,
How can my heart (quoth he) if you I love
To your request and suit but bend and bow?
Let rigor go, that right and justice be,
Wherein you all consent, and all agree.
26
Rinaldo shall return, let him restrain
Henceforth his headstrong wrath and hasty ire,
And with his hardy deeds let him take pain
To correspond your hope, and my desire:
Guelpho thou must call home the knight again,
See that with speed he to these tents retire,
The messengers appoint as likes thy mind,
And teach them where they should the yongman find.
27
Vpstart the Dane that bore Prince Swenos brand,
I will (quoth he) that message undertake,
I will refuse no pains by sea or land
To give the knight this sword, kept for his sake,
This man was bold of courage, strong of hand,
Guelpho was glad he did the proffer make,
Thou shall (quoth he) Vbaldo shall thou have
To go with thee, a knight, stout, wise, and grave.
28
Vbaldo in his youth had known and seen
The fashions strange of many an uncouth land,
And trauell'd over all the Realms, between
The Articke circle and hot Meroes strand,
And as a man whose wit his guide had been,
Their customs use he could, toongs understand,
For thy when spent his youthful seasons wear
Lord Guelpho entertained and held him dear.
29
To these committed was the charge and caire
To find, and bring again the champion bold,
Guelpho commands them to the fort repair
Where Boemond does his seat and scepter hold,
For public fame said that Bertoldoes hair
There lived, there dwelt, there stayed, the hermit old
(That knew they were misled by false report)
Among them came, and parled in this sort:
30
Sir knights (quoth he) if you entend to ride,
And follow each report fond people say,
You follow but a rash and trothlesse guide,
That leads vain men amiss, and makes them stray,
Near Ascalon go to the salt sea side,
Where a swift brook falls in with hideous sway,
An aged sire, our friend, there shall you find,
All what he says that do, that keep in mind,
31
Of this great voyage which you undertake,
Much by his skill, and much by mine advise
Has he foreknowne, and welcome for mysake
You both shall be, the man is kind and wise;
Instructed thus no further question make
The twain, elected for this enterprise,
But humbly yielded to obey his word,
For what the Hermit said, that said the Lord.
32
They took their leave, and on their journey went,
Their will could brook no stay, their zeal, no let;
To Ascalon their voyage straight they bent,
Whose broken shores with brackish waves are wet,
And there they heard how against the cliftes (besprent
With bitter foam) the roaring surges bet,
A tumbling brook their passage stopped and staid,
Which late fallen rain had proud and puissant maid,
33
So proud that over all his banks he grew,
And through the fields ran swift as shaft from bow,
While here they stopped and stood, before them drew
An aged sire, grave and benign in show,
Crowned with a beechen garland gathred new,
Clad in a linen roabe that raught down low,
In his right hand a rod, and on the flood
Against the stream he marched, and drieshod yood.
34
As on the Rhene (when winters freesing cold
Congeales the streams to thick and hardened glass)
The beauies fair of Shepherds daughters bold,
With wanton wind lays run, turn, play and pas;
So on this river past the wisard old,
Although vnfrosen, soft and swift it was,
And thither stalked where the warrious staid,
To whom (their greetings done) he spoke, and said:
35
Great pains, great travail (Lords) you have begone,
And of a cunning guide great need you stand,
Far off (alas) is great Bertoldoes son,
Imprisoned in a waste and desert land,
What soil remains by which you must not run?
What promontorie, rock, sea, shore or sand?
Your search must stretch before the prince be found,
Beyond our world, beyond our half of ground.
36
But yet vouchsafe to see my cell I pray,
In hidden caves and vaults though builded low,
Great wonders there, strange things I will bewray,
Things good for you to hear, and fit to know:
This said, he bids the river make them way,
The flood retirde, and backward began to flow,
And here and there two crystal mountains rise,
So fled the red sea once, and Jordan thrice.
37
He took their hands and led them headlong down
Under the flood, through vast and hollow deepes,
Such light they had as when through shadows brown
Of thickest deserts feeble Cinthia peepes,
There spacious caves they saw all overflowed,
There all his waters pure great Neptune keeps,
And thence to moisten all the earth, he brings
Seas, rivers, floods, lakes, fountains, wels and springs:
38
Whence Ganges, Indus, Volga, Ister, Poe,
Whence Euphrates, whence Tygresse spring they view,
Whence Tanais, whence Nilus comes also,
(Although his head till then no creature knew)
But under these a wealthy stream does go
That Sulphur yields and Oar, rich, quick and new,
Which the sunbeames does polish, purge and fine,
And makes it silver pure, and gold divine.
39
And all his banks the rich and wealthy stream
Has fair beset, with pearl and precious stone,
Like stars in sky, or lamps on stage that seame,
The darkness there was day, the night was gone,
There sparkled (clothed in his azure beam)
The heavenly Zaphire, there the Iacinth shone,
The Carbuncle there flamde, the Dimond sheene,
There glistred bright, there smilde the Emrauld green.
40
Amas'd the knights amid these woonders past,
And fixed so deep the marueiles in their thought,
That not one word they vttred, till at last
Vbaldo spoke, and thus his guide besought,
O father tell me, by what skill thou have
These wonders done? and to what place us brought?
For well I know not if I wake or sleep,
My heart is drowned in such amazement deep.
41
You are within the hollow womb (quoth he)
Of fertile earth, the nurse of all things made,
And but you brought and guided are by me,
Her sacred entrals could no wight invade,
My palace shortly shall you splendant see
With glorious light, though built in night and shade,
A Pagan was I borne, but yet the Lord
To grace (by baptism) has my soul restored.
42
Nor yet by help of devil, or aid from hell
I do this uncouth work and woondrous feat,
The Lord forbid, I use or charm or spell
To raise foul Dis from his infernal seat,
But of all herbs, of every spring and well,
The hidden power I know and virtue great,
And all that kind has hid from mortal sight,
And all the stars, their motions and their might,
43
For in these caves I dwell not buried still
From sight of heaven, but often I resort
To tops of Libanon or Carmell hill,
And there in liquid air my self disport,
There Mars and Venus I behold at will,
As bare, as erst when Vulcan took them short,
And how the rest roll, glide and move, I see,
How their aspects benign or froward be.
44
And underneath my feet the clouds I view,
Now thick, now thin, now bright with Iris bow,
The frost and snow, the rain, the hail, the dew,
The winds from whence they come, and whence they blow,
How Jove his thunder makes, and lightning new,
How with the boult he strikes the earth below,
How comate, crinite, caudate stars are framed
I knew, my skill with pride my heart enflamed.
45
So learned, cunning, wise, my self I thought,
That I supposed my wit so high might clime
To know all things that God had framed or wrought,
Fire, air, sea, earth, man, beast, sprite, place, and time:
But when your hermit me to baptism brought,
And from my soul had washed the sin and crime,
Then I perceived my sight was blindness still,
My wit, was folly; ignorance, my skill.
46
Then saw I, that like owls in shining son,
So against the beams of truth, our souls are blind,
And at my self to smile I then begone,
And at my heart, puffed up with follies wind,
Yet still these arts as I before had done
I practiced, such was the hermits mind:
Thus has he changed my thoughts, my heart, my will,
And rules mine art, my knowledge, and my skill.
47
In him I rest, on him my thoughts depend,
My Lord, my teacher, and my guide is he,
This noble work he strives to bring to end,
He is the Architect, the workmen we;
The hardy youth home to this camp to send
From prison strong, my care, my charge shall be,
So he commands, and me ere this foretold
Your coming often, to seek the champion bold.
48
While this he said, he brought the champions twain
Down to a vault, wherein he dwells and lies,
It was a cave high, wide, large, ample, plain,
With goodly rooms, halles, chambers, galleries,
All what is bred in rich and precious vain
Of wealthy earth, and hid from mortal eyes,
There shines, and fair adorned was every part,
With riches grown by kind, not framed by art:
49
An hundredth grooms, quick, diligent and neat,
Attendance gave about these strangers bold,
Against the wall there stood a cupboord great
Of massy plate, of silver, crystal, gold.
But when with precious wines and costly meat
They filled were, thus spoke the wisard old,
Now fits the time (sir knights) I tell and show
What you desire to hear, and long to know;
50
Armidaes craft, her slight and hidden guile
You partly wot, her acts and arts untrue,
How to your camp she came, and by what wile
The greatest Lords and Princes thence she drew,
You know she turned them first to monsters vile,
And kept them since closed up in secret mew,
Lastly to Gaza ward in bonds them sent,
Whom young Rinaldo rescude as they went.
51
What chanced since I will at large declare,
(To you unknown) a story strange and true,
When first her pray (got with such pain and care)
Escapte and gone, the witch perceived and knew,
Her hands she wroong for grief, her clothes she tare,
And full of woe these heavy words out threw:
Alas, my knights are slain, my prisoners free,
Yet of that conquest never boast shall he;
52
He in their place shall serve me, and sustain
Their plagues, their torments suffer, sorrows bear,
And they his absence shall lamentin vain,
And wail his loss and theirs, with many a tear:
Thus talking to her self she did ordain
A false and wicked guile, as you shall hear,
Thither she hasted, where the valiant knight
Had overcome and slain her men in fight.
53
Rinaldo there had doft and left his own,
And on his back a Pagans harness tide,
Perchance he deemed so to pass unknown,
And in those arms less noted safe to ride,
A headless corse in fight late overthrown,
The Witch in his forsaken arms did hide,
And by a brook exposed it on the sand
Whither she wished would come a Christian band:
54
Their coming might the dame foreknow right well,
For secret spies she sent forth thousand ways,
Which every day news from the camp might tell,
Who parted thence, booties to search or prays:
Beside, the sprights coniur'd by sacred spell,
All what she asks or doubts, reueales and says,
The body therefore plast she in that part,
That furthred best her slight, her craft, and art;
55
And near the corpse a varlet false and sly
She left, attirde in shepherds homely weed,
And taught him how to counterfeit, and lie
As time required, and he performed the deed,
With him your soldiers spoke, of jealousy
And false suspect among them he strow'd the seed,
That since brought forth the fruit of strife and jar,
Of civil brawles, contention, discord, war.
56
And as she wished so the soldiers thought,
By Godfreyes practice that the Prince was slain,
Yet vanished that suspicion false to naught,
When truth spread forth her silver wings again:
Her false devises thus Armida wrought,
This was her first deceit, her foremost train,
What next she practiced (shall you hear me tell)
Against our knight, and what thereof befell.
57
Armida hunted him through wood and plain,
Till on Orontes flowrie banks he staid,
There, where the stream did part and meet again,
And in the midst a gentle Island maid,
A pillour fair was pight beside the maine,
Nere which a little frigot floting laid,
The marble white the Prince did long behold,
And this inscription read, there writ in gold:
58
Who so thou art whom will or chance does bring
With happy steps to flood Orontes sides,
Know, that the world has not so strange a thing,
(Twixt east and west) as this small Island hides,
Then pass and see, without more tarrying.
The hasty youth to pass the stream prouides,
And for the cogge was narrow, small and strait,
Alone he rowed, and bod his squires there wait;
59
Landed he stalks about, yet naught he sees
But verdant groves, sweet shades, and mossie rocks,
With caves and fountains, flowers, herbs and trees,
So that the words he red he takes for mockes:
But that green Isle was sweet at all degrees,
Wherewith entis'd down sits he and vnlockes
His closed helm, and bares his visage fair,
To take sweet breath from cool and gentle air.
60
A rumbling sound amid the waters deep
Meanewhile he heard, and thither turned his sight,
And tumbling in the troubled stream took keep,
How the strong waves together rush and fight,
Whence first he saw (with golden tresses) peep
The rising visage of a virgin bright,
And then her neck, her breasts, and all, as low
As he for shame could see, or she could show.
61
So in the twylight does sometimes appear
A Nymph, a Goddess, or a Fairie queen,
And though no Siren but a sprite this wear;
Yet by her beauty seemed it she had been
One of those sisters false, which haunted near
The Tirrhene shores, and kept those waters sheene,
Like theirs her face, her voice was and her sound,
And thus she sung, and pleased both skies and ground.
62
Ye happy youths, whom April fresh and May
Attire in flowring green of lusty age,
For glory vainc, or virtues idle ray,
Do not your tender limbs to toil engage,
In calm streams, fishes; birds, in sunshine play,
Who follows pleasure he is only sage,
So nature says, yet against her sacred will
Why still rebel you, and why strine you still?
63
O fools who youth possess, yet scorn the same,
A precious, but a short abiding, treasure,
Virtue it self is but an idle name,
Prized by the world boue reason all and measure,
And honor, glory, praise, renown and fame,
That men's proud hearts bewitch with tickling pleasure,
An Echo is, a shade, a dream, a flower
With each wind blasted, spoiled with every shower.
64
But let your happy souls in joy possess
The Iuorie castles of your bodies fair,
Your passed harms salve with forgetfulness,
Haste not your coming evils with thought and caire,
Regard no blazing star with burning tresse,
Nor storm, nor threatening sky, nor thundering air,
This wisdom is, good life, and worldly blis,
Kind teaches us, nature commands us this.
65
Thus sung the spirit false, and stealing sleep
(To which her tunes entis'd his heavy eyes)
By step and step did on his senses creep,
Still every limme therein unmoved lies,
Not thunders loud could from this slumber deep
(Of quiet death true image) make him rise:
Then from her ambush forth Armida start,
Swearing revenge, and threatening torments smart.
66
But when she looked on his face a while,
And saw how sweet he breathed, how still he lay,
How his fair eyes though closed seem to smile,
At first she staid, astound with great dismay,
Then sat her down, so love can art beguile,
And as she sat and looked fled fast away
Her wrath, that on his forehead gazde the maid,
As in his spring Narcissus tooting laid;
67
And with a veil she wiped now and than
From his fair cheek, the globes of silver sweat,
And cool air gathred with a trembling fan,
To mittigate the rage of melting heat,
Thus (who would think it) his hot eieglance can
Of that cold frost dissolve the hardness great,
Which late congeald the heart of that fair dame,
Who late a foe, a lover now became.
68
Of woodbines, lillies, and of roses sweet,
Which proudly flowred through that wanton plain,
All pletted fast, well knit, and joined meet,
She framed a soft, but surely holding chain,
Wherewith she bound his neck, his hands, and feet;
Thus bound, thus taken did the prince remain,
And in a coach which two old dragons drew,
She laid the sleeping knight, and thence she flew:
69
Nor turned she to Damascus kingdoms large,
Nor to the fort builtin Asphaltes lake,
But jealous of her dear and precious charge,
And of her love ashamed, the way did take
To the wide Ocean, whither skiffe or barge
From us does selde or never voyage make,
And there to frolike with her love awhile,
She chose a waste, a sole and desert i will.
70
An Isle that with her fellows bears the name
Of fortunate, for temperate air and mould,
There in a mountain high alight the dame,
A hill obscured with shades of forests old,
Upon whose sides the witch by art did frame
Continual snow, sharp frost and winter could,
But on the top, fresh, pleasant, sweet and green,
Beside a lake a palace built this queen.
71
There in perpetual, sweet and flowring spring
She lives at ease, and ioies her Lord at will;
The hardy youth from this strange prison bring
Your valors must, directed by my skill,
And overcome each monster and each thing,
That guardes the palace, or that keeps the hill,
Nor shall you want a guide, or engines fit,
To bring you to the mount, or conquer it.
72
Beside the stream, I parted shall you find
A dame, in visage young, but old in years,
Her curled locks about her front are twinde,
A party colored roabe of silk she wears:
This shall conduct you swift as air or wind,
Or that flit bird that Jove's hot weapon bears,
A faithful Pilot, cunning, trusty, sure,
As Tiphis was, or skillful Palinure.
73
At the hills foot, whereon the Witch does dwell
The serpents hiss, and cast their poison vilde,
The ouglie bores do rear their bristles fell,
There gape the bears, and roar the lions wild;
But yet a rod I have can easlie quell
Their rage and wrath, and make them meek and mild.
Yet on the top and height of all the hill,
The greatest danger lies, and greatest ill:
74
There welleth out a fair, clear, bubbling spring,
Whose waters pure the thirsty guests entise,
But in those liquors cold the secret sting
Of strange and deadly poison closed lies,
One suppe thereof the drinkers heart does bring
To sudden joy, whence laughter vain does rise,
Nor that strange meriment once stops or stays
Till, with his laughters end, he end his days:
75
Then from those deadly, wicked streams refrain
Your thirsty lips, despise the dainty cheer
You find exposed upon the grassie plain,
Nor those false damsels once vouchsafe to hear,
That in melodious tunes their voices strain,
Whose faces lovely, smiling, sweet, appear;
But you their looks, their voice, their songs despise,
And enter fair Armidaes Paradise.
76
The house is builded like a maze within,
With turning stairs, false doors and winding ways,
The shape whereof plotted in velam thin
I will you give, that all those sleights bewraies,
In midst a garden lies, where many a gin
And net to catch frail hearts, false Cupid lays;
There in the verdure of the herbours green,
With your brave champion lies the wanton queen.
77
But when she happily rises from the knight,
And has withdrawn her presence from the place,
Then take a shield I have of dimonds bright,
And hold the same before the yongmans face,
That he may glass therein his garments light,
And wanton soft attire, and view his case,
That with the sight, shame and disdain may move
His heart to leave that base and servile love.
78
Now rests naught that needful is to tell,
But that you go secure, safe, sure and bold,
Unseen the palace may you enter well,
And pass the dangers all I have foretold,
For neither art, nor charm, nor magic spell
Can stop your passage or your steps withhold,
Nor shall Armida (so you guarded be)
Your coming ought foreknow, or once foresee:
79
And ceke as safe from that enchanted fort
You shall return, and escape unhurt away;
But now the time does us to rest exhort,
And you must rise by peep of springing day.
This said, he led them through a narrow port,
Into a lodging fair wherein they lay,
There glad and full of thoughts he left his ghests,
And in his wonted bed the old man rests.
The fifteenth book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The well instructed knights forsake their host,
And come where their strange bark in harbor lay,
And setting sail beholdon Egypts cost
The Monarchs ships and armies in array:
Their wind and pilot good the seas in post
They pass, and of long iourneyes make short way:
The far sought isle they find; Armidaes charms
They scorn, they shun her sleights, despise her arms.
1
THE rosy fingred morn with gladsome ray,
Rose to her task from old Tithonus lap,
When their grave host came where the warriors lay,
And with him brought the shield, the rod, the map,
Arise (quoth he) ere lately broken day,
In his bright arms the round world fold or wrap,
All what I promised here, I have them brought,
Enough to bring Armidaes charms to naught.
2
They started up, and every tender lim
In sturdie steel and stubburne plate they dight,
Before the old man stalkt, they followed him
Through gloomie shades of sad and sable night,
Through vaults obscure again and entries dim,
The way they came their steps remeasurde right,
But at the flood arrived, farewell (quoth he)
Good luck your aid, your guide good fortune be.
3
The flood received them in his bottom low,
And lift them up, above his billows thin;
The waters so cast up a branch or bow,
By violence first plunged and diu'd therein:
But when upon the shore the waves them throw,
The knights for their fair guide to look begin,
And gasing round, a little bark they spide,
Wherein a damsel sat the stern to guide;
4
Upon her front her locks were curled new,
Her eyes were courteous, full of peace and love;
In look a saint, an Angel bright in show,
So in her visage grace and virtue strove;
Her roabe seemed sometimes red, and sometimes blew,
And changed still as she did stir or move;
That look how often man's eye beheild the same,
So often the colors changed, went and came.
5
The feathers so (that tender, soft and plain,
About the doves smooth neck close couched been)
Do in one color never long remain,
But change their hew, against glimse of Phoebus sheene;
And now of rubies bright a vermile chain,
Now make a Carknet rich of Emrauldes green;
Now mingle both, now alter, turn and change
To thousand colors, rich, pure, fair and strange.
6
Enter this boat, you happy men (she says)
Wherein through raging waves secure I ride,
To which all tempest, storm, and wind obaies,
All burdens light, benign is stream and tide:
My Lord (that rules your iourneies and your ways)
Has sent me here, your servant and your guide,
This said, her Shallop drove she against the sand,
And anchor cast amid the steadfast land.
7
They entered in, her anchors she vpwound,
And lanched forth to sea her pinnesse flit,
Spread to the wind her sails she broad unbound,
And at the helm sat down to govern it,
Swelled the flood that all his banks he drowned,
To bear the greatest ship of burden fit;
Yet was her Frigot, little, swift and light,
That at his lowest ebb bear it he might.
8
Swifter than thought the friendly wind forth bore
The sliding boat, upon the rolling wave,
With crudded foam, and froth the billows hoar
About the cable murmur, rore and rave;
At last they came where all his watrie store,
The flood in one deep channel did engraue,
And forth to greedy seas his streams he sent,
And so his waves, his name, himself, he spent.
9
The wondrous boat scant touched the troubled maine,
But all the sea still, hushed, and quiet was,
Vanished the clouds, ceased the wind and rain,
The tempests threatened ouerblow and pas,
A gentle breathing air made even and plain
The azure face of heavens smooth looking glass,
And heaven it self, smild from the skies above,
(With a calm cleernesse) on the earth his love.
10
By Ascalon they failed, and forth driued,
Toward the west their speedy course they frame,
In sight of Gaza till the bark arrived,
A little port when first it took that name;
But since by others loss so well it thriued,
A city great and rich that it became,
And there the shores and borders of the land
They found as full of armed men, as sand.
11
The passengers to landward turned their sight,
And there saw pitched many a stately tent,
Soldier and footman, captain, lord and knight,
Between the shore and city, came and went:
Huge elephants, strong camels, coursers light,
With horned hoofes the sandy ways out rent,
And in the haven many a ship and boat,
(With mighty anchores fastened) swim and floate;)
12
Some spread their sails, some with strong owers sweep
The waters smooth, and brush the buxome wave,
Their breasts insunder cleave the yielding deep,
The broken seas for anger foam and rave,
When thus their guide began, sir knights take keep
How all these shores are spread with squadrons brave,
And troops of hardy knights, yet on these sands
The monarch scant has gathred half his bands.
13
Of Egypt only these the forces are,
And aid from other lands they here attend,
For twixt the nooneday sun and morning star,
All realms at his command do bow and bend;
So that I trust we shall return from far,
And bring our journey long to wished end,
Before this (king or his lieutenant) shall
These armies bring, to Sions conquered wall.
14
While thus she said, as soaring eagles fly
Among other birds, securely through the air,
And mounting up behold with wakefull eye,
The radiant beams of old Hiperious hair,
Her gondelay so passed swiftly bie
Twixt ship and ship, withouten fear, or caire
Who should her follow, trouble, stop or stay,
And forth to sea made luckie speed and way.
15
Themselves forenenst old Raphias town they fand,
A town that first to sailers does appear,
As they from Syria pass to Egypt land,
The sterill coasts of barren Rinoceere
They past, and seas where Casius hill does stand,
That with his trees orespreads the waters near,
Against whose roots breaks the brackish wave,
Where Jove his temple; Pompeie has his grave.
16
Then Damiata next, where they behold
How to the sea his tribute Nilus paies,
By his seven mouths renowned in stories old,
And by an hundredth more ignoble ways
They past the town built by the Grecian bold,
Of him called Alexandria till our days,
And Pharos tower and isle, removed of yore
Far from the land, now joined to the shoer:
17
Both Creet and Rhodes they left by North unseen,
And sailed along the coasts of Afric lands,
Whose sea towns fair, but realms more inward been
All full of monsters and of desert sands,
With her five cities then they left Cireene,
Where that old temple of false Hammon stands:
Next Prolemais, and that sacred wood
Whence spring the silent streams of Lethe flood.
18
The greater Sirtes (that sailers often cast
In peril great of death and loss extreme)
They compast round about, and safely past,
Then Cape Iudeca and flood Magras stream;
Then Tripolie, against which is Malta plast,
That low and hid, to lurk in seas does seame:
The little Sirtes then, and Alzerbes i will,
Where dwelt the folk that Lotos eat erewhile.
19
Next Tunis on the crooked shore they spide,
Whose bay a rock on either side defends,
Tunis all towns in beauty, wealth and pride,
Above, as far as Libias bounds extends;
Against which (from fair Scicilias fertile side)
His rugged front great Lilebenni bends,
The Dame there pointed out where sometimes stoud,
(Romes stately rival whilome) Carthage proud,
20
Great Carthage low in ashes cold does lie,
Her ruins poor the herbs in height scant pass,
So cities fall, so perish kingdoms hie,
Their pride and pomp lies hid in sand and grass:
Then why should mortal man repine to die,
Whose life, is air; breath, wind; and body, glass?
From thence the seas next Biserts walls they cleft,
And far Sardignia on their right hand left.
21
Numidias mighty plains they coasted then,
Where wandering shepherds used their flocks to feed,
Then Bugia and Argiere, th'infamous den
Of Pirates false, Oran they left with speed,
All Tingitan they swiftly ouer-ren,
Where Elephants and angry Lions breed,
Where now the Realms of Fesse and Marocke be,
Against which Grenades shores and coasts they see.
22
Now are they there, where first the sea brake in
By great Alcides help (as stories feign)
True may it be that where those floodes begin
It whilome was a firm and solid maine,
Before the sea there through did passage win,
And parted Afric from the land of Spain,
Abila hence, thence Calpe great up springs,
Such power has time to change the face of things.
23
Four times the sun had spread his morning ray,
Since first the Dame launcht forth her wandrous barge,
And never yet took port in creek or bay,
But fairly forward bore the knights her charge,
Now through the strait her jolly ship made way,
And boldly sailed upon the Ocean large;
But if the sea in midst of earth was great,
O what was this, wherein earth has her seat?
24
Now deep engulphed in the mighty flood
They saw not Gades, nor the mountains near,
Fled was the land, and towns on land that stood,
Heaven cou'red sea, sea seemed the heavens to bear,
At last, fair Lady (quoth Vbaldo good)
That in this endless maine do guide us hear,
If ever man before here sailed, tell,
Or other lands here be wherein men dwell.
27
Great Hercules (quoth she) when he had quaild
The monsters fierce in Affricke and in Spain,
And all along your coasts and countries saild,
Yet durst he not assay the Ocean maine,
Within his pillours would he have impaild
The ouerdaring wit of mankind vain,
Till Lord Ulysses did those bounders pas,
To see and know he so desirous was.
26
He past those pillours, and in open wave
Of the broad sea first his bold sails vntwind,
But yet the greedy Ocean was his grave,
Naught helped him his skill against tide and wind,
With him all witness of his voyage brave
Lies buried there, no truth thereof we find,
And they whom storm has forced that way sense,
Are drowned all, or vnreturn'd from thence:
27
So that this mighty sea is yet unsought,
Where thousand Isles and kingdoms lie unknown,
Not void of men as some have vainly thought,
But peopled well, and wonned like your own,
The land is fertile ground, but scant well wrought,
Air, wholesome; temperate sun; grass proudly grown.
But (quoth Vbaldo) dame, I pray thee teach
Of that hid world, what be the laws and speech.
28
As diverse be their nations (answred she)
Their toongs, their rites, their laws so diffrent arre,
Some pray to beasts, some to a stone or tree,
Some to the earth, the sun, or morning star;
Their meats unwholesome, vile and hateful be,
Some eat man's flesh, and captives taken in war,
And all from Calpes mountain west that dwell,
In faith profane, in life are rude and fell.
29
But will our gracious God (the knight replide)
(That with his blood all sinful men has bought)
His truth for ever and his Gospel hide
From all those lands, as yet unknown, unsought?
O no (quoth she) his name both far and wide
Shall there be known, all learning thither brought,
Nor shall these long and tedious ways for ever
Your world and theirs, their lands, your kingdoms sever.
30
The time shall come that sailors shall disdain
To talk or argue of Alcides streat,
And lands and seas that namelesse yet remain,
Shall well be known, their bounders, site and seat,
The ships encompasse shall the sollid maine,
As far as seas outstretch their waters great,
And measure all the world, and with the sun
About this earth, this globe, this compass, run.
31
A knight of Genes shall have the hardiment
Upon this wondrous voyage first to wend,
Nor winds nor waves, that ships insunder rent,
Nor seas vnus'd, strange clime or poole unkind,
Nor other peril, nor astonishment
That makes frail hearts of men to bow and bend,
Within Abilas strait shall keep and hold,
The noble spirit of this saylor bold.
32
Thy ship (Columbus) shall her canuasse wing
Spread ore that world, that yet concealed lies,
That scant swift fame her looks shall after bring,
Though thousand plumes she have, and thousand eyes.
Let her of Bacchus and Alcides sing,
Of thee to future age let this suffies,
That of thine acts she some forewarning give,
Which shall in verse and noble story live.
33
Thus talking, swift twixt South and West they run,
And sliced out twixtfroth and foam their way;
At once they saw before, the setting sun;
Behind, the rising beam of springing day;
And when the morn her drops and dewes begun
To scatter broad upon the flowring lay,
Far off a hill and mountain high they spide,
Whose top the clouds enuiron, cloth and hide;
34
And drawing near, the hill at ease they view,
When all the clouds were molten, fallen and fled,
Whose top Pyramide wise did pointed show,
High, narrow, sharp, the sides yet more outspred,
Thence now and than fire, flame and smoke out flew,
As from that hill, where under lies in bed
Enceladus, whence with imperious sway
Bright fire breaks out by night, black smoke by day.
35
About the hill lay other Islands small,
Where other rocks, crags* clifts, and mountains stood,
Th'isles fortunate these elder time did call,
To which high heaven they feigned so kind and good,
And of his blessings rich so liberal,
That without tillage earth gives corn for food,
And grapes that swell with sweet and precious wine,
There without pruning yields the fertile vine.
36
The Olive fat there ever buds and flowers,
The honey drops from hollow oaks distill,
The falling brook her silver streams down powers,
With gentle murmur from their native hill,
The westren blast tempreth with deawes and showers
The sunnie rays, least heat the blossoms kill,
The fields Elisian (as fond heathen saine)
Were there, where souls of men in bliss remain.
37
To these their pilot steard, and now (quoth she)
Your voyage long to end is brought well near,
The happy isles of fortune now you see,
Of which great fame, and little truth, you hear,
Sweet, wholesome, pleasant, fertile, fat they be,
Yet not so rich as fame reports they wear.
This said, toward an island fresh she bore,
The first of ten, that lies next Africkes shore;
38
When Charles thus, if (worthy gouernesse)
To our good speed such tariance be no let,
Upon this isle that heaven so fair does bless,
(To view the place) on land a while us set,
To know the folk, and what God they confess,
And all whereby man's heart may knowledge get,
That I may tell the wonders therein seen
Another day, and say, there have I been.
39
She answ'red him, well fits this high desire
Thy noble heart, yet cannot I consent,
For heavens decree, firm, stable and entire,
Thy wish repugnes, and against thy will is bent,
Nor yet the time has Titans gliding fire
Met forth, prefixed for this discouerment,
Nor is it lawful of the Ocean maine
That you the secrets know, or known explain.
40
To you withouten needle, map or card
Its given to pass these seas, and there arrive
Where in strong prison lies your knight imbard,
And of her pray you must the witch deprive:
If further to aspire you be prepared,
In vain against fate and heavens decree you strive,
While thus she said, the first seen isle gave place,
And high and rough the second showed his face.
41
They saw how Eastward stretched in order long,
The happy islands sweetly flowring lay;
And how the seas betwixt those Isles inthrong,
And how they shouldred land from land away:
In seven of them the people rude among
The shadie trees, their sheds had built of clay,
The rest lay waste, unless wild beasts unseen,
Or wanton Nymphs, roam'd on the mountains green.
42
A secret place they found in one of those,
Where the cleft shore, sea in his bosom takes,
And twixt his stretched arms does fold and close
An ample Bay, a rock the haven makes,
Which to the maine does his broad back oppose,
Whereon the roaring billow cleaues and brakes,
And here and there two crags like turrets hie,
Point forth a port, to all that sail thereby:
43
The quiet seas below lie safe and still,
The greenewood like a garland grows aloft,
Sweet caves within, cool shades and waters shrill,
Where lie the Nymphs on Moss and Iuie soft;
No anchor there needs hold her frigot still,
Nor cabble twisted sure, though breaking often:
Into this desert, silent, quiet glade,
Entered the dame, and there her haven made.
44
The palace proudly built (quoth she) behold,
That sits on top of yonder mountains hight,
Of Christ's true faith there lies the champion bold
In idleness, love, fancy, folly, light;
When Phoebus shall his rising beams unfold,
Prepare you against the hill to mount upright,
Nor let this stay in your bold hearts breed care,
For, save that one, all hours unlucky are;
45
But yet this evening (if you make good speed)
To that hills foot with daylight might you pass,
Thus said, the Dame their guide, and they agreed,
And took their leave, and leapt forth on the grass,
They found the way that to the hill does leed,
And softly went that neither tired was,
But at the mountains foot they both arrived,
Before the sun his teame in waters diued.
46
They saw how from the crags and cliftes below
His proud and stately pleasant top grew out,
And how his sides were clad with frost and snow,
The height was green with herbs and flowrets sout,
Like hairie locks the trees about him grow,
The rocks of ice keep watch and ward about,
The tender roses and the lillies new,
Thus art can nature change, and kind subdew.
47
Within a thick, a dark and shadie plot,
At the hills foot that night the warriors dwell,
But when the sun his rays bright shining, hot,
Dispred, of golden light the eternal well,
Up, up, they cride, and fiercely up they got,
And climed boldly against the mountain fell;
But forth there crept (from whence I cannot say)
An ougly serpent, which forestalled their way,
48
Armed with golden scales his head and crest
He lifted high, his neck sweld great with ire,
Flamed his eyes, and hiding with his breast
All the broad path, he poison breathed and fire,
Now reached he forth in foldes and forward pressed,
Now would he back in rowles and heaps retire,
Thus he presents himself to guard the place,
The knights preas'd forward with assured pace:
49
Charles drew forth his brand to strike the snake;
Vbaldo cride, stay my companion dear,
Will you with sword or weapon battle make
Against this monster that affronts us hear?
This said, he began his charmed rod to shake,
So that the serpent durst not hiss for fear,
But fled, and dead for dread, fell on the gras,
And so the passage plain, eath, open was.
50
A little higher on the way they met
A lion fierce, that hugely roard and cride,
His crest he reared hie, and open set
Of his broad gaping jaws the furnace wide,
His stern his back often smote his rage to whet;
But when the sacred staff he once espide,
A trembling fear through his bold heart was spread,
His native wrath was gone, and swift he fled.
51
The hardy couple on their way forth wend,
And met an host that on them rore and gape,
Of savage beasts, tofore unseen, unkind,
Diffring in voice, in semblance and in shape;
All monsters which hot Affricke does forth send,
Twixt Nilus, Atlas, and the southren cape,
Were all there met, and all wild beasts besides,
Hircania breeds, or Hircane forests hides.
52
But yet that fierce, that strange and savage host,
Could not in presence of those worthies stand,
But fled away, their heart and courage lost,
When Lord Vbaldo shook his charming wand,
No other let their passage stopped or crossed,
Till on the mountains top themselves they fand,
Save that the ice, the frost, and drifted snow,
Often made them feeble, weary, faint and slow,
53
But having passed all that frosen ground,
And ouergone that winter sharp and keen,
A warm, mild, pleasant, gentle sky they found,
That ouerspred a large and ample green,
The winds breathed Spikenard, Myrrh and balm around,
The blastes there firm, unchanged, stable been,
Nor as elsewhere the winds now rise now fall,
And Phoebus there aie shines, sets not at all.
54
Not as elsewhere now sunshine bright, now showers,
Now heat, now cold, there enterchanged wear,
But everlasting spring mild heaven down powers,
In which nor rain, nor storm, nor clouds appear,
Nursing to fields, their grass; to grass, his flowers;
To flowers, their smell; to trees, the leaves they bear;
There by a lake a stately palace stands,
That ouerlookes all mountains, seas and lands:
55
The passage hard against the mountain steep,
These trauailers had faint and weary maid,
That through those grassie plains they scantly creep,
They walked, they rested often; they went, they staide,
When from the rocks that seemed for joy to weep,
Before their feet a dropping crystal plaide,
Entising them to drink, and on the flowers
The plentious spring a thousand streams down powers.
56
All which united in the springing grass,
Eat forth a channel through the tender green,
And underneath eternal shade did pass,
With murmur shrill, cold, pure, and scantly seen;
Yet so transparent that perceived was
The bottom rich, and sands that golden been,
And on the brimmes the silken grass aloft
Proffred them seats, sweet, easy, fresh and soft.
57
See hear the stream of laughter, see the spring
(Quoth they) of danger and of deadly pain,
Here fond desire must by fair governing
Be ruled, our lust bridled with wisdoms rain,
Our ears be stopped while these Sirens sing,
Their notes entising man to pleasure vain.
Thus past they forward where the stream did make
An ample pond, a large and spacious lake;
58
There on a table was all dainty food
That sea, that earth, or liquid air could give,
And in the cristall of the laughing flood,
They saw two naked virgins bathe and diue,
That sometimes toying, sometimes wrestling stood,
Sometimes for speed and skill in swimming strive,
Now underneath they diude, now rose above,
And tising baits laid forth of lust and love.
59
These naked wantons, tender, fair and white,
Moved so far the warriors stubborn hearts,
That on their shapes they gazed with delight;
The Nymphs applide their sweet alluring arts,
And one of them above the waters quite,
Lift up her head, her breasts, and higher parts,
And all that might weak eyes subdew and take,
Her lower beauties vaild the gentle lake.
60
As when the morning star escapt and fled,
From greedy waves with dewie beams up flies,
Or as the Queen of love, newborn and bred
Of The Oceans fruitful froth, did first arise:
So vented she, her golden locks forth shed
Round pearls and cristall moist therein which lies:
But when her eyes upon the knights she cast
She start, and feigned her of their sight aghast.
61
And her fair locks, that on a knot were tide
High on her crown, she began at large unfold;
Which falling long and thick, and spreading wide,
The iuorie soft and white, mantled in gold:
Thus her fair skin the dame would cloth and hide,
And that which hid it no less fair was hold;
Thus clad in waves and locks, her eyes divine
From them ashamed did she turn and twine.
62
With all she smiled, and she blushed withal,
Her blush, her smiling; smiles, her blushing graced:
Over her face her amber tresses fall,
Where under love himself in ambush placed:
At last she warbled forth a treble small,
And with sweet looks, her sweet songs enterlaced;
O happy men! that have the grace (quoth she)
This bliss, this heaven, this paradise to see.
63
This is the place wherein you may assuage
Your sorrows past, here is that joy and blis,
That florisht in the antique golden age,
Here needs no law, here none does ought amiss,
Put off those arms and fear not Mars his rage,
Your sword, your shield, your helmet needless is:
Then consecrate them here to endless rest,
You shall loves champions be, and soldiers blessed.
64
The fields for combat here are beds of down,
Or heaped lillies under shadie brakes;
But come and see our queen with golden crown,
That all her servants blessed and happy makes,
She will admit you gently for her own,
Numbered with those that of her joy partakes:
But first within this lake your dust and sweat
Wash off, and at that table sit and eat.
65
While thus she sung, her sister lur'de them nie
With many a gesture kind and loving show,
To musicks sound as dames in court apply
Their cunning feet, and dance now swift now slow;
But still the knights unmoved passed bie,
These vain delights for wicked charms they know,
Nor could their heavenly voice or angels look
Surprise their hearts, if eye or ear they took.
66
For if that sweetness once but touched their hearts,
And profred there to kindle Cupids fire,
Straight armed reason to his charge vpstarts,
And quenches lust, and kills fond desire;
Thus scorned were the dames, their wiles and arts:
And to the palace gates the knights retire,
While in their streams the damsels diued sad,
Ashamed, disgraste, for that repulse they had.
The sixteenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The searchers pass through all the palace bright,
Where in sweet prison lies Rinaldo pent,
And do so much, that full of rage and spite,
With them he goes sad, shamed, discontent:
With plaints and prayers to retain her knight
Armida strives; he hears, but thence he went,
And she forlorn her palace great and fair
Destroies for grief, and flies thence through the air.
1
THE palace great is builded rich and round,
And in the center of the inmost hold,
There lies a garden sweet, on fertile ground,
Fairer than that where grew the trees of gold:
The cunning sprites had buildings reared around,
With doors and entries false a thousand fold,
A labyrinth they made that fortress brave,
Like Dedals prison or Porsennaes grave.
2
The knights past through the castles largest gate,
(Though round about an hundredth ports there shine)
The door leaves framed of carved silver plate,
Upon their golden hinges turn and twine,
They staid to view this work of wit and state,
The workmanship excelled the substance fine,
For all the shapes in that rich metal wrought,
Save speech, of living bodies wanted naught.
3
Alcides there sat telling tales, and sponne
Among the feeble troops of damsels mild,
He that the fiery gates of hell had won,
And heaven vpheld; false love stood by and smild:
Armd with his club fair Iolee forth run,
His club with blood of monsters foul defilde,
And on her back his lions skin had she,
Too rough a bark for such a tender tree.
4
Beyond, was made a sea, whose azure flood
The hoarie froth crushed from the surges blew,
Wherein two nauies great well ranged stood
Of warlike ships, fire from their arms out flew,
The waters burnt about their vessels good,
Such flames the gold therein enchased threw,
Caesar his Romans hence, the Asian kings
Thence Antonie, and Indian princes brings.
5
The Ciclades seemed to swim amid the maine,
And hill against hill, and mount against mountain smote,
With such great fury met those armies twain,
Here burnt a ship, there sunk a bark or bote,
Here darts and wildefire flew, there drowned or slain
Of princes dead, the bodies fleet and flote;
Here Caesar wins, and yonder conquered been
The eastren ships, there fled The Egyptian queen:
6
Antonius eeke himself to flight betook,
The Empire lost to which he would aspire,
Yet fled not he, nor fight for fear forsook,
But followed her, drawn on by fond desire:
Well might you see within his troubled look,
Strive and contend, love, courage, shame and ire;
Often looked he backed, often gaz'de he on the fight,
But oftener on his mistress and her flight:
7
Then in the secret creekes of fruitful Nile,
Cast in her lap, he would sad death awate,
And in the pleasure of her lovely smile,
Sweeten the bitter stroke of cursed fate,
All this did art with curious hand compile
In the rich metal of that princely gate.
The knights these stories viewed first and last,
Which seen, they forward preas'd, and in they past:
8
As through his channel crookt Meander glides
With turns and twines, and rowles now to now fro,
Whose streams run forth there to the salt sea sides,
Here back return, and to their springward go:
Such crooked paths, such ways this palace hides;
Yet all the maze their map described so,
That through the labyrinth they got in fine,
As Theseus did by Ariadnaies line.
9
When they had passed all those troubled ways,
The garden sweet spread forth her green to show,
The moving crystal from the fountains plays,
Fair trees, high plants, strange herbs and flowrets new,
Sunshinie hills, dales hid from Phoebus rays,
Groves, arbours, mossie caves at once they view,
And that which beauty most, most wonder brought,
No where appeard the art which all this wrought.
10
So with the rude the polisht mingled was,
That natural seemd all, and every part,
Nature would craft in counterfaiting pas,
And imitate her imitator art:
Mild was the air, the skies were clear as glass,
The trees no whirlewind felt, not tempest smart,
But ere their fruit drop off, the blossom comes,
This springs, that falls, that ripeneth, and this blomes.
11
The leaves upon the selfsame bow did hide,
Beside the young the old and ripened fig,
Here fruit was green, there ripe with vermile side,
The apples new and old grew on one twigge,
The fruitful vine her arms spread high and wide,
That bended underneath their clusters big,
The grapes were tender here, hard, young and sour,
There purple, ripe, and nectar sweet forth power.
12
The joyous birds, hid under greenewood shade,
Sung merry notes on every branch and bow,
The wind (that in the leaves and waters played)
With murmur sweet, now song, and whistled now,
Ceased the birds, the wind loud answer made:
And while they sung, it rumbled soft and low;
Thus, were it hap or cunning, chance or art,
The wind in this strange music bore his part.
13
With party colored plumes and purple bill,
A woondrous bird among the rest there flew,
That in plain speech sung louelaies loud and shrill,
Her leden was like human language true,
So much she talked and with such wit and skill,
That strange it seemed how much good she knew,
Her feathred fellows all stood hushed to hear,
Dombe was the wind, the waters silent wear.
14
The gently budding rose (quoth she) behold,
That first scant peeping forth with virgin beams,
Half open, half shut, her beauties does vpfold
In their dear leaves, and less seen, fairer seames,
And after spreeds them forth more broad and bold,
Then languisheth and dies in last extremes,
Nor seems the same, that decked bed and boure
Of many a lady late, and paramoure:
15
So, in the passing of a day, does pas
The bud and blossom of the life of man,
Nor ere does flourish more, but like the gras
Cut down, becomes withred, pale and wan:
O gather then the rose while time thou has,
Short is the day, done when it scant began,
Gather the rose of love, while yet thou mast
Loving, be loved; embrasing, be embrast.
16
He ceast, and as approouing all he spoke,
The quire of birds their heavenly tunes renew,
The turtles sighed, and sighs with kisses broke,
The fowls to shades unseen, by paires, withdrew;
It seemd the laurel chaste, and stubborn oak,
And all the gentle trees on earth that grew,
It seemd the land, the sea, and heaven above,
All breathed out fancy sweet, and sighed out love.
17
Through all this music rare, and strong consent
Of strange allurements, sweet boue mean and measure,
Severe, firm, constant, still the knights forth went,
Hardening their hearts against false entising pleasure,
Twixt leaf and leaf, their sight before they sent,
And after crept themselves at ease and leisure,
Till they beheld the Queen, set with their knight
Besides the lake, shaded with bows from sight:
18
Her breasts were naked, for the day was hot,
Her locks unbound, wau'd in the wanton wind;
Somedeale she swet (tired with the game you wot)
Her sweat-drops bright, white, round, like pearls of Inde,
Her humide eyes a fiery smile forth shot,
That like sunne-beames in silver fountains shinde,
Ore him her looks she hung, and her soft breast
The pillow was, where he and love took rest.
19
His hungry eyes upon her face he fed,
And feeding them so, pinde himself away;
And she, declining often down her head,
His lips, his cheeks, his eyes kissed, as he lay,
Wherewith he sighed, as if his soul had fled
From his frail breast to hers, and there would stay
With her beloved sprite, the armed pare
These follies all beheld and this hot fare.
20
Down by the lovers side there pendant was
A Crystal mirror, bright, pure, smooth and neat,
He rose and to his mistress held the glass,
(A noble Page, graced with that service great)
She, with glad looks; he with enflamed (alas)
Beauty and love beheld, both in one seat;
Yet them in sundry objects each espies,
She, in the glass; he, saw them in her eyes:
21
Her, to command; to serve, it pleased the knight;
He proud of bondage; of her Empire, she;
My dear (she said) that blessest with thy sight
Even blessed Angels, turn thine eyes to me,
For painted in my heart and purtrai'd right
Thy worth, thy beauties, and perfections be,
Of which the form, the shape, and fashion best,
Not in this glass is seen, but in my breast.
22
And if thou me disdain, yet be content
At least so to behold thy lovely hew,
That while thereon thy looks are fixed and bent,
Thy happy eyes themselves may see and view;
So rare a shape, no Crystal can present,
No glass contain that heaven of beauties true;
O let the skies thy worthy mirror be!
And in clear stars thy shape and image see.
23
And with that word she smiled, and nerethelesse
Her loue-toies still she used, and pleasures bold:
Her hair that done she twisted up in tresse,
And looser locks in silken laces rolled,
Her curles garland wise she did vpdresse,
Wherein (like rich ennamell laid on gold,)
The twisted flowrets smiled, and her white breast
The Lillies (there that spring) with Roses dressed.
24
The jolly Peacocke spreeds not half so fair,
The eied feathers of his pompous train;
Nor golden Iris so bendes in the air
Her twenty colored bow, through clouds of rain:
Yet all her ornaments, strange, rich and raire,
Her girdle did in price and beauty stain,
Not that (with scorn) which Tuscane Guilla lost;
Nor Venus Ceston, could match this for cost.
25
Of mild denaies, of tender scorns, of sweet
Repulses, war, peace, hope, despair, joy, fear,
Of smiles, ieastes, mirth, woe, grief, and sad regreet;
Sighs, sorrows, tears, embracements, kisses dear,
That mixed first by weight and measure meet,
Then at an easy fire attempred wear;
This wondrous girdle did Armida frame,
And (when she would be loved) wore the same.
26
But when her wooing fit was brought to end,
She congee took, kissed him, and went her way;
For once she used every day to wend
Bout her affairs, her spells and charms to say:
The youth remained, yet had no power to bend
One step from thence, but used there to stray
Among the sweet birds, through every walk and grove,
Alone, save for an hermit false called Love.
27
And when the silence deep and friendly shaide
Recalled the lovers to their wonted sport,
In afaire room, for pleasure built, they laid,
And longest nights with ioies made sweet and short.
Now while the queen her household things suruaide,
And left her Lord, her garden, and disport,
The twain that hidden in the bushes wear,
Before the Prince in glistring arms appear:
28
As the fierce stead for age withdrawn from war,
Wherein the glorious beast had always won,
That in vile rest from fight sequestered far,
Feeds with the mares at large, his service done,
If arms he see, or hear the trumpets jar,
He neieth loud, and thither fast does run,
And wishes on his back the armed knight,
Longing for iustes, for turnament and fight:
29
So farde Rinaldo when the glorious light
Of their bright harness glistred in his eyes,
His noble sprite awaked at that sight,
His blood began to warm, his heart to rise,
Though drunk with ease deuoid of wonted might,
On sleep till then his weakened virtue lies,
Vbaldo forward stepped, and to him heild
Of dimonds clear, that pure and precious shield.
30
Upon the targe his looks amas'd he bent,
And therein all his wanton habit spide,
His ciuet, baulme, and perfumes redolent,
How from his locks they smoakt, and mantle wide,
His sword that many a Pagan stout had shent,
Bewrapt with flowers, hung idly by his side,
So nicely decked, that it seemd the knight
Wore it for fashion sake, but not for fight.
31
As when from sleep and idle dreams abraid
A man awakt, calls home his wits again;
So in beholding his attire he played,
But yet to view himself could not sustain,
His looks he downward cast, and naught he said,
Grieved, shamed, sad, he would have died feign,
And often he wished the earth or Ocean wide
Would swallow him, and so his errors hide.
32
Vbaldo took the time, and thus begone,
All Europe now and Asia be in war,
And all that Christ adore, and fame have won,
In battle strong, in Syria fighting arre;
But thee alone (Bertoldoes noble son)
This little corner keeps, exiled far
From all the world, buried in sloth and shame,
A carpet champion for a wanton dame.
33
What letharge has in drowsinesse vppend
Thy courage thus? what sloth does thee infect?
Up, up, our camp and Godfrey for thee send,
Thee fortune, praise, and victory expect,
Come fatal champion, bring to happy end
This enterprise begone, and all that sect,
(Which often thou shaken have) to earth full low
With thy sharp brand, strike down, kill, overthrow.
34
This said, the noble infant stood a space
Confused, speechless, senseless, ill ashamed;
But when that shame to just disdain gave place,
To fierce disdain, from courage sprung untamed,
Another redness blushed through his face,
Whence worthy anger shone, displeasure flamed,
His nice attire in scorn he rent and tore,
For of his bondage vile that witness bore;
35
That done, he hasted from the charmed fort,
And through the maze past with his searchers twain.
Armida of her mount and chiefest port
Wondered to find the furious keeper slain,
A while she feared, but she knew in short
That her dear Lord was fled, then saw she plain
(Ah woeful sight!) how from her gates the man
In haste, in fear, in wrath, in anger ran.
36
Whither O cruel, leau'st thou me alone?
She would have cride, her grief her speeches staid,
So that her woeful words are backward gone,
And in her heart a bitter Echo maid,
Poor soul, of greater skill than she was one
Whose knowledge from her thus her joy conuaid,
This wist she well, yet had desire to prove
If art could keep, if charms recall her love.
37
All what the witches of Thessalia land
With lips vnpure yet ever said or spoke,
Words that could make heavens rolling circles stand,
And draw the damned ghostes from Limbo lake,
All well she knew, but yet no time she fand
To use her knowledge, or her charms to make,
But left her arts, and forth she ran to prove,
If single beauty were best charm for love.
38
She ran, nor of her honor took regard,
Oh where be all her vants and triumphs now?
Loves Empire great of late she made or marde,
To her his subjects humbly bend and bow,
And with her pride mixed was a scorn so hard,
That to be loved, she loved, yet whilst they wow
Her lovers all she hates, that pleased her will,
To conquer men, and conqu'red so, to kill.
39
But now her self, disdained, abandoned,
Ran after him, that from her fled in scorn,
And her despised beauty labored,
With humble plaints and prayers, to adorn;
She ran, and hasted after him that fled,
Through frost and snow, through brier, bush, and thorn,
And sent her cries on message her before,
That reached not him, till he had reached the shore:
40
O thou that leau'st but half behind (quoth she)
Of my poor heart, and half with thee do carry,
O take this part, or render that to me,
Else kill them both at once, ah tarry, tarry:
Hear my last words, no parting kiss of thee
I crave, for some more fit with thee to marry
Keep them (unkind) what fear thou if thou stay?
Thou mai'st deny, as well as run away.
41
At this Rinaldo stopped, stood still, and staid,
She came, sad, breathless, weary, faint, and weak,
So woe begone was never Nymph or maid;
And yet her beauties pride grief could not break,
On him she looked, she gas'd, but naught she said,
She would not, could not, or she durst not speak,
At her he looked not, glanst not, if he did,
Those glances shamefaste were, close, secret, hid.
42
As cunning singers, ere they strain on hie,
In loud melodious tunes, their gentle voice,
Prepare the hearers ears to harmony,
With fainings sweet, low notes, and warbles choice:
So she, not having yet forgot pardie
Her woonted shifts and sleights in Cupides toies,
A sequence first of sighs and sobbes forth cast,
To breed compassion dear, than spoke at last.
43
Suppose not (cruel) that I come to wow,
Or pray, as Ladies do their loves and Lords;
Such were we late, if thou disdain it now,
Or scorn to grant such grace as love affords,
At least yet as an enmie listen thou,
Sworn foes sometime will talk, and chaffer words,
For what I ask thee, may thou grant right well,
And lessen naught thy wrath and anger fell.
44
If me thou hate, and in that hate delight,
I come not to appease thee, hate me still,
Its like for like; I bore great hate and spite
Against Christians all, chiefly I wished thee ill:
I was a Pagan borne, and all my might
Against Godfredo bent, mine art and skill,
I followed thee, took thee, and bore thee far
To this strange isle, and kept thee safe from war:
45
And more, which more thy hate may justly move,
More to thy loss, more to thy shame and grief,
I thee enchanted and allured to love,
Wicked deceit, craft worthy sharp repriefe,
Mine honor gave I thee all gifts above,
And of my beauties made thee Lord and chief,
And to my suitors old what I denaid,
That gave I thee (my lover new) vnpraid.
46
But reckon that among my faults, and let
Those many wrongs provoke thee so to wrath,
That hence thou run, and that at naught thou set
This pleasant house, so many joys which has;
Go, travail, pass the seas, fight, conquest get,
Destroy our faith, what shall I say our fath?
Ah no! no longer ours, before thy shrine
Alone I pray, thou cruel saint of mine,
47
All only let me go with thee (unkind)
A small request although I were thy foe,
The spoiler seldom leaves the pray behind,
Who triumphs lets his captives with him go,
Among thy prisoners poor Armida bind,
And let the camp increase thy praises so,
That thy beguiler so thou could beguile,
And point at me, thy thrall and bondslaue vile.
48
Despised bondslaue, since my Lord does hate
These locks, why keep I them or hold them dear?
Come cut them off, that to my servile state
My habit answer may, and all my gear:
I follow thee in spite of death and fate
Through battles fierce where dangers most appear,
Courage I have and strength enough (perchance)
To lead thy courser spare, and bear thy lance:
49
I will or bear, or be my self, thy shield,
And to defend thy life, will loose mine own:
This breast, this bosom soft, shall be thy bield
Against storms of arrows, darts and weapons thrown;
Thy foes pardie encountering thee in field,
Will spare to strike thee (mine affection known)
Least me they wound, nor will sharp vengeance take
On thee, for this despised beauties sake.
50
O wretch! dare I still vant, or help inuoake
From this poor beauty, scorned and disdained?
She said no more, her tears her speeches broake,
Which from her eyes like streams from springs down rained:
She would have caught him by the hand or cloak,
But he stepped backward, and himself restrained,
Conquered his will, his heart ruth soft'ned not,
There plaintes no ishue; love, no entrance got.
51
Love entered not to kindle in his breast
(Which reason late had quenched) his wonted flame;
Yet entered pity in the place at lest:
Loves sister, but a chaste and sober dame,
And stirred him so, that hardly he suppressed
The springing tears that to his eyes up came;
But yet even there his plaints repressed wear,
And (as he could) he lookte, and fained cheer.
52
Madame (quoth he) for your distress I grieve,
And would amend it, if I might or could,
From your wise heart that fond affection drive:
I cannot hate nor scorn you though I would,
I seek no vengeance, wrongs I all forgive,
Nor you my servant, nor my foe I hold,
Truth is, you err'de, and your estate forgot,
Too great your hate was, and your love too hot.
53
But those are common faults, and faults of kind,
Excused by nature, by your sex and years;
I erred likewise, if I pardon find,
None can condemn you, that our trespass hears,
Your dear remembrance will I keep in mind,
In ioes, in woes, in comforts, hopes and fears,
Call me your soldier and your knight, as far
As Christian faith permits, and Asias war.
54
Ah let our faults and follies here take end,
And let our errors past you satisfy,
And in this Angle of the world ipend,
Let both the fame and shame thereof, now die,
From all the earth where I am known and kend
I wish this fact should still concealed lie:
Nor yet in following me poor knight, disgrace
Your worth; your beauty, and your princely race.
55
Stay here in peace, I go, nor wend you may
With me, my guide your fellowship denies,
Stay here or hence depart some better way,
And calm your thoughts, you are both sage and wise.
While thus he spoke, her passions found no stay,
But here and there she turned and rolled her eyes,
And staring on his face a while, at last
Thus in foul terms, her bitter wrath forth brast.
56
Of Sophia fair thou never were the child,
Nor of the Azzaine race isprong thou art,
The mad sea waves thee bore, some Tigresse wild
On Caucasus cold crags, nursed thee apart;
Ah cruel man! in whom no token mild
Appeeres, of pity, ruth, or tender heart,
Could not my griefs, my woes, my plaints and all
One sigh strain from thy breast, one tear make fall?
57
What shall I say, or how renew my speech?
He scorns me, leaves me, bids me call him mine:
The victor has his foe within his reach;
Yet pardons her, that merits death and pine;
Hear how he counsels me, how he began preach
(Like chaste Xenocrates) against love divine;
Oh heavens, oh gods! why do these men of shame,
Thus spoil your Temples, and blaspheme your name?
58
Go cruel, go, go with such peace, such rest,
Such joy, such comfort, as thou leau'st me hear:
My angry soul discharged from this weak breast,
Shall haunt thee ever and attend thee near,
And fury like in snakes and fire brands dressed,
Shall aie torment thee, whom it late held dear:
And if thou escape the seas, the rocks and sands,
And come to fight amid the Pagan bands,
59
There lying wounded, among the hurt and slain,
Of these my wrongs thou shall the vengeance bear,
And often Armida shall thou call in vain,
At thy last gasp; this hope I soon to hear:
Hear fainted she, with sorrow grief and pain,
Her latest words scant well expressed were,
But in a swoune on earth outstretcht she lies,
Stiff were her frozen limbs, closed were her eyes.
60
Thou closed thine eyes (Armida) heaven enuide
Ease to thy grief, or comfort to thy woe;
Ah, open them again, see tears down slide
From his kind eyes, whom thou esteems thy foe,
If thou had heard, his sighs had mollifide
Thine anger hard, he sighed and mourned so;
And as he could with sad and rufull look
His leave of thee, and last farewell he took.
61
What should he do? leave on the naked sand
This woeful lady half alive, half dead?
Kindness forbod, pity did that withstand;
But hard constraint (alas) did thence him lead;
Away he went, the west wind blew from land
Among the rich tresses of their pilots head,
And with that golden sail the waves she cleft,
To land he looked, till land unseen he left.
62
Wakt from her trance, forsaken, speechless sad,
Armida wildly star'd, and gas'd about,
And is he gone (quoth she) nor pity had
To leave me thus twixt life and death in doubt?
Could he not stay? could not the traitor lad
From this last trance help or recall me out?
And do I love him still, and on this sand
Still vnreuengde, still mourn, still weeping stand?
63
Fie no, complaints farewell, with arms and art
I will pursue to death this spiteful knight,
Not earthes low center, nor seas deepest part,
Nor heaven, nor hell, can shield him from my might,
I will oretake him, take him, cleave his heart,
Such vengeance fits a wronged lovers spite,
In cruelty that cruel knight surpass
I will, but what avail vain words, alas?
64
O fool! thou should have been cruel than,
(For than this cruel well deserved thine ire)
When thou in prison had entrapt the man,
Now dead with cold, too late thou ask fire;
But though my wit, my cunning nothing can,
Some other means shall work my hearts desire,
To thee (my beauty) thine be all these wrongs,
Vengeance to thee, to thee revenge belongs.
65
Thou shall be his reward, with murdring brand
That dare this traitor of his head deprive,
O you my lovers, on this rock does stand
The castle of her love, for whom you strive,
I, thee sole heir of all Damascus land,
For this revenge my self and kingdom give,
If by this price my will I cannot gain,
Nature, gives beauty; fortune, wealth in vain.
66
But thee vain gift (vain beauty) thee I scorn,
I hate the kingdom, which I have to give,
I hate my self, and rue that I was borne,
Only in hope of sweet revenge I live,
Thus raging with fell ire she began return
From that bare shore in haste, and homeward drive,
And as true witness of her frantic ire,
Her locks wau'd loose, face shone, eyes sparkled fire.
67
When she came home, she called with outcries shrill,
A thousand devils in Limbo deep that won,
Black clouds the skies with horrid darkness fill,
And pale for dread became th'eclipsed son,
The whirlewinde blustred big on every hill,
And hell to roar under her feet begone,
You might have heard how through the palace wide,
Some spirits howld, some barkt, some hist, some cride.
68
A shadow, blacker than the mirkest night,
Enuiron'd all the place, with darkness sad,
Wherein a firebrand gave a dreadful light,
Kindled in hell by Tisiphone the mad;
Vanished the shade, the sun appeard in sight,
Pale were his beams, the air was nothing glad,
And all the palace vanished was and gone,
Nor of so great a work was left one stone.
69
As often the clouds frame shapes of castles great
Amid the air, that little time do last,
But are dissolved by wind or Titans heat;
Or like vain dreams soon made, and sooner past:
The palace vanished so, nor in his seat
Left ought, but rocks and crags, by kind there plast;
She in her coach which two old serpents drew,
Sat down, and as she used, away she flew.
70
She broake the clouds, and cleft the yielding sky,
And bout her gathred tempest, storm, and wind,
The lands that view the south pole flew she bie,
And left those unknown countries far behind,
The straites of Hercules she past, which lie
Twixt Spain and Afric, nor her flight enclinde
To north or south, but still did forward ride
Ore seas and streams, till Syrias coasts she spide:
71
Nor went she forward to Damascus fair,
But of her country dear she fled the sight,
And guided to Asphaltes lake her chair,
Where stood her castle, there she ends her flight,
And from her damsels far, she made repair
To a deep vault, far from resort and light,
Where in sad thoughts a thousand doubts she cast,
Till grief and shame, to wrath gave place at last.
72
I will not hence (quoth she) till Egypts lord
In aid of Sions king, his host shall move;
Then will I use all helps that charms afford,
And change my shape, or sex if so behoue:
Well can I handle bow, or lance, or sword,
The worthies all will aid me, for my love:
I seek revenge, and to obtain the same,
Farewell regard of honor, farewell shame.
73
Nor let mine uncle and protector me
Reprove for this, he most deserves the blame,
My heart and sex (that weak and tender be)
He bent to deeds, that maidens evil became;
His niece a wandering damsel first made he,
He spurred my youth, and I cast off my shame,
His be the fault, if ought against mine estate
I did for love, or shall commit for hate.
74
This said, her knights, her ladies, pages, squires
She all assembleth, and for journey fit,
In such fair arms and vestures them attires,
As showed her wealth, and well declared her wit;
And forward marched, full of strange desires,
Nor rested she by day or night one whit,
Till she came there, where all the eastren bands,
Their kings and princes, lay on Gazaes sands.
The seventeenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Egypts great host in battle ray forth brought,
The Caliph sends with Godfreyes power to fight;
Armida who Rinaldoes ruin sought,
To them adioynes her self and Sirias might,
To satisfy her cruel will and thought,
She gives her self to him that kills her knight:
He takes his fatal arms, and in his shield
His ancestors and their great deeds beheild.
1
GAza the city on the frontire stands
Of Iudaes realm, as men to Egypt ride,
Built near the sea, beside it of dry sands
Huge wildernesses lie, and deserts wide,
Which the strong winds lift from the parched lands,
And toss like roaring waves in roughest tide,
That from those storms poor passengers almost
No refuge find, but there are down'd and lost.
2
Within this town (won from the Turks of yore)
Strong garrison the king of Egypt plast,
And for it nearer was, and fitted more
That high emprise, to which his thoughts he cast,
He left great Memphis, and to Gaza bore
His regal throne, and there, from countries vast
Of his huge Empire, all the puissant host
Assembled he, and mustred on the coast.
3
Come say (my muse) what manner times these wear,
And in those times how stood the state of things,
What power this monarch had, what arms they bear,
What nations subject and what friends he brings;
For from all lands the Southren Ocean near,
Or morning star, came Princes, Dukes and Kings,
And only thou of half the world welnie
The armies, Lords, and Captains, can descrie.
4
When Egypt from the Greekish Emperor
Rebelled first, and Christ's true faith denide,
Of Mahomets descent, a warrior
There set his throne, and ruled that kingdom wide,
Caliph he hight, and Caliphes since that hour
Are his successors named all beside:
So Nilus old his kings long time had seen
That Ptolemies and Pharoes called had been.
5
Established was that kingdom in short while,
And grew so great, that over Asias lands
And Libias Realms, it stretched many a mile,
From Syrias coasts as far as Cirene sands,
And Southward passed against the course of Nile,
Through the hot clime where burnt Siene stands,
Hence bounded in with sandy desartes wast,
And thence with Euphrates rich flood embrast.
6
Maremma, Myrrh and spices that does bring,
And all the rich red sea it comprehends,
And to those lands, toward the morning spring
That lie beyond that gulf, it far extends:
Great is that Empire, greater by the king
That rules it now, whose worth the land amends,
And makes more famous, Lord thereof by blood,
By wisdom, valor, and all virtues good.
7
With Turks and Persians war he often did wage,
And often he won, and sometime lost the field,
Nor could his adverse fortune ought assuage
His valors heat, or make his proud heart yield,
But when he grew unfit for war through age,
He sheathed his sword, and laid aside his shield:
But yet his warlike mind he laid not down,
Nor his great thirst of rule, praise, and renown,
8
But by his knights still cruel wars maintained.
So wise his words, so quick his wit appears,
That of the kingdom large ore which he rained,
The charge seemed not too weighty for his years;
His greatness Africks lesser kings constrained
To tremble at his name, all Inde him fears,
And other realms that would his friendship hold,
Some armed soldiers sent, some gifts, some gold.
9
This mighty Prince assembled had the flower
Of all his realms, against the French men stout
To break their rising empire and their power,
Nor of sure conquest had he fear or dout:
To him Armida came, even at the hour
When in the plains (old Gazaes walls without)
The Lords and leaders all their armies bring
In battle ray, mustred before their king.
10
He on his throne was set, to which on hight
Who clombe, an hundred iuorie stairs first told,
Under a pentise wrought of silver bright,
And troade on carpets made of silk and gold;
His robes were such as best beseemen might
A king, so great, so grave, so rich, so old,
And twined of sixty else of lawne and more,
A Turbant strange, adorned his tresses hoar.
11
His right hand did his precious scepter weild,
His beard was gray, his looks severe and grave,
And from his eyes (not yet made dim with eild)
Sparkled his former worth and vigor brave,
His gestures all the majesty vpheild
And state, as his old age and empire crave,
So Phidias carved, Apelles so (pardie)
Erst painted Jove, Jove thundering down from sky.
12
On either side him stood a noble lord,
Whereof the first held in his upright hand,
Of severe justice the impartial sword;
The other bore the seal and causes scand,
Keeping his folk in peace and good accord,
And termed was Lord Chancelour of the land;
But Marshall was the first, and used to leed
His armies forth to war, often with good speed.
13
Of bold Circassians with their halberds long,
(About his throne) his guard stood in a ring,
All richly armd in guilden corslets strong,
And by their sides their crooked swords down hing:
Thus set, thus seated, his grave lords among,
His hoasts and armies great beheld the king,
And every band as by his throne it went,
Their ensig^ low enclind, and arms down bent:
14
Their squadr^^ first the men of Egypt show,
In four ^oo^es, and each his feu'rall guide,
Of the hie ^^^ntrie two, two of the low,
Which Nile had won out of the salt sea side,
Hi^ fertile slime first stopped the waters flow,
Then hardened to firm land the plough to bide,
So Egypt still encreast, within far plast
That part is now, where ships erst anchor cast.
15
The foremost band the people were that dwell'd
In Alexandrias rich and fertile plain,
Along the westren shore, whence Nile expelled
The greedy billows of the swelling maine;
Araspes was their guide, who more excelled
In wit and craft, than strength or warlike pain,
To place an ambush close, or to devise
A treason false, was none so sly, so wise.
16
The people next that against the morning rays
Along the coasts of Asia have their seat,
Arontes led them, whom no warlike praise
Ennobled, but high birth and titles great,
His helm nere made him sweat in toilsome fraies,
Nor was his sleep ere broake with trumpets threat,
But from soft ease to try the toil of fight,
His fond ambition brought this carpet knight.
17
The third seemed not a troop or squadron small,
But an huge host; nor seemed it so much grain
In Egypt grew, as to sustain them all;
Yet from one town thereof came all that train,
A town in people to huge shires equal,
That did a thousand streets and more contain,
Great Caire it hight, whose Commons from each side
Came swarming out to war, Campson their guide.
18
Next under Gazell martched they that plow
The fertile lands above that town which lie,
Up to the place where Nilus tumbling low,
Falls from his second Catarrackt from hie:
The Egyptians weap'ned were with sword and bow,
No weight of helm or hawberke list they try,
And ritchly armed in their strong foes no dreed
Of death, but great desire of spoil, they breed.
19
The naked folk of Barca these succeed,
Unarmed half; Alarcon led that band,
That long in deserts lived (in extreme need)
On spoils and prays, purchased by strength of hand,
To battle strong unfit, their king did leed
His army next brought from Zumara land;
Then he of Tripolie, for sudden fight
And skirmish short, both ready, bold and light.
20
Two Captains next brought forth their bands to show,
Whom stony sent and happy Arabie,
Which never felt the cold of frost and snow,
Or force of burning heat, unless fame lie,
Where incense pure and all sweet odours grow,
Where the sole Phoenix, does revive, not die,
And midst the perfumes rich and flowrets brave,
Both birth, and burial, cradle has, and grave.
21
Their clothes not rich, their garments were not gay,
But weapons like The Egyptian troops they had:
Th'Arabians next that have no certain stay,
No house, no home, no mansion good or bad,
But ever (as the Scythian Hordas stray)
From place to place their wandering cities gad:
These have both voice and stature feminine,
Hair, long and black; black face, and fiery eine.
22
Long Indian Canes (with iron armed) they bear,
And as upon their nimble steedes they ride,
Like a swift storm their speedy troops appear,
If winds so fast bring storms from heavens wide:
By Siphax led the first Arabians wear;
Aldine the second squadron had to guide,
And Abiazer proud, brought to the fight
The third, a thief, a murdrer, not a knight.
23
The Islanders came than their Prince before,
Whose lands Arabias gulf enclosed about,
Wherein they fish and gather oisters store,
Whose shells great pearls rich and round power out;
The red sea sent with them from his left shore,
Of Negroes grim a black and ougly rou^^^
These Agricalt and those Osmida brought,
A man that set law, faith and truth at naught.
24
The Ethiops next which Meroe does breed,
That sweet and gentle isle of Meroee,
Twixt Nile and Astrabore that far does spreed,
Where two religions are, and kingdoms three,
These Assamiro and Canario leed,
Both kings, both Pagans, and both subjects be
To the great Caliph, but the third king kept
Christ's sacred faith, nor to these wars out stepped.
25
After two kings (both subject also) ride,
And of two bands of archers had the charge,
The first Sultan of Orms plast in the wide
Huge Persian bay, a town rich, fair and large:
The last of Boecan, which at every tide
The sea cuts off from Persias Southren marge,
And makes an isle; but when it ebs again,
The passage there is sandy, dry and plain.
26
Nor thee (great Altamore) in her chaste bed
Thy loving Queen kept with her dear embrace,
She tore her locks, she smote her breast, and shed
Salt tears to make thee stay in that sweet place,
Seem the rough seas more calm, cruel, she sed,
Than the mild looks of thy kind spouses face?
Or is thy shield, with blood and dust defilde,
A dearer armefull than thy tender child?
27
This was the mighty king of Sarmachand,
A captain wise, well skilled in feats of war,
In courage fierce, matchless for strength of hand,
Great was his praise, his force was noised far;
His worth rightwell the Frenchmen understand,
By whom his virtues feared and loved arre:
His men were armed with helmes and hawberks strong,
And by their sides broad swords and mases hong.
28
Then from the mansions bright of fresh Aurore,
Adrastus came, the glorious king of Inde,
A snakes green skin spotted with black he wore,
That was made rich by art and hard by kind,
An Elephant this furious Giant bore,
He fierce as fire, h(...) unture swift as wind:
Mutch people brought he from his kingdoms wide,
Twixt Indus, Ganges, and the saltsea side.
29
The kings own troop came next, a chosen crew,
Of all the camp the strength, the crown, the flower,
Wherein each soldiers had with honors dew
Rewarded been, for service, ere that hour;
Their arms were strong for need, and fair for show,
Upon fierce steeds well mounted road this power,
And heaven it self with the clear splendure shone
Of their bright armor, purple, gold and stone.
30
Among these Alarco fierce, and Odemare
The muster master was, and Hidraort,
And Rimedon, whose rashness took no care
To shun deaths bitter stroke, in field or fort,
Tigranes, Rapold stern, the men that fare
By sea, that robbed in each creek and port;
Ormond, and Marlabust The Arabian named,
Because that land rebellious he reclam'd.
31
There Pirga, Arimon, Orindo arre,
Brimarte the scaler, and with him (...)fant
The breaker of wild horses brought from far;
Then the great wrastler strong Aridamante,
And Tisipherne, the thunderbolt of war,
Whom none surpast, whom none to match durst vante
At tilt, at turnay, or in combat brave,
With spear or lance, with sword, with mase or glaue.
32
A false Armenian did this squadron guide,
That in his youth from Christ's true faith and light,
To the blind lore of Paganism did slide,
That Clement late, now Emireno, hight;
Yet to his king he faithful was, and tried
True in all causes, his in wrong and right:
A cunning leader and a soldier bold,
For strength and courage, young; for wisdom, old.
33
When all these regiments were past and gone,
Appeared Armide, and came her troop to show,
Set in a chariot bright with precious stone,
Her gown tuckt up, and in her hand a bow;
In her sweet face her new displeasures shone,
Mixed with the native beauties there which grow,
And quickened so her looks, that in sharp wise
It seems she threats, and yet her threats entise.
34
Her chariot like Auroraes glorious waine,
With Carbuncles and Iacinthes glistred round:
Her coachman guided with the golden rain
Four Unicorns, by couples yoakte and bound;
Of Squires and lovely Ladies hundreths twain,
(Whose rattling quiuers at their backs resound)
On milk white steedes, wait on the chariot bright,
Their steeds to menage, ready; swift, to flight:
35
Followed her troop led forth by Aradin,
Which Hidraort from Syrias kingdom sent,
As when the newborn Phoenix does begin
To fly to Ethiope ward, at the fair bent
Of her rich wings strange plumes, and feathers thin,
Her crowns and chains, with native gold besprent,
The world amazed stands; and with her fly
An host of wondering birds, that sing and cry:
36
So past Armida, looked on, gazed on, so,
A woondrous dame in habit, gesture, face;
There lived no wight to love so great a foe,
But wished and longed those beauties to embrace,
Scant seen, with anger sullen, sad for woe,
She conquered all the Lords and knights in place,
What would she do (her sorrows past) think you,
When her fair eyes, her looks and smiles shall wowe?
37
She past, the king commanded Emiren
Of his rich throne to mount the lofty stage,
To whom his host, his army and his men,
He would commit, now in his grauer age.
With stately grace the man approached then;
His looks, his coming honor did presage:
The guard asunder cleft, and passage maid,
He to the throne up went, and there he staide;
38
To earth he cast his eyes and bent his knee:
To whom the king thus began his will explain,
To thee this scepter (Emiren) to thee
These armies I commit, my place sustain
Among them, go set the king of Judah free,
And let the Frenchmen feel my just disdain,
Go, meet them, conquer them, leave none on live,
Or those that escape from battle, bring captive.
39
Thus spoke the tyrant, and the scepter laid
With all his sovereign power upon the knight:
I take this scepter at your hand (he said)
And with your happy fortune go to fight,
And trust (my Lord) in your great virtues aid,
To venge all Asias harms, her wrongs to right,
Nor ere but victor will I see your face,
Our overthrow shall bring death, not disgrace:
40
Heavens grant if evil (yet no mishap I dread)
Or harm, they threaten against this camp of thine,
That all that mischief fall upon my head,
Theirs be the conquest, and the danger mine;
And let them safe, bring home their captain dead,
Buried in pomp of triumphs glorious shine.
He ceased, and then a murmur loud up went,
With noise of joy and sound of instrument;
41
Amid the noise and shout, vprose the king,
Environed with many a noble peer,
That to his royal tent the monarch bring,
And there he feasted them and made them cheer,
To him and him he talked, and carved each thing,
The greatest honored, meanest graced weere.
And while this mirth, this joy and feast does last,
Armida found fit time her nets to cast:
42
But when the feast was done, she (that espide
All cies on her fair visage fixed and bent,
And by true notes and certain signs descride,
How loves impoisned fire, theri entrals brent)
Arose, and where the king sat in his pride,
With stately pace and humble gestures, went;
And as she could in looks in voice she strove
Fierce, stern, bold, angry, and severe to prove.
43
Great Emperor, behold me here (she said)
For thee, my country, and my faith to fight,
A dame, a virgin, but a royal maid,
And worthy seems this war a princess hight,
For by the sword, the scepter is vpstaid,
This hand can use them both, with skill and might,
This hand of mine can strike, and at each blow
Thy foes and ours kill, wound, and overthrow.
44
Nor yet suppose this is the foremost day
Wherein to war I bent my noble thought,
But for the surety of thy realms, and stay
Of our religion true, ere this I wrought:
Yourselfe best know if this be true I say,
Or if my former deeds reiois'd you ought,
When Godfreyes hardy knights and princes strong
I captive took, and held in bondage long:
45
I took them, bound them, and so sent them bound
To thee, a noble gift, with whom they had
Condemned low in dungeon under ground
For ever dwelt, in woe and torment sad:
So might thine host an easy way have found
To end this doubtful war, with conquest glad,
Had not Rinaldo fierce my knights all slain,
And set those lords his friends, at large again.
46
Rinaldo is well known, (and there a long
And true rehearsal made she of his deeds)
This is the knight that since has done me wrong,
Wrong yet untold, that sharp reuengement needs:
Displeasure therefore, mixed with reason strong,
This thirst of war in me, this courage breeds;
Nor how he injured me time serves to tell,
Let this suffice, I seek reuengement fell,
47
And will procure it, for all shaftes that fly
Light not in vain, some work the shooters will,
And Jove's right hand with thunders cast from sky,
Takes open vengeance often for secret ill:
But if some champion dare this knight defy
To mortal battle, and by fight him kill,
And with his hateful head will me present,
That gift my soul shall please, my heart content:
48
So please, that for reward enjoy he shall,
(The greatest gift, I can or may afford)
My self, my beauty, wealth and kingdoms all,
To marry him, and take him for my lord,
This promise will I keep what ere befall,
And thereto bind my self by oath and word:
Now he that deemes this purchase worth his pain,
Let him step forth and speak, I none disdain.
49
While thus the Princess said, his hungry eine
Adrastus fed on her sweet beauties light,
The gods forbid (quoth he) one shaft of thine
Should be dischargd against that discourteous knight,
His heart unworthy is (shootresse divine)
Of thine artillery to feel the might;
To wreake thine ire behold me pressed and fit,
I will his head cut off, and bring thee it:
50
I will his heart with this sharp sword divide,
And to the vultures cast his carcass out.
Thus threatened he, but Tisipherne enuide
To hear his glorious vaunt and boasting stout,
And said, but who art thou, that so great pride
Thou show before the king, me, and this rout?
Pardie here are some such, whose worth exceeds
Thy vaunting much, yet boast not of their deeds.
51
The Indian fierce replide, I am the man
Whose acts his words and boasts have aie surpast;
But if elsewhere the words thou now began
Had vttred been, that speech had been thy last.
Thus quarreled they, they monarch staid them than,
And twixt the angry knights his scepter cast;
Then to Armida said, fair Queen, I see
Thy heart is stout, thy thoughts courageous be:
52
Thou worthy art that their disdain and ire
At thy commands these knights should both appease,
That against thy foe their courage hot as fire
Thou may employ, both when and where thou please,
There all their power and force, and what desire
They have to serve thee, may they show at ease.
The monarch held his peace when this was said,
And they new proffer of their service maid:
53
Nor they alone, but all that famous wear
In feats of arms, boast that he shall be dead,
All offer her their aid, all say and swear
To take revenge, on his condemned head:
So many arms moved she against her dear,
And swore her darling under foot to tread.
But he, since first th'inchanted isle he left,
Safe in his barge the roaring waves still cleft.
54
By the same way returned the well taught bote
By which it came, and made like haste, like speed;
The friendly wind (upon her sail that smote)
So turned, as to return her ship had need:
The youth sometime the pole or bear did note,
Or wandering stars, which cleerest nights forth spreed:
Sometimes the floods, the hills, or mountains steep,
Whose woodie frontes oreshade the silent deep:
55
Now of the camp the man the state enquires;
Now asks the customs strange of sundry lands,
And sailed, till clad in beams and bright attires
The fourth days sun on th'Eastren threshold stands:
But when the Westren seas had quenched those fires,
Their frigot stroke against the shore and sands;
Then spoke their guide, the land of Palestine
This is, here must your journey end and mine;
56
The Knights she set upon the shore all three,
And vanished thence in twinkling of an eye.
Vprose the night in whose deep blacknes be
All colors hid of things, in earth or sky,
Nor could they house, or hold, or harbor see,
Or in that desert sign of dwelling spy,
Nor trackt of man or horse, or ought that might
Inform them of some path or passage right.
57
When they had mused what way they travail should,
From the waste shore their steps at last they twinde,
And lo far off at last their eyes behold
Something (they wist not what) that clearly shinde,
With rays of silver and with beams of gould,
Which the dark foulds of nights black mantle linde,
Forward they went and marched against the light,
To see and find the thing, that shone so bright:
58
High on a tree they saw an armor new,
That glistred bright against Cint hias silver ray,
Therein (like stars in skies) the dimonds show,
Fret in the gilden helm and hawberke gay,
The mighty shield all scored full they view
Of pictures fair, ranged in meet array;
To keep them sat an aged man beside,
Who to salute them rose, when them he spide.
59
The twain, who first were sent in this pursuit,
Of their wise friend well knew the aged face:
But when the wisard sage their first salute
Received, and quited had, with kind embrace,
To the young Prince (that silent stood and mute)
He turned his speech: in this unused place
For you alone I wait (my Lord) quoth he,
My chiefest care your state and welfare be;
60
For (though you wot it not) I am your friend,
And for your profit work, as these can tell,
I taught them how Armidaes charms to end,
And bring you hither from loves hateful cell,
Now to my words (though sharp perchance) attend,
Nor be aggreeu'd although they seem too fell,
But keep them well in mind, till in the truth
A wise and holier man instruct thy yuth.
61
Not underneath sweet shades and fountains shrill,
Among the nymphs, the fairies, leaves and flours;
But on the steep, the rough and craggie hill
Of virtue, stands this blis, this good of ours:
By toil and travail, not by sitting still
In pleasures lap, we come to honors bours;
Why will you thus in sloathes deep valley lie?
The royal Eagles on high mountains fly.
62
Nature liftes up thy forehead to the skies,
And fills thy heart with high and noble thought,
That thou to heau'nward aie should lift thine eyes,
And purchase fame by deeds well done and wrought,
She gives thee ire, by which hot courage flies
To conquest, not through braules and battles (fought
For civil iarres) nor that thereby you might
Your wicked malice wreake and cursed spite:
63
But that your strength sourr'd forth with noble wraith,
With greater fury might Christ's foes assault,
And that your bridle should with lesser scaith
Each secret vice, and kill each inward fault;
For so his godly anger ruled haith
Each righteous man, beneath heavens starrie vault,
And at his will makes it now hot, now cold,
Now lets it run, now does it fettred hold.
64
Thus parled he; Rinaldo hushed and still
Great wisdom heard in those few words compilde,
He marked his speech, a purple blush did fill
His guilty cheeks, down went his eie-sight mild.
The hermit by his bashful looks his will
Well understood, and said, look up my child,
And painted in this precious shield behold
The glorious deeds of thy forefathers old:
65
Thine elders glory herein see and know,
In virtues path how they troade all their days,
Whom thou art far behind, a runner slow
In this true course of honor, fame and prays:
Up, up, thy self incite by the fair show
Of Knigtly worth, which this bright shield bewraies,
That be thy spur, to praise: at last the knight
Looked up, and on those purtraites bent his sight.
66
The cunning workman had in little space
Infinite shapes of men there well expressed,
For there described was the worthy race,
And pedigree of all the house of Est:
Come from a Roman spring ore all the place
Flowed pure streams of Crystal East and West,
With Laurel crowned stood the Princes old,
Their wars the Hermit and their battles told.
67
He showed him Caius first, when first in pray
To people strange the falling empire went,
First Prince of Est, that did the scepter sway
Ore such as chose him Lord by free consent,
His weaker neighbors to his rule obey,
Need made them stoop, constraint does force content;
After, (when Lord Honorius called the train,
Of savage Goths into his land again,)
68
And when all Italic did burn and flame
With bloody war, by this fierce people maid,
When Rome a captive and a slave became,
And to be quite destroi'd was most afraid,
Aurelius (to his everlasting fame)
Preserved in peace the folk that him obai'd:
Next whom was Forest, who the rage withstood
Of the bold Hunnes, and of their tyrant prood.
69
Known by his look was Attila the fell,
Whose dragon eyes shone bright with angers spark,
Worse faced than a dog, who vew'd him well,
Supposed they saw him grin, and heard him bark;
But when in single fight he lost the bell,
How through his troops he fled there might you mark,
And how Lord Forest after fortified
Aquilias town, and how for it he died;
70
For there was wrought the fatal end and fine,
Both of himself and of the town he kept:
But his great son renowned Acarine,
Into his fathers place and honor stepped,
To cruel fate, not to the Hunnes, Altine
Gave place, and when time served again forth lept,
And in the vale of Poe built for his seat
Of many a village small, a city great.
71
Against the swelling flood he bankt it strong,
And thence vprose the fair and noble town,
Where they of Est should by succession long
Command, and rule in bliss and high renown:
Against Odoacer then he fought, but wrong
Often spoileth right, fortune treads courage down,
For there he did for his dear countries sake,
And of his fathers praise did so partake:
72
With him did Alphorisio, Azzo was
With his dear brother into exile sent,
But homewards they in arms again repas,
(The Herule king oppressed) from banishment,
His front through pierced with a dart (alas:)
Next them of Est th'Epaminondas went,
That smiling seemd to cruel death to yield,
When Totila was fled, and safe his shield.
73
Of Boniface I speak, Valerian
His son in praise and power succeeded him,
Who durst sustain (in years though scant a man)
Of the proud Goths an hundredth squadrons trim:
Then he that against the Sclaues much honor wan,
Ernesto threatening stood with visage grim,
Before him Aldoard, the Lombard stout
Who from Monscelces bouldly erst shut out.
74
There Henry was and Berengare the bold,
That served great Charles in his conquests hie,
Who in each battle give the onset would,
A hardy soldier and a captain sly;
After, prince Jews did he well vphould
Against his nephew, king of Italy,
He won the field and took that king on live:
Next him stood Otho with his children five.
75
Of Almerike the image next they view,
Lord Marquis of Ferrara first create,
Founder of many churches, that vpthrew
His eyes, like one that used to contemplate.
Against him the second Azzo stood in rue,
With Berengarious that did long debate,
Till after often change of fortunes stroke,
He won, and on all Itaile laid the yoke.
76
Albert his son the Germans ward among,
And there his praise and fame was spread so wide,
That having foiled the Danes in battle strong,
His daughter young became great Othoes bride.
Behind him Hugo stood with warfare long,
That broake the horn of all the Romans pride,
Who of all Italy the Marquis hight,
And Tuscane whole, possessed as his right.
77
After Tedaldo, puissant Boniface
And Beatrice his dear possessed the stage;
Nor was there left heir male of that great race,
T'enioy the scepter, state and heritage;
The Princess Maude alone supplide the place,
Supplide the want in number, sex and age;
For far above each scepter, throne and crown,
The noble Dame aduanst her veil and gown:
78
With manlike vigor shone her noble look,
And more than manlike wrath her face orespred,
There the fell Normans, Guichard there forsook
The field, till than who never feared nor fled;
Henry the fourth she beat, and from him took
His standard, and in church it offered;
Which done, the Pope back to the Vaticane
She brought, and plast in Peter's chair again.
79
As he that honored her, and held her dear
Azzo the fifth stood by her lovely side;
But the fourth Azzos offspring far and near
Spread forth, and through Germania fructifide,
Sprung from that branch did Guelpho bold appear,
Guelpho his son by Cunigond his bride,
And in Bauarias field transplanted new
This Roman grift florisht, encreast and grew.
80
A branch of Est there in the Guelfian tree
Engraffed was, which of it self was old,
Whereon you might the Guelfoes fairer see,
Renew their scepters and their crowns of gold,
On which heavens good aspectes so bended be,
That high and broad it spread, and florisht bold,
Till underneath his glorious branches lade
Half Germany, and all under his shade.
81
This regal plant from his Italian rout
Sprung up as hie, and blossomed fair above,
For nenst Lord Guelpho, Bertold issued out,
With the sixth Azzo whom all virtues love;
This was the pedigree of worthies stout,
Who seemed in that bright shield to live and move.
Rinaldo waked up and cheered his face,
To see these worthies of his house and race.
82
To do like acts his courage wished and sought,
And with that wish transported him so far,
That all those deeds which filled aie his thought,
(Towns won, fortes taken, armies killed in war)
As if they were things done indeed and wrought,
Before his eyes he thinks they present arre,
He hastly arms him, and with hope and have,
Sure conquest met, prevented and imbrast.
83
But Charles, who had told the death and fall
Of the young Prince of Danes his late dear Lord,
Gave him the fatal weapon, and withal,
Young knight (quoth he) take with good luck this sword,
Your just, strong, valiant hand in battle shall
Employ it long, for Christ's true faith and word,
And of his former Lord revenge the wrongs,
Who loved you so, that deed to you belongs.
84
He answered, God for his mercy sake,
Grant that this hand which holds this weapon good,
For thy dear master may sharp vengeance take,
May cleave the Pagans heart, and shed his blood.
To this but short reply did Charles make,
And thankt him much, nor more on terms they stood:
For lo the wisard sage that was their guide
On their dark journey hastes them forth to ride,
85
High time it is (quoth he) for you to wend
Where Godfrey you awaits, and many a knight,
There may we well arrive ere night does end,
And through this darkness can I guide you right.
This said, up to his coach they all ascend,
On his swift wheels forth rolled the chariot light,
He gave his coursers flit the rod and rain,
And gallopt forth and eastward drove amain;
86
While silent so through nights dark shade they fly,
The Hermit thus bespake the young man stout,
Of thy great house, thy race, thine offspring hie,
Here have thou seen the branch, the bole, the rout,
And as these worthies borne to chivalry,
And deeds of arms, it has tofore brought out;
So is it, so it shall be fertile still,
Nor time shall end, nor age that seed shall kill.
87
Would God, as drawn from the forgetful lap
Of antique time, I have thine elders shown;
That so I could the Catalogue unwrap
Of thy great nephews yet unborn, unknown,
That ere this light they view, their fate and hap
I might foretell, and how their chance is thrown,
That like thine elders so thou might behold
Thy children many, famous, stout and bold.
88
But not by art or skill, of things future
Can the plain troath revealed be and told,
Although some knowledge doubtful, dark, obscure
We have of coming haps in clouds vprold;
Nor all which in this cause I know for sure
Dare I foretell: for of that father old
The hermit Peter, learned I much, and he
Withouten veil heavens secrets great does see.
89
But this (to him revealed by grace divine)
By him to me declared, to thee I say,
Was never race Greek, Barbarous, or Latin,
Great in times past, or famous at this day,
Richer in hardy knights than this of thine;
Such blessings heaven shall on thy children lay,
That they in fame shall pass, in praise overcome
The worthies old of Sparta, Carthage, Rome.
90
But among the rest I chose Alphonsus bold,
In virtue first, second in place and name,
He shall be borne when this frail world grows old,
Corrupted, poor, and bare of men of fame,
Better than he none shall, none can, or could
The sword or scepter use, or guide the same,
To rule in peace, or to command in fight,
Thine ofsprings glory and thy houses light.
91
His younger age foretokens true shall yield
Of future valor, puissance, force and might,
From him no rock the savage beast shall shield;
At tilt or turnay match him shall no knight:
After he conquer shall in pitched field
Great armies, and win spoils in single fight,
And on his locks (rewards for knightly praise)
Shall garlands wear of grass, of oak, of baies.
92
His grauer age, as well that eild it fits,
Shall happy peace preserve, and quiet blessed,
And from his neighbors strong among whom he sits,
Shall keep his cities safe, in wealth and rest,
Shall nourish arts, and cherish pregnant wits,
Make triumphs great, and feast his subjects best,
Reward the good, the evil with pains torment,
Shall dangers all foresee; and seen, prevent.
93
But if it hap against those wicked bands
That sea and earth infest with blood and war,
And in these wretched times to noble lands
Give laws of peace, false and unjust that arre,
That he be sent, to drive their guilty hands
From Christ's pure altars, and high temples far,
O what revenge? what vengeance shall he bring
On that false sect, and their accursed king?
94
Too late the Moors, too late the Turkish king,
Against him should arm their troops and legions bold;
For he beyond great Euphrates should bring,
Beyond the frosen tops of Taurus cold,
Beyond the land where is perpetual spring,
The cross, the Eagle white, the lilly of gold,
And by baptising of the Ethiops brown,
Of aged Nile reveal the springs unknown.
95
Thus said the hermit, and his prophecy
The Prince accepted with content and pleasure,
The secret thought of his posterity,
Of his concealed joys heapt up the measure.
Meane-while the morning bright was mounted hie,
And changed heavens silver wealth to golden treasure,
And high above the Christian tents they view,
How the broad ensigns trembled, wau'd and blew;
96
When thus again their leader sage begone,
See how bright Phoebus cleeres the darksome skies,
See how with gentle beams the friendly son
The tents, the towns, the hills and dales descries,
Through my well guiding is your voyage done,
From danger safe, in travail often which lies,
Hence without fear of harm or doubt of foe,
March to the camp, I may no nearer go.
97
Thus took he leave, and made a quick return,
And forward went the champions three on fout,
And marching right against the rising morn,
A ready passage to the camp found out,
Meane-while had speedy fame the tidings borne
That to the tents approacht these Barons stout,
And starting from his throne and kingly seat
To entertain them, rose Godfredo great.
The eighteenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The charms and spirits false therein which lie,
Rinaldo chaseth from the forest old;
The host of Egypt comes; Vafrine the spy
Enters their camp, stout, crafty, wise and bold,
Sharp is the fight about the bulwarks hie
And ports of Zion, to assault the hold:
Godfrey has aid from heaven, by force the town
Is won, the Pagans slain, walls beaten down.
1
Arrived, where Godfrey to embrace him stood,
My sovereign Lord, Rinaldo meekely said,
To venge my wrongs against Gernando prood,
My honors care prouokt my wrath unstaid;
But that I you displeasd my chieftaine good,
My thoughts yet grieve, my heart is still dismayed,
And here I come, pressed all exploits to try,
To make me gracious in your gracious eye.
2
To him that kneeled (folding his friendly arms
About his neck) the Duke this answer gave:
Let pass such speeches sad, of passed harms,
Remembrance is the life of grief; his grave,
Forgetfulness; and for amends, in arms
Your wonted valor use and courage brave;
For you alone to happy end must bring,
The strong enchantments of the charmed spring.
3
That aged wood whence heretofore we got
(To build our scaling engines) timber fit,
Is now the fearful seat (but how none wot)
Where ougly feends and damned spirits sit;
To cut one twist thereof aduentreth not
The boldest knight we have, nor without it
This wall can battred be, where others dout
There venture thou, and show thy courage stout.
4
Thus said he, and the knight in speeches few
Profred his service to attempt the thing,
To hard assaies his courage willing flew,
To him praise was no spur, words were no sting:
Of his dear friends then he embrast the crew,
To welcome him which came; for in a ring
About him Guelfo, Tancred and the rest
Stood, of the camp the greatest, chief and best:
5
When with the Prince these Lords had iterate
Their welcomes often, and often their dear embrace;
Toward the rest of lesser worth and state,
He turned, and them received with gentle grace;
The merry soldiers bout him shout and prate,
With cries as joyful and as cheerful face,
As if in triumphs chariot bright as sun,
He had returned, Affricke or Asia won.
6
Thus marched to his tent the champion good,
And there sat down with all his friends around;
Now of the war he asked, now of the wood,
And answered each demand they list propound.
But when they left him to his ease, vpstood
The Hermit, and fit time to speak once found,
My Lord he said, your travels woondrous arre,
Far have you straied, erred, wandered far;
7
Mutch are you bound to God above, who brought
You safe from false Armidas charmed hold;
And th^e a straying sheep whom once he bought,
Has now again reduced to his fold,
And against his heathen foes these men of naught,
Has chosen thee in place next Godfrey bold;
Yet mai'st thou not polluted thus with sin,
In his high service, war or fight begin;
8
The world, the flesh with their infection vile,
Pollute the thoughts impure, thy spirit stain;
Not Poe, not Ganges, not seven mouthed Nile,
Not the wide seas can wash thee clean again,
Only to purge all faults which thee defile,
His blood has power who for thy sins was slain:
His help therefore inuoake, to him bewray
Thy secret faults, mourn, weep, complain and pray.
9
This said, the knight first with the Witch unchaste,
His idle loves and follies vain lamented;
Then kneeling low with heavy looks down cast,
His other sins confessed and all repented,
And meekely pardon craved for first and last.
The Hermit with his zeal was well contented,
And said, on yonder hill next morn go pray
That turns his forehead against the morning ray:
10
That done, march to the wood, whence each one brings
Such news of furies, gobblings, feends, and sprites,
The Giants, monsters, and all dreedfull things
Thou shall subdue, which that dark grove unites:
Let no strange voice, that mournes or sweetly sings;
Nor beauty, whose glad smile frail hearts delites,
Within thy breast make ruth or pity rise,
But their false looks and prayers false despise.
11
Thus he advised him, and the hardy knight
Prepared him gladly to this enterprise,
Thoughtfull he past the day, and sad the night;
And ere the silver morn began to rise,
His arms he took, and in a coat him dight
Of color strange, cut in the warlike guise;
And on his way sole, silent, forth he went
Alone, and left his friends, and left his tent.
12
It was the time when against the breaking day
Rebellious night yet strove, and still repined;
For in the East appeared the morning gray,
And yet some lamps in Jove's high palace shined,
When to mount Oliuet he took his way,
And saw (as round about his eyes he twined)
Nights shadows hence, from thence the morning shine
This bright, that dark; that earthly, this divine:
13
Thus to himself he thought, how many bright
And splendant lamps shine in heavens temple hie,
Day has his golden sun, her moon the night,
Her sixth and wandering stars the azure sky,
So framed all by their creators might,
That still they live and shine, and nere shall die,
Till (in a moment) with the last days brand
They burn, and with them burns sea, air and land.
14
Thus as he mused, to the top he went,
And there kneeld down with reverence and fear,
His eyes upon heavens eastren face he bent,
His thoughts above all heavens vplifted wear,
The sins and errors (which I now repent)
Of mine unbridled youth, O father dear
Remember not, but let thy mercy fall,
And purge my faults, and mine offenses all.
15
Thus prayed he, with purple wings vpflew
In golden weed the mornings lusty queen,
Begilding (with the radiantbeames she threw)
His helm, his harness and the mountain green,
Upon his breast and forehead gently blew
The air, that balm and nardus breathed unseen,
And ore his head let down from cleerest skies
A cloud of pure and precious dew there flies,
16
The heavenly dew was on his garments spread,
To which compared, his clothes pale ashes seame,
And spinkled so, that all that palenesse fled,
And thence of purest white bright rays outstreame:
So cheered are the flowers late withered,
With the sweet comfort of the morning beam;
And so returned to youth, a serpent old
Adornes her self in new and native gold.
17
The lovely whiteness of his changed weed
The prince perceived well, and long admirde,
Toward the forest marched he on with speed,
Resolved, as such adventures great requir'de,
Thither he came whence shrinking back, for dreed
Of that strange deserts sight, the first retir'de,
But not to him fearful or loathsome made
That forest was, but sweet with pleasant shade:
18
Forward he past, and in the grove before
He heard a sound that strange, sweet, pleasing was,
There rolled a crystal brook with gentle rore,
There sighed the winds as through the leaves they pas,
There did the Nightingale her wrongs deplore,
There sung the swan, and singing did (alas)
There lute, harp, cittren, human voice he hard,
And all these sounds one sound right well declard.
19
A dreedfull thunderclap at last he hard,
The aged trees and plants welnie that rent;
Yet heard he Nymphs and Sirens afterward,
Birds, winds, and waters sing, with sweet consent:
Whereat amazd he staid, and well prepared
For his defense, heedfull and slow foorthwent,
Nor in his way his passage ought withstood,
Except a quiet, still, transparent flood:
20
On the green banks which that fair stream inbound,
Flowers and odours sweetly smilde and smeld,
Which reaching out his stretched arms around,
All the large desert in his bosom held,
And through the grove on channel passage found,
That, in the wood; in that, the forest dweld:
Trees, clad the streams; streams, green those trees aie made,
And so exchangd their moisture and their shade.
21
The knight some way sought out the flood to pas,
And as he sought a wondrous bridge appeard,
A bridge of gold, a huge and weighty mas,
On arches great of that rich metal reard;
When through that golden way he entered was,
Down fell the bridge, swelled the stream, and weard
The work away, not sign left where it stood,
And of a river calm became a flood:
22
He turned, amasd to see it troubled so,
Like sudden brooks encreast with molten snow,
The billows fierce that tossed to and froe,
The whirlpooles sucked down to their bosoms low;
But on he went to search for wonders more,
Through the thick trees, there high and broad which grow,
And in that forest huge and desert wide,
The more he sought, more wonders still he spide.
23
Where so he stepped, it seemed the joyful ground
Renewed the verdure of her flowrie weed,
A fountain here, a welspring there he found;
Here bud the Roses, there the Lillies spreed;
The aged wood ore and about him round
Flourisht with blossoms new, new leaves, new seed,
And on the boughs and branches of those treene,
The bark was softened, and renewed the green.
24
The Manna on each leaf did pearled lie,
The honey stilled from the tender rind.
Again he heard that woondrous harmony,
Of songs and sweet complaints of lovers kind,
The human voices sung a triple hie,
To which respond the birds, the streams, the wind,
But yet unseen those Nymphs, those singers wear,
Unseen the lutes, harpes, viols which they bear.
25
He lookte, he listened, yet this thoughts denide
To think that true which he both heard and see,
A Myrtle in an ample plain hespide,
And thither by a beaten path went he:
The Myrtle spread her mighty branches wide,
Higher than Pine, or Palm, or Cipresse tree:
And far above all other plants was seen,
That forests Lady, and that deserts queen.
26
Upon the tree his eyes Rinaldo bent,
And there a marvel great and strange began;
An aged Oak beside him cleft and rent,
And from his fertile hollow womb forth ran,
(Clad in rare weeds and strange habiliment)
A Nymph, for age able to go to man,
An hundredth plants beside (even in his sight)
Childed an hundredth Nymphs, so great, so dight:
27
Such as on stages play, such as we see
The Dryads painted, whom wild Satires love,
Whose arms, half naked; locks untrussed be,
With buskins laced on their legs above,
And silken roabes tuckt short above their knee;
Such seemed the Siluan daughters of this grove,
Save that in stead of shafts and boughs of tree,
She bore a lute, a harp or cittern she.
28
And wantonly they cast them in a ring,
And sung and danst to move her weaker sense,
Rinaldo round about enuironing,
As centers are with their circumference;
The tree they compast eeke, and began to sing,
That woods and streams admired their excellence;
Welcome dear Lord, welcome to this sweet grove,
Welcome our Ladies hope, welcome her love;
29
Thou come to cure our Princess, faint and sick
For love, for love of thee, faint, sick, distressed;
Late black, late dreadful was this forest thick,
Fit dwelling for sad folk with grief oppressed,
See with thy coming how the branches quick
Revived are, and in new blossoms dressed:
This was their song, and after, from it went
First a sweet sound, and then the myrtle rent.
30
If antique times admired Silenus old,
That often appeer'd set on his lasie ass,
How would they wonder if they had behold
Such sights as from the myrtle high did pass?
Thence came a Lady fair with locks of gold,
That like in shape, in face and beauty was
To sweet Armida; Rinald thinks he spies
Her gestures, smiles and glances of her eyes.
31
On him a sad and smiling look she cast,
Which twenty passions strange at once bewraies,
And art thou come (quoth she) returned at last
To her, from whom but late thou ranst thy ways?
Comst thou to comfort me for sorrows past?
To ease my widow nights, and careful days?
Or come thou to work me grief and harm?
Why nilt thou speak? Why not thy face disarme?
32
Comst thou a friend or foe? I did not frame
That golden bridge to entertain my foe,
Nor opened flowers and fountains as you came,
To welcome him with joy that brings me woe:
Put off thy helm, rejoice me with the flame
Of thy bright eyes, whence first my fires did groe:
Kiss me, embrace me, if you further venture,
Love keeps the gate, the fort is eath to enter.
33
Thus as she wowes, she rowles her ruefull eyes,
With pitious look, and changes often her cheer,
An hundredth sighs from her false heart vpflies,
She sobbes, she mournes, it is great ruth to hear,
The hardest breast sweet pity mollifies,
What stony heart resists a woman's tear?
But yet the knight, wise, wary, not unkind,
Drew forth his sword and from her careless twind.
34
Toward the tree he marched, she thither start,
Before him stepped, embrast the plant and cride,
Ah, never do me such a spiteful part,
To cut my tree, this forests joy and pride,
Put up thy sword, else pierce therewith the heart
Of thy forsaken and despised Armide;
For through this breast, and through this heart (unkind)
To this fair tree thy sword shall passage find.
35
He list his brand, nor cared though often she praid,
And she her form to other shape did change;
Such monsters huge, when men in dreams are laid,
Often in their idle fancies roame and range:
Her body sweld, her face obscure was maid,
Vanished her garments rich, and vestures strange,
A giantesse before him high she stands,
Like Briareus armd with an hundredth hands:
36
With fifty swords, and fifty targets bright,
She threatened death, she roared, cride and fought,
Each other nymph in armor likewise dight,
A Cyclops great became: he feared them naught,
But on the myrtle smote with all his might,
That groand like living souls to death nie brought,
The sky seemd Plutoes court, the air seemd hell,
Therein such monsters roar, such spirits yell:
37
Lightened the heaven above, the earth below
Roared aloud, that thundered, and this shook;
Blustred the tempests strong, the whirlwinds blow,
The bitter storm drove hailestones in his look;
But yet his arm grew neither weak nor slow,
Nor of that fury heed or care he took,
Till low to earth, the wounded tree down bended,
Then fled the spirits all, the charms all ended.
38
The heavens grew clear, the air waxt calm and still,
The wood returned to his wonted state,
Of witchcrafts free, quite void of spirits ill,
Of horror full, but horror there innate;
He further proved if ought withstood his will
To cut those trees, as did the charms of late,
And finding naught to stop him, smilde, and said,
O shadows vain! O fools of shades afraid!
39
From thence home to the campward turned the knight,
The hermit cride vpstarting from his seat,
Now of the wood the charms have lost their might,
The sprites are conquered, ended is the feat,
See where he comes, in glistring white all dight
Appeared the man, bold, stately, high and great,
His eagles silver wings to shine begun,
With wondrous splendure against the golden sun.
40
The camp received him with a joyful cry,
A cry the dales and hills about that filled;
Then Godfrey welcomd him with honors hie,
His glory quenched all spite, all envy killed:
To yonder dreadful grove (quoth he) went I,
And from the fearful wood (as me you wild)
Have driven the sprites away, thither let be
Your people sent, the way is safe and free.
41
Sent were the workmen thither, thence they brought
Timber enough, by good advise select,
And though, by skillesse builders framed and wrought,
Their engines rude and rams were late elect,
Yet now the forts and towers (from whence they fought)
Were framed by a cunning architect,
William, of all the Genoas Lord and guide,
Which late ruled all the seas from side to side;
42
But forced to retire from him at last,
The Pagan fleet the seas moist empire wunne,
His men with all their stuff and store in have
Home to the camp with their commander run,
In skill, in wit, in cunning him surpast
Yet never enginer beneath the sun,
Of Carpenters an hundredth large he brought,
That what their Lord devised made and wrought.
43
This man begun with woondrous art to make,
Not rams, not mighty brakes, not slings alone,
Wherewith the firm and solid walls to shake,
To cast a dart or throw a shaft or stone;
But framed of Pines and Firres, did undertake
To build a fortress huge, to which was none
Yet ever like, whereof he clothed the sides
Against the balls of fire, with raw bulls hides;
44
In mortesses and sockets framed just,
The beams, the studdes and punchions joined he fast;
To beat the cities wall, beneath forth brust
A ram with horned front, about her wast
A bridge the engine from her side out thrust,
Which on the wall when need required she cast;
And from her top a turret small vpstood,
Strong, surely armed, and builded of like wood:
45
Set on an hundredth wheels the rolling mas,
On the smoothe lands went nimbly up and down,
Though full of arms and armed men it was;
Yet with small pains it ran, as it had flowne,
Woondred the camp so quick to see it pas,
They praised the workmen, and their skill unknown,
And on that day two towers they builded more,
Like that which sweet Clorinda burnt before.
46
Yet wholly were not from the Saracines
Their works concealed, and their labors hid,
Upon that wall which next the camp confines,
They placed spies who marked all they did:
They saw the ashes wild and squared Pines
How to the tents (trail'd from the grove) they slid;
And engines huge they saw, yet could not tell
How they were built, their forms they saw not well,
47
Their engines eeke they reard, and with great art
Repaired each bulwark, turret, port and tower,
And fortifide the plain and easy part,
To bide the storm of every warlike stowre,
Till as they thought no slight, or force of mart,
To undermine or scale the same had power:
And false Ismeno began new balls prepare
Of wicked fire, wild, wondrous, strange and rare.
48
He mingled brimstone with Bitumen fell
Fetch from that lake where Sodom erst did sink,
And from that flood which nine times compast hell,
Some of the liquor whot he brought, I think,
Wherewith the quenchlesse fire he tempred well,
To make it smoke and flame and deadly stink;
And for his wood cut down the aged sire
Would thus reuengement take, with flame and fire.
49
While thus the camp, and thus the town were bent,
These to assault, these to defend the wall,
A speedy dove through the clear welkin went,
Straight ore the tents, seen by the soldiers all
With nimble fannes the yiedling air she rent,
Nor seemd it that she would alight or fall,
Till she arrived near that besieged town,
Then from the clouds at last she stouped down:
50
But lo (from whence I nolte) a falcon came,
Armed with crooked bill and talons long,
And twixt the camp and city crossed her game,
That durst not bide her foes encounter strong;
But right upon the royal tent down came,
And there the lords and princes great among,
(When the sharp hawk nie touched her tender head)
In Godfreyes lap she fell, with fear half dead:
51
The Duke received her, saved her, and spide,
As he beheld the bird, a wondrous thing,
About her neck a letter close was tide,
By a small thread, and trust under her winge,
He loosed forth the writ and spread it wide,
And read the intent thereof, To Iudaies king,
(Thus said the scedule) honors high increase
The Egyptian chiefetaine wishes, health and peace:
52
Fear not (renowned prince) resist, endure
Till the third day, or till the fourth at most,
I come and your deliverance will procure,
And kill your coward foes and all their host.
This secret in that brief was closed up sure,
Writ in strange language, to the winged post
Given to transport for in their warlike need;
The East such message used, often with good speed.
53
The Duke let go the captive dove at large,
And she that had his counsel close bewraid,
Traitresse to her great Lord touched not the marge
Of Salems town, but fled far thence afraid;
The Duke before all those, which had or charge
Or office high, the letter red, and said;
See how the goodness of the Lord foreshoes
The secret purpose of our crafty foes.
54
No longer then let us protract the time,
But scale the bulwark of this fortress hie,
Through sweat and labor against those rocks sublime
Let us ascend, which to the Southward lie;
Hard will it be that way in arms to clime,
But yet the place and passage both know I,
And that high wall by sci^e strong on that part,
Is least defenst by arms, by work and art.
55
Thou Raimond, on this side with all thy might
Assault the wall, and by those cragges ascend,
My squadrons with mine engines huge shall fight,
And against the Northren gate my puissance bend;
That so our foes beguiled with the sight,
Our greatest force and power shall there attend,
While my great tower from thence shall nimbly slide,
And batter down some worse defended side;
56
Camillo thou not far from me shall rear
Another tower, close to the walls ibrought.
This spoken, Raimond old that sat him near,
(And while he talkte great things tossed in his thought)
Said, to Godfredoes counsel given us hear,
Naught can be added, from it taken naught:
Yet this I further wish that some were sent
To spy their camp, their secret and intent;
57
That may their number and their squadrons brave
Describe, and through their tents disguised mask:
Quoth Tancred, lo, a subtle squire I have,
A person fit to undertake this task,
A man, quick, ready, bold, sly to deceive,
To answer, wise; and well aduisde to ask;
Well languaged, and that with time and place
Can change his look, his voice, his gate, his grace.
58
Sent for he came, and when his lord him told
What Godfreyes pleasure was, and what his own;
He smilde, and said forthwith he gladly would,
I go quoth he, careless what chance be thrown,
And where encamped be these Pagans bold,
Will walk, in every tent a spy unknown,
Their camp even at noone day I enter shall,
And number all their horse and footmen all;
59
How great, how strong, how armed this army is,
And what their guide entendes, I will declare,
To me the secrets of that heart of his,
And hidden thoughts shall open lie and bare.
Thus Vafrine spoke, nor longer staid on this,
But for a mantle changd the cote he ware,
Nakte was his neck, and bout his forehead bold,
Of linen whitefull twenty yeards he rould;
60
His weapons were a Syrian bow and quiver,
His gestures barbarous, like the Turkish train,
Wondered all they that heard his tongue deliver
Of every land the language true and plain,
In Tite, a borne Phenician, by the river
Of Nile, a knight bred in The Egyptian maine,
Both people would have thought him, forth he rides
On a swift stead, ore hills and dales that glides.
61
But ere the third day came the French forth sent
Their pioners to eeu'n the rougher ways,
And ready made each warlike instrument,
Nor ought their labor interrupts or stays;
The nights in busy toil they likewise spent,
And with long eueninges lenghtned forth short days,
Till naught was left the hosts that hinder might,
To use their utmost power, and strength in fight.
62
That day, which of the assault the day foreronne,
The godly Duke in prayer spent welnie,
And all the rest, because they had misdonne,
The Sacrament receive, and mercy cry;
Then often the Duke his engines great begone
To show, where least he would their strength apply;
His foes reiois'd, deluded in that sort,
To see them bent against their surest port:
63
But after aided by the friendly night
His greatest engine to that side he brought,
Where plainest seemed the wall, where with their might
The flankers least could hurt them as they fought,
And to the Southren mountains greatest hight
To raise his turret old Raimondo sought;
And thou Camillo on that part had thine,
Where from the North the walls did Westward twine.
64
But when amid the Estren heaven appeared
The rising morning bright as shining glass,
The troubled Pagans saw, and seeing feared,
How the great tower stood not where late it was,
And here and there tofore unseen was reared,
Of timber strong a huge and fearful mas,
And numberless with beams, with roapes and strings
They view the iron rams, the brakes and slings.
65
The Syrian people now were no whit slow,
Their best defenses to that side to bear,
Where Godfrey did his greatest engine show,
From thence where late in vain they placed wear;
But he who at his back rightwell did know,
The host of Egypt to be proaching near,
To him called Guelfo, and the Roberts twain,
And said, on horseback look you still remain,
66
And have regard while all our people strive
To scale this wall, where weak it seems and thin,
Least unawares some sudden host arrive,
And at our backs vnlookte for war begin.
This said, three fierce assaults at once they give,
The hardy soldiers all would die or win,
And on three parts resistance makes the king,
And rage against strength, despair against hope does bring;
67
Himself upon his limbs with feeble eild
That shook, (vnweildie with their proper weight,)
His armor laid and long unused shield,
And marched against Raimond to the mountains height:
Great Soliman against Godfrey took the field,
Forenenst Camillo stood Argantes straight
Where Tancred strong he found, so fortune will,
That this good Prince his wonted foe shall kill.
68
The archers shot their arrows sharp and keen
Dipped in the bitter juice of poison strong,
The shadie face of heaven was scantly seen,
Hid with the clouds of shaftes and quarries long;
Yet weapons sharp with greater fury been,
Cast from the towers the Pagan troops among,
For thence flew stones and clifts of marble rocks,
Trees shod with iron, timber, logges and blocks.
69
A thunderbolt seemed every stone, it brake
His lims and armours so on whom it light,
That life and soul it did not only take,
But all his shape and face disfigured quight;
The lances stayed not in the wounds they make,
But through the gored body took their flight,
From side to side, through flesh, through skin and rind
They flew, and flying, left sad death behind.
70
But yet not all this force and fury drove
The Pagan people to forsake the wall,
But to revenge these deadly blows they strove,
With darts that fly, with stones and trees that fall;
For need so cowards often courageous prove,
For liberty they fight, for life and all,
And often with arrows, shaftes and stones that fly,
Give bitter answer to a sharp reply.
71
This while the fierce assailants never cease,
But sternly still maintain a threefold charge,
And against the clouds of shaftes draw nie at ease,
Under a pentise made of many a targe,
The armed towers close to the bulwarks prease,
And strive to grapple with the battled marge,
And lanch their bridges out, meane-while below
With iron fronts the rams the walls down throw.
72
Yet still Rinaldo unresolved went,
And far unworthy him this service thought,
If among the common sort his pains he spent;
Renown so got the Prince esteemed naught:
His angry looks on every side he bent,
And where most harm, most danger was he sought,
And where the wall high, strong and surest was,
That part would he assault, and that way pas.
73
And turning to the worthies him behind,
All hardy knights, whom Dudon late did guide,
O shame (quoth he) this wall no war does find,
When battred is elsewhere each part, each side;
All pain is safety to a valiant mind,
Each way is eath to him that dares abide,
Come let us scale this wall, though strong and hie,
And with your shieldes keep off the darts that fly:
74
With him united all while thus he spoke,
Their targets hard above their heads they threw,
Which joined in one an iron pentise make,
That from the dreadful storm preserved the crew,
Defended thus their speedy course they take,
And to the wall without resistance drew,
For that strong penticle protected well
The knights, from all that flew and all that fell.
75
Against the fort Rinaldo began vpreare
A ladder huge, an hundredth steps of hight,
And in his arm the same did easlie bear,
And move, as winds do reeds or rushes light,
Sometime a tree, a rock, a dart, or spear,
Fell from above, yet forward clombe the knight,
And upward fearelesse preased, careless still,
Though mount Olympus fell or Ossa hill:
76
A mount of ruins, and of shaftes a wood
Upon his shoulders and his shield he bore,
One hand the ladder held whereon he stood,
The other bare his targe his face before;
His hardy troop, by his ensample good
Prouokt, with him the place assaulted sore,
And ladders long against the wall they clappe,
Unlike in courage yet, unlike in hap:
77
One did, an other fell, he forward went,
And these he comforts, and he threatens those,
Now with his hand outstrecht the battlement
Welnie he reached, when all his armed foes
Ran thither, and their force and fury bent
To throw him headlong down, yet up he goes,
A wondrous thing, one knight whole armed bands
Alone, and hanging in the air, withstands:
78
Withstands, and forces his great strength so far,
That like a palm whereon huge weight does rest,
His forces so resisted stronger arre,
His virtues higher rise the more oppressed,
Till all that would his entrance bold debar
He backewarde drove, vpleaped, and possessed
The wall, and safe and easy with his blade,
To all that after came, the passage made,
79
There killing such as durst and did withstand,
To noble Eustace that was like to fall,
He reached forth his friendly conquering hand,
And next himself helped him to mount the wall.
This while Godfredo and his people fand
Their lives to greater harms and dangers thrall,
For there not man with man, nor knight with knight
Contend, but engines there with engines fight.
80
For in that place the Paynims reared a post,
Which late had served some gallant ship for mast,
And over it another beam they crossed,
Pointed with iron sharp, to it made fast
With ropes, which as men would the dormant tossed,
Now out, now in, now back, now forward cast,
In his swift pullies often the men withdrew
The tree, and often the riding balke forth threw:
81
The mighty beam redoubled often his blows,
And with such force the engine smote and hit,
That her broad side the tower wide open throws,
Her ioints were broke, her rafters cleft and split;
But yet against every hap whence mischief grows
Prepared, the piece (against such extremes made fit)
Lanch forth two sithes, sharp, cutting, long and broad,
And cut the ropes whereon the engine road:
82
As an oulde rock, which age or stormy wind
Tears from some craggie hill or mountain steep,
Does break, does bruise, and into dust does grind
Woods, houses, hamlets, herds, and fould of sheep;
So fell the beam, and down with it all kind
Of arms, of weapons, and of men did sweep,
Wherewith the towers once or twice did shake,
Trembled the walls, the hills and mountains quake.
83
Victorious Godfrey boldly forward came,
And had great hope even then the place to win;
But lo a fire, with stinch, with smoke, and flame,
Withstood his passage, stopped his entrance in:
Such burnings Etna yet could never frame,
When from her entrals hot her fires begin,
Nor yet in summer on the Indian plain
Such vapors warm, from scorching air, down rain.
84
There balls of wild fire, there fly burning spears,
This flame was black, that blew; this red as blood;
Stinch welnie choaketh them, noise deafes their ears,
Smoke blindes their eyes, fire kindles on the wood;
Nor those raw hides which for defense it wears,
Could save the tower, in such distress it stood;
For now they wrinkle, now it sweates and fries,
Now burns, unless some help come down from skies.
85
The hardy Duke before his folk abides,
Nor changed he color, countenance or place,
But comforts those that from the scaldred hides,
With water strove th'approching flames to chase:
In these extremes the Prince and those he guides
Half roasted stood before fierce Vulcans face,
When lo a sudden and unlooked for blast,
The flames against the kindlers backward cast:
86
The winds drove back the fire where heaped lie
The Pagans weapons, where their engines wear,
Which kindling quickly in that substance dry,
Burnt all their store and all their warlike gear:
O glorious captain! whom the Lord from hie
Defends, whom God preserues, and holds so dear;
For thee heaven fights, to thee the winds (from far,
Called with thy trumpets blast) obedient arre.
87
But wicked Ismen to his harm that saw,
How the fierce blast drove back the fire and flame,
By art would nature change, and thence withdraw
Those noisome winds, else calm and still the same;
Twixt two false Wizards without fear or aw
Upon the walls in open sight he came,
Black, grisly, loathsome, grim and ougly faced,
Like Pluto old, betwixt two furies placed;
88
And now the wretch those dreadful words begun,
Which tremble make deep hell and all her flock,
Now troubled is the air, the golden sun
His fearful beams in clouds did close and lock,
When from the tower (which Ismen could not shun)
Out flew a mighty stone, late half a rock,
Which light so just upon the Wizards three,
That driu'n to dust their bones and bodies be.
89
To less than naught their members old were torn,
And shiuer'd were their heads to pieces small,
As small, as are the bruised grains of corn,
When from the mill resolved to meal they fall;
Their damned souls to deepest hell down borne
(Far from the joy and light celestial)
The furies plunged in the infernal lake,
O mankind! at their ends ensample take.
90
This while the engine which the tempest could,
Had saved from burning with his friendly blast,
Approached had so near the battred hold,
That on the walls her bridge at ease she cast:
But Soliman ran thither fierce and bold,
To cut the planke whereon the Christians past,
And had performed his will, save that vpreard
High in the skies a turret new appeard;
91
Far in the air up clombe the fortress tall
Higher than house, then steeple, church or tower;
The Pagans trembled to behold the wall,
And city subject to her shot and power;
Yet kept the Turk his stand, though on him fall
Of stones and darts a sharp and deadly shower,
And still to cut the bridge, he hopes and strives,
And those that fear, with cheerful speech reuiues.
92
The Angel Michaell to all the rest
Unseen, appeared before Godfredoes eyes,
In pure and heavenly armor ritchly dressed,
Brighter than Titans rays in cleerest skies;
Godfrey (quoth he) this is the moment blessed
To free this town that long in bondage lies,
See, see what legions in thine aid I bring,
For heaven assists thee, and heavens glorious king:
93
Lift up thine eyes and in the air behold
The sacred armies, how they mustred be,
That cloud of flesh in which from times of old
All mankind wrapped is, I take from thee,
And from thy senses their thick mist unfold,
That face to face thou may these spirits see,
And for a little space, right well sustain
Their glorious light, and view those angels plain.
94
Behold the souls of every Lord and knight
That late bore arms and did for Christ's dear sake,
How on thy side against this town they fight,
And of thy joy and conquest will partake:
There where the dust and smoke blind all men's sight,
Where stones and ruins such an heap do make,
There Hugo fights, in thickest cloud imbard,
And undermines that bulwarks groundworke hard.
95
See Dudon yonder, who with sword and fire
Assailes and helps to scale the northren port,
That with bold courage does thy folk inspire,
And reares their ladders against th'assaulted fort:
He that high on the mount in grave attire
Is clad, and crowned stands in kingly sort,
Is Bishop Ademare, a blessed spirit,
Blessed for his faith, crowned for his death and merit.
96
But higher lift thy happy eyes, and view
Where all the sacred hosts of heaven appear;
He looked, and saw where winged armies flew,
Innumerable, pure, divine, and clear;
A battle round of squadrons three they show,
And all by threes those squadrons ranged wear,
Which spreading wide in rings, still wider go,
Moved with a stone, calm water circleth so.
97
With that he winkte and vanished was and gone
That wondrous vision when he looked again,
His worthies fighting vew'd he one by one,
And on each side saw signs of conquest plain,
For with Rinaldo against his yielding fone,
His knights were entered and the Pagans slain.
This seen, the Duke no longer stay could brook,
But from the bearer bold his ensign took:
98
And on the bridge he stepped, but there was staid
By Soliman, who entrance all denide,
That narrow tree to virtue great was maid,
The field as in few blows right soon was tried,
Here will I give my life for Sions aid,
Here will I end my days, the Sultan cride,
Behind me cut, or break this bridge, that I
May kill a thousand Christians first, then die.
99
But thither fierce Rinaldo threatening went,
And at his sight fled all the Soldans train,
What shall I do? if here my life be spent,
I spend and spill (quoth he) my blood in vain:
With that his steps from Godfrey back he bent,
And to him let the passage free remain,
Who threatening followed as the Sultan fled,
And on the walls the purple cross dispred,
100
About his head he tossed, he turned, he cast
That glorious ensign, with a thousand twines,
Thereon the wind breathes with his sweetest blast,
Thereon with golden rays glad Phoebus shines,
Earth laughes for joy, the streams forbear their have,
Floods clap their hands, on mountains dance the pines,
And Sions towers and sacred temples smile,
For their deliu'rance from that bondage vile.
101
And now the armies reared the happy cry
Of victory, glad, joyful, loud and shrill,
The hills resound, the Echo showteth hie,
And Tancred bold that fights and combats still,
With proud Argantes, brought his tower so nie,
That on the wall, against the boasters will,
In his despite, his bridge he also laid,
And won the place, and there the cross displaid.
102
But on the southren hill (where Raimond fought,
Against the townsmen and their aged king)
His hardy Gascoignes gained small or naught;
Their engine to the walls they could not bring,
For thither all his strength the Prince had brought,
For life and safety sternly combatting,
And for the wall was feeblest on that cost,
There were his soldiers best, and engines most.
103
Besides, the tower upon that quarter found
Unsure, uneasy, and vneeu'n the way,
Nor art could help, but that the rougher ground
The rolling mass did often stop and stay;
But now of victory the joyful sound
The king and Raimond heard, amid their fray;
And by the showte they and their soldiers know,
The town was entered on the plain below.
104
Which heard, Raimondo thus bespake this crew,
The town is won (my friends) and does it yet
Resist? are we kept out still by these few?
Shall we no share in this high conquest get?
But from that part the king at last withdrew,
He strove in vain their entrance there to let,
And to a stronger place his folk he brought,
Where to sustain the assault a while he thought.
105
The conquerours at once now entered all,
The walls were won, the gates were opened wide,
Now bruised, broken down, destroyed fall
The ports, and towers, that battrie durst abide;
Rages the sword, death murdreth great and small,
And proud twixt woe and horror sad does tide,
Here ronnes the blood, in ponds there stands the gore,
And drownes the knights in whom it lived before.
The nineteenth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
Tancred in single combat killes his foe
Argantes strong: the king and Seldan fly
To David's tower and save their persons so:
Erminia well instructs Vafrine the spy,
With him she rides away, and as they go
Finds where her Lord for dead on earth does lie;
First she laments, then cures him: Godfrey hears
Ormondocs treason and what marks he bears.
1
NOW death, or fear, or care to save their lives,
From their forsaken walls the Pagans chase:
Yet neither force, nor fear, nor wisdom drives
The constant knight Argantes, from his place;
Alone, against ten thousand foes he strives,
Yet dreedlesse, doubtless, careless seemed his face,
Not death, not danger, but disgrace he fears,
And still unconquered (though oreset) appears.
2
But among the rest upon his helmet gay
With his broad sword Tancredic came and smote:
The Pagan knew the Prince by his array,
By his strong blows, his armor and his cote;
For once they fought, and when night staid that fray,
New time they chose to end their combat hot,
But Tancred failed, wherefore the Pagan knight
Cride, (Tancred) come thou thus, thus late to fight?
3
Too late thou come and not alone to war,
But yet the fight I neither shun nor fear,
Although from knighthood true thou errest far,
Since like an enginer thou do appear,
That tower, that troop, thy shield and safety arre,
Strange kind of arms in single fight to bear;
Yet shall thou not escape (O conqu'rer strong
Of Ladies fair) sharp death, to venge that wrong.
4
Lord Tancred smiled, with disdain and scorn,
And answered thus, to end our strife (quoth he)
Behold at last I come, and my return
(Though late) perchance will be too soon for thee;
For thou shall wish (of hope and help forlorn)
Some sea or mountain plast twixt thee and me,
And well shall know before we end this fray,
No fear or cowardice has caused my stay.
5
But come aside thou, by whose prowess dies
The monsters, knights and giants in all lands,
The killer of weak women thee defies.
This said, he turned to his fighting bands
And bids them all retire, forbear he cries
To strike this knight, on him let none lay hands;
For mine he is (more than a common fo)
By challenge new and promise old also.
6
Descend (the fierce Circassian began reply)
Alone, or all this troop for succor take
To deserts waste, or place frequented hie,
For vantage none I will the fight forsake:
Thus given and taken was the bold defy,
And through the prease (agreed so) they brake,
Their hatred made them one, and as they wend
Each knight his foe did for despite defend.
7
Great was his thirst of praise, great the desire
That Tancred had the Pagans blood to spill,
Nor could that quench his wrath, or calm his ire,
If other hand his foe should foil or kill,
He saved him with his shield, and cride retire
To all he met, and do this knight none ill:
And thus defending against his friends his foe,
Through thousand angry weapons safe they go.
8
They left the city, and they left behind
Godfredoes camp, and far beyond it past,
And came where into creekes and bosoms blind
A winding hill his corners turned and cast,
A valley small and shadie dale they find,
Amid the mountains steep so laid and plast,
As it some Theater or closed place
Had been, for men to fight, or beasts to chase,
9
There stayed the champions both, with ruefull eyes
Argantes began the fortress won to view;
Tancred his foe withouten shield espies,
And far away his target therefore threw,
And said, whereon does thy sad heart deuies?
Think thou this hour must end thy life untrue?
If this thou fear, and do foresee thy fate,
Thy fear is vain, thy foresight comes too late.
10
I think (quoth he) on this distressed town,
The aged Queen of Iudaies ancient land,
Now lost, now sacked, spoiled and trodden down,
Whose fall in vain I striued to withstand,
A small revenge for Sions fort orethrnowne
That head can be cut offby my strong hand;
This said, together with great heed they flew,
For each his foe for bold and hardy knew:
11
Tancred of body active was and light,
Quick, nimble, ready both of hand and fout:
But higher by the head the Pagan knight,
Of limbs far greater was, of heart as stout:
Tancred laid low and trauerst in his fight,
Now to his ward retired, now struck out,
Often with his sword his foes fierce blows he broake,
And rather chose to ward, than bear his stroke.
12
But bold, and boult upright Argantes fought,
Unlike in gesture, like in skill and art,
His sword out stretched before him far he brought;
Nor would his weapon touch, put pierce his heart,
To catch his point prince Tancred strove and sought,
But at his breast or helmes unclosed part
He threatened death, and would with stretched out brand
His entrance close, and fierce assaults withstand.
13
With a tall ship so does a gallie fight,
When the still winds stir not th'vnstable maine,
Where this in nimblenesse, as that in might,
Excels; that stands, this goes and comes again,
And shifts from prow to poope with turnings light;
Meanewhile the other does unmoved remain,
And on her numble foe approaches nie,
Her weighty engines tumbleth down from hie:
14
The christian sought to enter on his foe,
Voiding his point, which at his breast was bent;
Argantes at his face a thrust did throe,
Which while the prince awards, and does prevent,
His ready hand the Pagan turned so,
That all defense his quickenes far orewent,
And pierst his side, which done he said and smilde,
The craftsman is in his own craft beguilde:
15
Tancredie bit his lips for scorn and shame,
Nor longer stood on points of fence and skill,
But to revenge so fierce and fast he came,
As if his hand could not oretake his will,
And at his visour aiming just, began frame
To his proud boast an answer sharp, but still
Argantes broake the thrust; and at half sword,
Swift, hardy, bold, in stepped the christian lord.
16
With his left foot fast forward began he stride,
And with his left the Pagans right arm hent,
With his right hand meanewhile the man's right side
He cut, he wounded, mangled, tore, and rent,
To his victorious teacher (Tancred cride)
His conquered scholar has this answer sent;
Argantes chafed, struggled, turned and twind,
Yet could not so his captive arm unbind:
17
His sword at last he let hang by the chain,
And gripte his hardy foe in both his hands,
In his strong arms Tancred caught him again,
And thus each other held and wrapped in bands.
With greater might Alcides did not strain,
The giant Antheus on the Libian sands,
On holdfast knots their brawnie arms they cast,
And whom he hates most, each held embrast:
18
Such was their wrestling, such their shockes and throws,
That down at once they tumbled both to ground,
Argantes (were it hap or skill who knows)
His better hand loose and in freedom found;
But the good prince his hand more fit for blows
With his huge weight the Pagan vnderbound;
But he, his disadvantage great that knew,
Let go his hold, and on his feet vpflew:
19
Far flower rose th'vnweldie Saracine,
And caught a rappe ere he was reard upright.
But as against the blustering winds a pine
Now bends his top, now lifts his head on hight,
His courage so (when it began most decline)
The man r'enforced, and aduanst his might,
And with fierce change of blows renewd the fray,
Where rage, for skill: horror, for art bore sway.
20
The purple drops from Tancreds sides down railed,
But from the Pagan ran whole streams of blood,
Wherewith his force grew weak, his courage quailed,
As fires die which fuel want or food.
Tancred that saw his feeble arm now failed
To strike his blows, that scant he stirred or stood,
Asswagd his anger and his wrath alaid,
And stepping back, thus gently spoke and said.
21
Yield hardy knight, and chance of war, or me
Confess to have subdew'd thee in this fight,
I will no trophee, triumph, spoil of thee,
Nor glory wish, nor seek a victors right:
More terrible than erst, herewith grew he,
And all awakt, his fury, rage and might,
And said, dare thou of vantage speak or think?
Or move Argantes once to yield or shrink?
22
Use, use, thy vantage, thee and fortune both
I scorn, and punish will thy foolish pride:
As a hot brand flames most ere it forth go'th,
And dying blazeth bright on every side;
So he (when blood was lost) with anger wroth,
Revived his courage, when his puissance did,
And would his latest hour which now drew nie
Illustrate with his end, and nobly die;
23
He ioin'd his left hand to her sister strong,
And with them both let fall his weighty blade.
Tancred to ward his blow his sword up flong,
But that it smote aside, nor there it stade,
But from his shoulder to his side along
It glanst, and many wounds at once it made:
Yet Tancred feared naught, for in his heart,
Found coward dread no place, fear had no part.
24
His fearful blow he doubled, but he spent
His force in wast, and all his strength in vain:
For Tancred from the blow against him bent
Leaped aside, the stroke fell on the plain,
With thine own weight orethrowne to earth thou went
(Argantes stout) nor could thy self sustain,
Thy self thou threwest down, O happy man!
Upon whose fall none boast, or triumph can:
25
His gaping wounds the fall set open wide,
The streams of blood about him made a lake,
Helped with his left hand on one knee he tried
To rear himself, and new defense to make:
The courteous Prince stepped back, and yield thee, cride,
No hurt he profred him, no blow he struck.
Meane-while by stealth the Pagan false him gave
A sudden wound, threatening with speeches brave:
26
Herewith Tancredie furious grew, and said,
Villain, do thou my mercy so despies?
Therewith he thrust and thrust again his blade,
And through his ventall pierst his dazeled eyes:
Argantes did, yet no complaint he made,
But as he furious lived, he careless dies;
Bold, proud, disdainful, fierce and void of fear;
His motions last, last looks, last speeches wear.
27
Tancred put up his sword, and praises glad
Gave to his God, that saved him in this fight;
But yet this bloody conquest feebled had
So much the conquerours force, strength, and might,
That through the way he feared which homeward lad
He had not strength enough to walk upright;
Yet as he could his steps from thence he bent,
And foot by foot a heavy pace forth went;
28
His legs could bear him but a little stound,
And more he hastes (more tirde) less was his speed,
On his right hand, at last, laid on the ground
He leaned, his hand weak like a shaking reed,
Daz'led his eyes, the world on wheels ran round;
Day wrapped her brightness up in sable weed;
At length he swouned, and the victor knight
Naught diffred from his conquered foe in sight.
29
But while these Lords their private fight pursue,
Made fierce and cruel through their secret hate,
The victors ire destroi'd the faithless crew
From street to street, and chased from gate to gate.
But of the sacked town the image true
Who can describe? or paint the woeful state?
Or with fit words this spectacle express
Who can? or tell the cities great distress?
30
Blood, murder, death, each street, house, church defilde,
There heaps of flaine appear, there mountains hie;
There underneath th'vnburied hills vppilde
Of bodies dead, the living buried lie;
There the sad mother with her tender child
Does tear her tresses loose, complain, and fly,
And there the spoiler (by her Amber hair)
Draws to his lust the virgin chaste and fair.
31
But through the way that to the West hill yood,
Whereon the old and stately temple stands,
All soild with gore, and wet with lukewarm blood
Rinaldo run, and chased the Pagan bands,
Above their heads he heau'd his curtlax good,
Life in his grace, and death lay in his hands;
Nor helm nor target strong his blows off bears,
Best armed there seemed he, no arms that wears;
32
For against his armed foes he only bends
His force, and scorns the naked folk to wound;
Them whom no courage arms, no arms defends,
He chased with his looks, and dreedfull sound:
Oh, who can tell how far his force extends?
How these he scorns, threats those, lays them on ground?
How with unequal harm, with equal fear
Fled all, all that well armed or naked wear,
33
Fast fled the people weak, and with the same
A squadron strong is to the temple gone,
Which burnt and builded often, still keeps the name
Of the first founder, wise king Salomone,
That Prince this stately house did whilome frame
Of Cedar trees, of gold and marble stone;
Now not so rich, yet strong and sure it was,
With turrets hie, thick walls, and doors of bras.
34
The knight arrived where in warlike sort
The men that ample church had fortified,
And closed found each wicket, gate and port,
And on the top defenses ready spied,
He lift his frowning looks and twice that fort
From his high top down to the groundworke eied,
And entrance sought, and twice with his swift fout
The mighty place he measured about.
35
Like as a Wolf about the closed fold
Rangeth by night his hoped pray to get,
Enraged with hunger, and with malice old,
Which kind twixt him and harmless sheep has set:
So searched he high and low about that hold,
Where he might enter without stop or let,
In the great court he stayed, his foes above
Attend the assault, and would their fortune prove.
36
There lay by chance a posted tree therebie,
Kept for some needful use, what ere it were,
The armed galleys not so thick nor hie
Their tall and lofty masts at Genes vpreare;
This beam the knight against the gates made fly
From his strong hands, all weights which lift and bear,
Like a light lance the tree he shook and tossed,
And brus'd the gate, the threshold, and the post.
37
No marble stone, no metal strong outbore
The wondrous might, of that redoubled blow,
The brazen henges from the walls it tore,
It breoke the locks, and laid the doors down low,
No iron tamme, no engine could do more,
Nor cannons great that thunderbolts forth throw,
His people like a flowing stream inthrong,
And after them entered the victor strong;
38
The woeful slaughter black and loathsome maid
That house, sometime the sacred house of God,
O heavenly justice! if thou be delaid
On wretched sinners sharper falls thy rod,
In them this place profaned which inuaid
Thou kindled ire, and mercy all forbod,
Until with their heart bloods the Pagans vile
This temple washed, which they did late defile.
39
But Soliman this while himself fast sped
Up to the fort, which David's tower is named,
And with him all the soldiers left he led,
And against each entrance new defenses framed:
The tyrant Aladine eeke thither fled,
To whom the Sultan thus (far off) exclamed,
Come, come, renowned king, up to this rock,
Thy self, within this fortress safe vplocke:
40
For well this fortress shall thee and thy crown
Defend, awhile here may we safe remain.
Alas (quoth he) alas, for this fair town,
Which cruel war beats down eeu'n with the plain,
My life is done, mine empire trodden down,
I raind, I lived, but now nor live nor rain;
For now (alas) behold the fatal hour,
That ends our lives, and ends our kingly power.
41
Where is your virtue, where your wisdom grave,
And courage stout? the angry Sultan said,
Let chance our kingdoms take which erst she gave;
Yet in our hearts our kingly worth is laid;
But come and in this fort your person save,
Refresh your weary limbs and strength decaid:
Thus counseld he and did to saftie bring,
Within that fort the weak and aged king.
42
His iron mace in both his hands he hent,
And on his thigh his trusty sword he tide,
And to the entrance fierce and fearlesse went,
And kept the strait, and all the French defide:
The blows were mortal which he gave or lent,
For whom he hit he slew, else by his side
Laid low on earth, that all fled from the place
Where they beheld that great and dreedfull mace.
43
But old Raimondo with his hardy crew
By chance came thither, to his great mishap,
To that defended path the old man flew,
And scorned his blows and him that kept the gap,
He stroke his foe, his blow no blood forth drew,
But on the front with that he caught a rap,
Which in a swoune, low in the dust him laid,
Wide open, trembling, with his arms displaid.
44
The Pagans gathred heart at last, though fear
Their courage weak had put to flight but late,
So that the conquerours repulsed wear,
And beaten back, else slain before the gate:
The Sultan (among the dead beside him near
That saw Lord Raimond lie in such estate)
Cride to his men, within these bars (quoth he)
Come draw this knight, and let him captive be.
45
Forward they rusht to execute his word,
But hard and dangerous that emprise they found,
For none of Raimonds men forsook their Lord,
But to their guides defense they flocked round,
Thence fury fights, hence pity draws the sword,
Nor strive they for vile cause, or on light ground,
The life and freedom of that champion brave,
Those spoil, these would preserve, those kill, these save.
46
But yet at last (if they had longer fought)
The hardy Soldane would have won the field;
For against his thundering mace auailed naught
Or helm of temper fine, or seu'nfold shield:
But from each side great succor now was brought
To his weak foes, now fit to faint and yield,
And both at once to aid and help the same
The sovereign Duke and young Rinaldo came.
47
As when a shepherd, raging round about
That sees a storm with wind, hail, thunder, rain,
(When gloomy clouds have days bright eye put out)
His tender flocks drives from the open plain,
To some thick grove or mountains shadie fout,
Where heavens fierce wrath they may unhurt sustain,
And with his hook, his whistle and his cries
Drives forth his fleecie charge, and with them flies:
48
So fled the Sultan, when he began descrie
This tempest come from angry war forth cast,
The armours clashte and lightened against the sky,
And from each side swords, weapons, fire out brast:
He sent his folk up to the fortress hie,
To shun the furious storm, himself staid last,
Yet to the danger he gave place at length,
For wit, his courage; wisdom, ruled his strength.
49
But scant the knight was safe the gate within,
Scant closed were the doors, when having broake
The bars, Rinaldo does assault begin
Against the port, and on the wicket stroke
His matchless might, his great desire to win,
His oath and promise, does his wrath prouoake,
For he had sworn (nor should his word be vain)
To kill the man that had Prince Sweno slain.
50
And now his armed hand that castle great
Would have assaulted, and had shortly won,
Nor safe pardie the Sultan there a seat
Had found his fatal foes sharp wrath to shonne,
Had not Godfredo sounded the retreat;
For now dark shades to shroud the earth begone,
Within the town the Duke would lodge that night
And with the morn renew the assault and fight.
51
With cheerful look thus to his folk he said,
High God has helped well his children dear,
This work is done, the rest this night delai'd
Does little labor bring, less doubt, no fear,
This tower (our foes weak hope and latest aid)
We conquer will, when sun shall next appear:
Meane-while with love and tender ruth go see
And comfort those which hurt and wounded be;
52
Go cure their wounds which boldly ventured
Their lives, and spilt their bloods to get this hold,
That fitteth more this host for Christ forth led,
Then thirst of vengeance, or desire of gold;
Too much (ah) too much blood this day is shed!
In some we too much haste to spoil behold,
But I command no more you spoil and kill,
And let a trumpet publish forth my will;
53
This said, he went where Raimond panting lay,
Wakt from the swonne wherein he late had been.
Nor Soliman with countenance less gay
Bespake his troops, and kept his grief unseen;
My friends, you are unconquered this day,
In spite of fortune, still our hope is green,
For underneath great shows of harm and fear,
Our dangers small, our losses little wear:
54
Burnt are your houses, and your people slain,
Yet safe your town is, though your walls be gone,
For in your selves and in your sovereign
Consists your city, not in lime and stone;
Your king is safe, and safe is all his train,
In this strong fort defended from their fone,
And on this empty conquest let them bost,
Till with this town again, their lives be lost;
55
And on their heads the loss at last will light,
For with good fortune proud and insolent,
In spoil and murder spend they day and night,
In riot, drinking, lust and rauishment,
And may amid their praves with little fight
At ease be overthrown, killed, slain and spent,
If in this carelessness The Egyptian host
Upon them fall, which now draws near this coast.
56
Meane-while the highest buildings of this town
We may shake down with stones, about their ears,
And with our darts and spears from engines thrown,
Command that hill Christ's sepulcher that bears:
Thus comforts he their hopes and hearts cast down,
Awakes their valors, and exiles their fears.
But while these things hapt thus, Vafrino goes
Unknown, amid ten thousand armed foes.
57
The sun nie set had brought to end the day,
When Vafrine went the Pagan host to spy,
He past unknown a close and secret way;
A traveler, false, cunning, crafty, sly,
Past Ascalon he saw the morning gray
Step ore the threshold of the Estren sky,
And ere bright Titan, half his course had run,
That camp, that mighty host to show begun.
58
Tents infinite and standards broad he spies,
This red, that white, that blew, this purple was,
And hears strange toongs, and stranger harmornies
Of trumpets, clarions, and well sounding bras:
The Elephant there braies, the Camel cries;
The horses neigh as to and fro they pas:
Which seen and heard, he said within his thought,
Hither all Asia is, all Affricke, brought.
59
He viewed the camp awhile, her site and seat,
What ditch, what trench it had, what rampire strong,
Nor close, nor secret ways to work his feat
He longer sought, nor hid him from the throng;
But entered through the gates, broad, royal, great,
And of he asked, and answered often among,
In questions wise, in answers short and sly;
Bold was his look, eyes quick, front lifted hie:
60
On every side he pried here and theare,
And marked each way, each passage and each tent:
The knights he notes, their steads, and arms they bear;
Their names, their armours and their government,
And greater secrets hopes to learn, and hear
Their hidden purpose, and their close intent:
So long he walked and wandered, till he spide
The way t'approach the great Pauilions side;
61
There as he lookte, he saw the canuasse rent,
Through which the voice found eath and open way,
From the close lodgings of the regal tent,
And inmost closet, where the captain lay;
So that if Emireno spoke, forth went
They sound to them that listen what they say,
There Vafrine watched, and those that saw him thought
To mend the breach, that there he stood and wrought.
62
The captain great within bare headed stood,
His body armed and clad in purple weed;
Two Pages bore his shield and helmet good,
He leaning on a bending lance, gave heed
To a big man, whose looks were fierce and prood,
With whom he parled of some haughty deed,
Godfredoes name as Vafrine watched he hard,
Which made him give more heed, take more regard:
63
Thus spoke the Chieftaine to that surly sire,
Art thou so sure that Godfrey shall be slain?
I am (quoth he) and swear nere to retire
(Except he first be killed) to court again,
I will prevent those that with me conspire:
Nor other guerdon ask I for my pain,
But that I may hang up his harness brave
At Caire, and under them these words engraue,
64
These arms Ormondo took in noble fight
From Godfrey proud, that spoiled all Asias lands,
And with them took his life, and here on hight
(In memory thereof) this trophie stands.
The Duke replide, nere shall that deed (bold knight)
Pass unrewarded at our sou'raignes hands,
What thou demaundest shall he gladly grant,
Nor gold nor guerdon shall thou wish, or want.
65
Those counterfeited armours than prepare,
Because the day of fight approaches fast,
They ready are (quoth he:) then both forbear
From further talk, these speeches were the last.
Vafrine (these great things heard) with grief and care
Remained astound, and in his thoughts often cast
What treason false this was, how feigned wear
Those arms, but yet that doubt he could not clear.
66
From thence he parted, and broad waking lay
All that long night, nor slumbred once nor slept:
But when the camp by peep of springing day
Their banners spread, and knights on horseback lept,
With them he marched forth in meet array,
And where they pitched, lodged, and with them kept,
And then from tent to tent he stalkt about,
To hear and see, and learn this secret out;
67
Searching about on a rich throne he fand
Armida set, with dames and knights around,
Sullen she sat, and sighed, it seemd she scand
Some weighty matters in her thoughts profound,
Her rosy cheek leand on her lilly hand,
Her eyes (loves twinkling stars) she bent to ground,
Weep she, or no, he knows not, yet appears
Her humid eyes even great with child with tears.
68
He saw before her set Adrastus grim,
That seemed scant to live, move, or respire,
So was he fixed on his mistres trim,
So gazed he, and fed his fond desire;
But Tisiperne beheld now her, now him,
And quakte, sometime for love, sometime for ire,
And in his cheeks the color went and came,
For their wrathes fire now burnt, now shone loves flame.
69
Then from the garland fair of virgins bright,
(Among whom he lay enclosd) rose Altamore,
His hot desire he hid and kept from sight,
His looks were ruld by Cupids crafty lore,
His left eye viewd her hand, her face; his right
Both watched her beauties hid, and secret store,
And entrance found where her thin veil bewraid
The milken way between her breasts that laid.
70
Her eyes Armida lift from earth at last,
And cleard again her front and visage sad,
Midst clouds of woe her looks which ouercast
She lightened forth a smile, sweet, pleasant, glad;
My Lord (quoth she) your oath and promise past,
Has freed my heart of all the griefs it had,
That now in hope of sweet revenge it lives,
Such joy, such ease, desired vengeance gives.
71
Cheer up thy looks (answered the Indian king)
And for sweet beauties sake, appease thy woe,
Cast at your feet ere you expect the thing,
I will present the head of thy strong foe;
Else shall this hand his person captive bring
And cast in prison deep, he boasted so.
His rival heard him well, yet answered naught,
But bit his lips, and grieved in secret thought.
72
To Tisiphern the damsel turning right,
And what say you, my noble lord? (quoth she)
He taunting said, I, that am slow to fight
Will follow far behind, the worth to see
Of this your terrible and puissant knight,
In scornful words this bitter scoff gave he.
Good reason (quoth the king) thou come behind,
Nor ere compare thee with the prince of Inde.
73
Lord Tisiphernes shook his head, and said,
Oh had my power free like my courage been,
Or had I liberty to use this blade,
Who slow, who weakest is, soon should be seen,
Nor thou, nor thy great vants make me afraid,
But cruel love I fear, and this fair queen.
This said, to challenge him the king forth lept,
But up their mistress start and twixt them stepped:
74
Will you thus rob me of that gift (quoth she)
Which each has vowed to giueby word and oath?
You are my champions, let that title be
The bond of love and peace, between you both;
He that displeasd is, is displeasd with me,
For which of you is grieud, and I not wroth?
Thus warnd she them, their hearts (for ire nie broake)
In forced peace and rest, thus bore loves yoke.
75
All this heard Vafrine as he stood beside,
And having learned the troth, he left the tent,
That treason was against the christians guide
Contriud, he wist, yet wist not how it went,
By words, and questions far off, he tried
To find the truth, more difficult, more bent
Was he to know it, and resolud to die,
Or of that secret close th'entent to spy.
76
Of sly intelligence he proved all ways,
All crafts, all wiles, that in his thoughts abid,
Yet all in vain the man by wit assaies,
To know that false compact and practice hid:
But chance (what wisdom could not tell) bewraies,
Fortune of all his doubt the knots undid,
So that prepared for Godfreies last mishappe
(At ease) he found the net, and spide the trappe.
77
Thither he turned again, where seated was
The angry lover, twixt her friends and lords,
For in that troop much talk he thought would pas,
Each great assembly store of news affords,
He sided there a lusty lovely las,
And with some courtly terms the wench he bords,
He faines acquaintance, and as bold appears
As he had known that virgin twenty years:
78
He said, would some sweet lady grace me so,
To choose me for her champion, friend, and knight,
Proud Godfreies or Rinaldoes head (I troe)
Should feel the sharpnes of my curtlax bright;
Ask me the head (fair mistress) of some foe,
For to your beauty vowed is my might,
So he began, and meant in speeches wise
Further to wade, but thus he brake the ise:
79
Therewith he smild, and smiling began to frame
His looks, so to their old and native grace,
That toward him another virgin came,
Heard him, beheld him, and with bashful face
Said, for thy mistress choose no other dame
But me, on me thy love and service place,
I take thee for my champion, and apart
Would reason with thee, if my knight thou art.
80
Withdrawn, she thus began, Vafrine (pardie)
I know thee well, and me thou know of old,
To his last trumpe this drove the subtle spy,
But smiling toward her he turned him bold,
Nere that I wot I saw thee erst with eye,
Yet for thy worth all eyes should thee behold,
Thus much I know right well, for from the same
Which erst you gave me diffrent is my name.
81
My mother bore me near Bisertas wall,
Her name was Lesbine, mine is Almansore:
I knew long since (quoth she) what men thee call,
And thine estate, dissemble it no more,
From me thy friend hide not thy self at all,
If I bewraie thee let me die therefore,
I am Erminia, daughter to a prince,
But Tancreds slave, thy fellow servant since;
82
Two happy months within that prison kind,
Under thy guard, reioiced I to dwell,
And thee a keeper meek and good did find,
The same, the same I am; behold me well.
The squire her lovely beauty called to mind,
And marked her visage fair: from thee expel
All fear (she says) for me live safe and sure,
I will thy safety, not thy harm procure.
83
But yet I pray thee (when thou do return)
To my dear prison lead me home again;
For in this hateful freedom eau'n and morn
I sigh for sorrow, mourn and weep for pain:
But if to spy perchance thou here soiorne,
Great hap thou have, to know their secrets plain,
For I their treasons false, false trains, can say,
Which few beside can tell, none will bewray.
84
On her he gazd, and silent stood this while,
Armidas sleights he knew, and trains unjust,
Women have toongs of craft, and hearts of guile,
They will, they will not, fools that on them trust,
For in their speech, is death; hell, in their smile;
At last he said, if hence depart you lust,
I will you guide, on this conclude we hear,
And further speech, till fitter time, forbear.
85
Forthwith (ere thence the camp remove) to ride
They were resolved, their flight that season fits,
Vafrine departs, she to the dames beside
Returns, and there on thorns awhile she sits,
Of her new knight she talks, till time and tide
To escape vnmarkt she find, then forth she gits,
Thither where Vafrine her unseen abode,
There took she horse, and from the camp they rode.
86
And now in deserts waste and wild arrived,
Far from the camp, far from resort and sight,
Vafrine began, against Godfreies life contrived
The false compacts and trains unfold aright:
Then she those treasons (from their spring derived)
Repeats, and brings their hid deceits to light,
Eight knights she says, (all courtiers brave) there arre,
(But Ormond strong, the rest surpasses far)
87
These (whether hate or hope of gain them move)
Conspired have, and framed their treason so,
That day when Emiren by fight shall prove
To win lost Asia from his christian foe,
These, with the cross scor'd on their arms above,
And armd like Frenchmen, will disguised go,
Like Godfreies guard that gould and white do wear,
Such shall their habit be, and such their gear:
88
Yet each will bear a token in his crest,
That so their friends for Pagans may them know:
But in close fight when all the soldiers best
Shall mingled be, to give the fatal blow,
They will creep near, and pierce Godfredoes breast,
While of his faithful guard they bear false show,
And all their swords are dipped in poison strong,
Because each wound shall bring sad death ere long.
89
And for their chiefetaine wist I knew your guize,
What garments, ensigns, and what arms you carry,
Those feigned arms he forced me to deuize,
So that from yours but small or naught they varrie:
But these unjust commands my thoughts despize,
Within their camp therefore I list not tarry,
My heart abhorres I should this hand defile
With spot of treason, or with act of guile.
90
This is the cause, but not the cause alone:
And there she ceast, and blushed, and on the maine
Cast down her eyes, these last words scant outgone,
She would have stopped, nor durst pronounce them plain,
The squire, what she conceald, would know, as one
That from her breast her secret thoughts could strain,
Of little faith (quoth he) why would thou hide
Those causes true, from me thy squire and guide?
91
With that she fecht a sigh, sad, sore, and deep,
And from her lips her words slow, trembling came,
Fruitless (she said) untimely, hard to keep,
Vain modesty farewell, and farewell shame,
Why hope you restless love to bring on sleep?
Why strive your fires to quench sweet Cupids flame?
No, no, such cares, and such respects beseem
Great Ladies, wandering maids them naught esteem.
92
That night, fatal to me and Antioch town,
Then made a pray to her commanding foe,
My loss was greater than was seen or known,
There ended not, but thence began my woe:
Light was the loss of friends, of Realm or crown;
But with my state, I lost my self also,
Nere to be found again, for then I lost
My wit, my sense, my heart, my soul almost.
93
Through fire and sword, through blood and death (Vafrine)
(Which all my friends did burn, did kill, did chase)
Thou know I run to thy dear Lord and mine,
When first he entered had my fathers place,
And kneeling with salt tears in my swollen eine;
Great Prince (quoth I) grant mercy, pity, grace,
Save not my kingdom, not my life I said,
But save mine honor, let me die a maid.
94
He lift me by the trembling hand from ground,
Nor staide he till my humble speech was done;
But said, a friend and keeper have thou found
(Fair virgin) nor to me in vain you run:
A sweetness strange from that sweet voices sound
Pierced my heart, my breasts weak fortress won,
Which creeping through my bosom soft, became
A wound, a sickness, and a quenchlesse flame.
95
He visits me, with speeches kind and grave
He sought to ease my griefs, and sorrows smart:
He said, I give thee liberty, recaue
All that is thine, and at thy will depart:
Alas, he robbed me when he thought he gave,
Free was Erminia: but captived her heart,
Mine was the body, his the soul and mind,
He gave the cage, but kept the bird behind.
96
But who can hide desire, or love suppress?
Often of his worth with thee in talk I strove,
Thou (by my trembling fit that well could guess
What fever held me) said, thou art in love;
But I denaid, for what can maids do less?
And yet my sighs thy sayings true did prove,
In stead of speech, my looks, my tears, mine eyes,
Told in what flame, what fire, thy mistress fries.
97
Unhappy silence, well I might have told
My woes, and for my harms have sought relief,
Since now my pains and plaints I utter bold,
Where none that hears can help or ease my grief:
From him I parted, and did close vpfold
My wounds within my bosom, death was chief
Of all my hopes and helps, till loves sweet flame
Plucked off the bridle of respect and shame,
98
And caused me ride to seek my Lord and knight,
For he that made me sick could make me sound:
But on an ambush I mischanst to light
Of cruel men, in armor clothed round,
Hardly I escaped their hands by mature flight,
And fled to wilderness and desert ground,
And there I lived in groves and forests wild,
With gentle grooms and shepherds daughters mild.
99
But when hot love, which fear had late suppressed,
Revived again, there nould I longer sit,
But rode the way I came, nor ere took rest,
Till on like danger, like mishap I hit,
A troop to forage and to spoil addressed,
Encountered me, nor could I fly from it:
Thus was I taken, and those that had me cought
Egyptians were, and me to Gaza brought,
100
And for a present to their captain gave,
Whom I entreated and besought so well,
That he mine honor had great care to save,
And since with fair Armida let me dwell.
Thus taken often, escaped often I have,
Ah, see what haps I past, what dangers fell,
So often captive, free so often again,
Still my first bands I keep, still my first chain.
101
And he that did this chain so surely bind
About my heart, which none can loose but he,
Let him not say, go (wandering damsel) find
Some other home, thou shall not bide with me,
But let him welcome me with speeches kind,
And in my wonted prison set me free:
Thus spoke the Princess, thus she and her guide
Talked day and night, and on their journey ride,
102
Through the high ways Vafrino would not pas,
A path more secret, safe and short, he knew,
And now close by the cities wall he was,
When sun was set, night in the East vpflew,
With drops of blood besmeerd he found the gras,
And saw where lay a warrior murdered new,
That all bebled the ground, his face to skies
He turns, and seems to threat, though dead he lies:
103
His harness and his habit both bewraid
He was a Pagan, forward went the squire,
And saw whereas another champion laid
Dead on the land, all soild with blood and mire,
This was some Christian knight Vafrino said;
And marking well his arms and rich attire,
He loosed his helm, and saw his visage plain,
And cride, alas, here lies Tancredie slain!
104
The woeful virgin tarried, and gave heed
To the fierce looks of that proud Saracine,
Till that high cry (full of sad fear and dreed)
Pierst through her heart with sorrow, grief and pine,
At Tancreds name thither she ran with speed,
Like one half mad, or drunk with too much wine,
And when she saw his face, pale, bloodlesse, dead,
She lighted, nay, she tumbled from her stead:
105
Her springs of tears she loses forth, and cries
Hither why bringst thou me, ah fortune blind?
Where dead (for whom I lived) my comfort lies,
Where war, for peace; travel for rest I find;
Tancred, I have thee, see thee, yet thine eyes
Lookte not upon thy love and handmaide kind,
Undo their doors, their lids fast closed sever,
Alas, I find thee for to lose thee ever.
106
I never thought that to mine eyes (my dear)
Thou could have grievous or unpleasant been;
But now would blind or rather dead I wear,
That thy sad plight might be unknown, unseen,
Alas, where is thy mirth and smiling cheer?
Where are thine eyes clear beams and sparkles sheene?
Of thy fair cheek where is the purple read,
And foreheads whitnes? are all gone, all dead?
107
Though gone, though dead, I love thee still behold;
Death wounds, but kills not love; yet if thou live
Sweet soul, still in his breast, my follies bold
Ah, pardon, loves, desires and stealthes forgive;
Grant me from his pale mouth some kisses cold,
Since death does love of just reward deprive;
And of thy spoils sad death afford me this,
Let me his mouth pale, cold and bloodlesse kis;
108
O gentle mouth! with speeches kind and sweet,
Thou did relieve my grief, my woe and pain,
Ere my weak soul from this frail body fleet,
Ah, comfort me with one dear kiss or twain,
Perchance if we alive had hapt to meet,
They had been given which now are stolen, O vain,
O feeble life, betwixt his lips out fly,
O let me kiss thee first, then let me die!
109
Receive my yielded spirit, and with thine
Guide it to heaven, where all true love has place:
This said, she sighed, and tore her tresses fine,
And from her eyes two streams powrde on his face,
The man revived with those showers divine,
Awakt, and opened his lips a space:
His lips were open; but fast shut his eyes,
And with her sighs, one sigh from him vpflies.
110
The dame perceived that Tancred breathed and sight,
Which calmed her grieves somedeale and eased her fears:
Unclose thine eyes (she says) my Lord and knight,
See my last services, my plaints and tears,
See her that dies to see thy woeful plight,
That of thy pain her part and portion bears,
Once look on me, small is the gift I crave,
The last which thou can give, or I can have.
111
Tancred looked up, and closed his eyes again,
Heavy and dim, and she renewed her woe:
Quoth Vafrine, cure him first, and then complain,
Medicine is life's chief friend; plaint her most foe,
They plucked his armor off, and she each vain,
Each joint, and sinew felt, and handled so,
And searched so well, each thrust, each cut and wound,
That hope of life her love and skill soon found.
112
From weariness and loss of blood she spide
His greatest pains and anguish most proceed,
Naught but her veil amid those deserts wide
She had to bind his wounds, in so great need,
But love could other bands (though strange) provide,
And pity wept for joy to see that deed,
For with her amber locks cut off each wound
She tide: O happy man, so cured, so bound!
113
For why her veil was short and thin, those deep
And cruel hurtes to fasten, roll, and bind,
Nor salve, nor simple had she, yet to keep
Her knight on live, strong charms of wondrous kind
She said, and from him drove that deadly sleep,
That now his eyes he lifted, turned and twinde,
And saw his squire, and saw that courteous dame
In habit strange, and wondered whence she came.
114
He said, O Vafrine, tell me, whence come thou?
And who this gentle surgeon is, disclose;
She smiled, she sighed, she looked she wist not how,
She wept, reioist, she blushed as red as rose,
You shall know all (she says) your surgeon now
Commands you silence, rest, and soft repose,
You shall be sound, prepare my guerdon meet,
His head then laid she in her bosom sweet.
115
Vafrine devised this while how he might bear
His master home, ere night obscured the land,
When lo a troop of soldiers did appear,
Whom he descride to be Tancredies band,
With him when he and Argant met they wear;
But when they went to combat hand for hand,
He bod them stay behind, and they obaid,
But came to seek him now, so long he staid.
116
Besides them, many followed that enquest,
But these alone found out the rightest way,
Upon their friendly arms the men addressed
A seat, whereon he sat, he leaned, he lay:
(Quoth Tancred) shall the strong Circassian rest
In this broad field, for wolves and crows a pray?
Ah no, defraud not you that champion brave
Of his just praise, of his due tomb and grave,
117
With his dead bones no longer war have I,
Boldly he did, and nobly was he slain,
Then let us not that honor him deny,
Which after death alonely does remain:
The Pagan dead they lifted up on hie,
And after Tancred bore him through the plain.
Close by the virgin chaste did Vafrine ride,
As he that was her squire, her guard, her guide.
118
Not home (quoth Tancred) to my wonted tent,
But bear me to this royal town, I pray,
That if cut short by human accident
I die, there I may see my latest day,
The place where Christ upon his cross was rent,
To heaven perchance may easier make the way,
And ere I yield to deaths and fortunes rage,
Performed shall be my vow and pilgrimage,
119
Thus to the city was Tancredie borne,
And fell on sleep, laid on a bed of down.
Vafrino where the damsel might soiorne,
A chamber got, close, secret, near his own:
That done he came the mighty Duke beforne,
And entrance found, for till his news were known
Naught was concluded among those knights and Lords,
Their counsel hung on his report and words.
120
Where weak and weary wounded Raimond laid,
Godfrey was set upon his couches side,
And round about the man a ring was maid
Of lords and knights, that filled the chamber wide;
There while the squire his late discou'rie said,
To break his talk none answered, none replide,
My lord (he said) at your command I went
And vew'd their camp, each cabin, booth and tent;
121
But of that mighty host the number true
Expect not that I can, or should descrie,
All couerd with their armies might you view
The fields, the plains, the dales and mountains hie,
I saw what way so ere they went and drew,
They spoild the land, drunk floods and fountains dry,
For not whole Jordan could have given them drink,
Nor all the grain in Syria, bread, I think.
122
But yet amongst them many bands are found
Both horse and foot, of little force and might,
That keep no order, know no trumpets sound,
That draw no sword, but far off shoot and fight,
But yet the Persian army does abound
With many a footeman strong, and hardy knight,
So does the kings own troop which all is framed
Of soldiers old, the immortal squadron named.
123
Immortal called is that band of right,
For of that number never wants one,
But in his empty place some other knight
Steps in, when any man is dead or gone:
This armies leader Emireno hight,
Like whom in wit and strength are few or none,
Who has in charge in plain and pitched field,
To fight with you, to make you fly or yield.
124
And well I know their army and their host,
Within a day or two, will here arrive:
But thee, Rinaldo, it behooves most
To keep thy noble head, for which they strive,
For all the chief in arms or courage, bost
They will the same to queen Armida give,
And for the same she gives her self in price,
Such hire will many hands to work entice.
125
The chief of these (that have thy murder sworn)
Is Altamore, the king of Sarmachand;
Adrastus then, whose realm lies near the morn,
A hardy giant, bold, and strong of hand,
This king upon an elephant is borne,
For under him no horse can stir or stand;
The third is Tisipherne, as brave a lord
As ever put on helm, or guirt on sword.
126
This said, from young Rinaldoes angry eyes
Flew sparks of wrath, flames in his visage shinde,
He longed to be amid those enemies,
Nor rest nor reason in his heart could find.
But to the Duke Vafrine his talk applies,
The greatest news (my Lord) are yet behind,
For all their thoughts, their crafts and counsels tend
By treason false to bring thy life to end:
127
Then all from point to point he began expose
The false compact, how it was made and wrought,
The arms and ensigns fained, poison close,
Ormondos vant, what praise, what thank he sought,
And what reward, and satisfide all those
That would demand, enquire, or ask of ought,
Silence was made a while, when Godfrey thus,
Raimondo say, what counsel give thou us?
128
Not as we purposed late, next morn (quoth he)
Let us not scale, but round besiege this tower,
That those within may have no issue free
To sallie out, and hurt us with their power,
Our camp well rested and refreshed see,
Provided well against this last storm and shower,
And then in pitched field, fight, if you will;
If not, delay, and keep this fortress still:
129
But least you be endangred, hurt or slain,
Of all your cares take care your self to save,
By you this camp does live, does win, does rain,
Who else can rule or guide these squadrons brave?
And for the traitors shall be noted plain,
Command your guard to change the arms they have,
So shall their guile be known, in their own net
So shall they fall, caught in the snare they set.
130
As it has ever (thus the Duke begone)
Thy counsel shows thy wisdom and thy love,
And what you left in doubt, shall thus be done,
We will their force in pitched battle prove;
Closed in this wall and trench, the fight to shonne,
Does ill this camp beseem, and worse behoue,
But we their strength and manhood will assay,
And try, in open field and open day.
131
The fame of our great conquests to sustain,
Or bide our looks and threats, they are not able,
And when this army is subdued and slain,
Then is our empire settled, firm and stable,
The tower shall yield, or but resist in vain,
For fear her anchor is, despair her cable,
Thus he concludes, and rolling down the west
Fast set the stars, and called them all to rest.
The twentieth Book of Godfrey of Bulloigne.
The argument.
The Pagan host arriues, and cruel fight
Makes with the Christians, and their faithful power;
The Sultan longs in field to prove his might,
With the old king quits the besieged tower;
Yet both are slain, and in eternal night
A famous hand gives each his fatal hour;
Rinald appeasd Armida; first the field
The Christians win; then praise to God they yield.
1
THe sun called up the world from idle sleep,
And of the day ten hours were gone and past,
When the bold troop that had the tower to keep,
Espide a sudden mist, that ouercast
The earth, with mirksome clouds and darkness deep,
And saw it was The Egyptian camp at last,
Which raised the dust, for hills and valleies broad
That host did ouerspread and ouerload:
2
Therewith a merry shout and joyful cry
The Pagans reard, from their besieged hold;
The cranes from Thrace with such a rumor fly,
His hoarie frost and snow when Hyems old
Powers down, and fast to warmer regions hie,
From the sharp winds, fierce storms and tempests cold*
And quick and ready this new hope and aid,
Their hands, to shoot; their toongs to threaten maid.
3
From whence their ire, their wrath and hardy threat
Proceeds, the French well knew, and plain espide,
For from the walls and ports the army great
They saw, her strenght, her number, pomp and pride,
Swelled their breasts with valors noble heat,
Battle and fight they wished, arm, arm, they cride,
The youth to give the sign of fight all praid
Their Duke, and were displeasd, because delaid,
4
Till morning next for he refusd to fight,
Their haste and heat he bridled, but not brake,
Nor yet with sudden fray or skirmish light,
Of these new foes would he vain trial make,
After so many wars (he says) good right
It is, that one days rest at least you take,
For thus in his vain foes he cherish would
The hope, which in their strength they have and hold.
5
To see Auroras gentle beam appear,
The soldiers armed, pressed and ready lay,
The skies were never half so fair and clear,
As in the breaking of that blessed day,
The merry morning smild, and seemd to wear
Upon her silver crown, suns golden ray,
And without cloud, heaven his redoubled light
Bent down, to see this field, this fray, this fight.
6
When first he saw the day break, show and shine,
Godfrey his host in good array brought out,
And to besiege the tyrant Aladine
Raimond he left, and all the faithful rout,
That from the towns was come of Palestine,
To serve and succor their deliverer stout,
And with them left a hardy troop beside
Of Gascoignes strong; in arms well proved, often tried.
7
Such was Godfredoes countenance, such his cheer,
That from his eye sure conquest flames and streams,
Heavens gracious favors in his looks appear,
And great and goodly more than erst he seames,
His face and forehead full of noblesse wear,
And on his cheek smiled youths purple beams,
And in his gate, his grace, his acts, his eyes
Somewhat (far more than mortal) lives and lies.
8
He had not marched far, ere he espied
Of his proud foes the mighty host draw nie,
A hill at first he took, and fortified
At his left hand which stood his army bie,
Broad in the front, behind more strait up tied,
His army ready stood the fight to try,
And to the middle ward well armd he brings
His footmen strong, his horsemen serud for wings;
9
To the left wing, spread underneath the bent
Of the steep hill, that saved their flank and side,
The Roberts twain, two leaders good, he sent;
His brother had the middle ward to guide;
To the right wing himself in person went,
Down, where the plain was dangrous, broad and wide,
And where his foes with their great numbers, would
Perchance enuiron round his squadrons bold.
10
There all his Lorreners and men of might,
All his best armd he plast, and chosen bands,
And with those horse some footmen armed light,
That archers were, (vsd to that service) stands,
Th'aduentrers then, in battle and in fight
Well tried, a squadron famous through all lands,
On the right hand he set, somedeale aside,
Rinaldo was their leader, lord, and guide.
11
To whom the Duke, in thee our hope is laid
Of victory, thou must the conquest gain,
Behind this mighty wing, so far displaid,
Thou with thy noble squadron close remain;
And when the Pagans would our backs inuaide,
Assail them then, and make their onset vain;
For if I guess aright, they have in mind
To compass us, and charge our troops behind.
12
Then through his host, that took so large a scope,
He road, and vewd them all, both horse and fout,
His face was bare, his helm vnclos'd and open,
Lightened his eyes, his looks bright fire shot out,
He cheers the fearful, comforts them that hope,
And to the bold recounts his boasting stout,
And to the valiant his adventures hard,
These bids he look for praise, those for reward.
13
At last he staid, whereof his squadrons bold,
And noblest troops, assembled was best part,
There from a rising bank his will he told,
And all that heard his speech thereat took heart:
And as the molten snow from mountains cold
Runs down in streams, with eloquence and art,
So from his lips his words and speeches fell,
Shrill, speedy, pleasant, sweet, and placed well.
14
My hardy host, you conqu'rours of the East,
You scourge, wherewith Christ whips his heathen fone,
Of victory, behold the latest feast,
See the last day, for which you wished alone;
Not without cause the Sarzens most and least,
Our gracious Lord has gathred here in one,
For all your foes and his, assembled arre,
That one days fight may end seaune years of war.
15
This fight shall bring us many victories,
The danger none, the labor will be small,
Let not the number of your enemies
Dismay your hearts, grant fear no place at all;
For strife and discord through their army flies,
Their bands ill rankt themselves entangle shall,
And few of them to strike or fight shall come,
For some want strength, some heart, some elbow rome.
16
This host, with whom you must encounter now,
Are men half naked, without strength or skill,
From idleness, or following the plow,
Late pressed forth to war, against their will,
Their swords are blunt, shieldes thin, soon pierced throw,
Their banners shake, their bearers shrink, for ill
Their leaders heard, obaid, or followed be,
Their loss, their flight, their death I well foresee:
17
Their captain, clad in purple, armd in gould,
That seems so fierce, so hardy, stout and strong,
The Moors or weak Arabians vanquish could,
Yet can he not resist your valors long,
What can he do, (though wise, though sage, though bold)
In that confusion, trouble, thrust and throng?
Ill known he is, and worse he knows his host,
Strange lords ill feared are, ill obaid of most.
18
But I am captain of this chosen crew,
With whom I often have conquered, triumphed often,
Your lands and linages long since I knew,
Each knight obaies my rule, mild, easy, soft,
I know each sword, each dart, each shaft I view,
Although the quarrel fly in skies aloft,
Whether the same of Ireland be or France,
And from what bow it comes, what hand perchance.
19
I ask an easy, and an usual thing,
As you have often, this day, so win the field,
Let zeal and honor be your virtues sting,
Your lives, my fame, Christ's faith, defend and shield,
To earth these Pagans slain and wounded bring,
Tread on their necks, make them all die or yield,
What need I more exhort you? from your eyes
I see how victory, how conquest flies.
20
Upon the captain (when his speech was done)
It seemd a lamp and golden light down came,
As from nights azure mantle often does run
Or fall, a sliding star, or shining flame;
But from the bosom of the burning son
Proceeded this, and garland wise the same
Godfredoes noble head encompast round,
And (as some thought) foreshewd he should be cround:
21
Perchance (if man's proud thought, or saucie tongue,
Have leave to judge, or guess at heavenly things)
This was the angel which had kept him long,
That now came down, and hid him with his wings.
While thus the Duke bespeaks his armies strong,
And every troop and band in order brings,
Lord Emiren his host disposed well,
And with bold words whet on their courage fell:
22
The man brought forth his army great with speed,
In order good, his foes at hand he spide,
Like the new moon his host two horns did spreed,
In midst the foot, the horse were on each side,
The right wing kept he for himself to leed,
Great Altamore received the left to guide,
The middle ward led Muleasses prood,
And in that battle fair, Armida stood.
23
On the right quarter stood the Indian grim,
With Tisipherne and all the kings own band;
But where the left winge spread her squadrons trim
Ore the large plain, did Altamoro stand,
With Aphrican and Persian kings with him,
And two that came from Meroes hot sand,
And all his crosbowes and his slinges he plast,
Where room best served to shoot, to throw, to cast.
24
Thus Emiren his host put in array,
And road from band to band, from rank to rank,
His Truchmen now, and now himself does say,
What spoil his folk shall gain, what praise, what thank,
To him that feared, look up, ours is the day
He says, vile fear to bold hearts never sanke,
How dares one against an hundredth fight?
Our cry, our shade, will put them all to flight.
25
But to the bold, go hardy knight (he says,)
His pray out of this lions paws go tear,
To some before his thoughts the shape he lays,
And makes therein the image true appear,
How his sad country him entreats and prays,
His house, his loving wife, and children dear,
Suppose (quoth he) thy country does beseech
And pray thee thus, suppose this is her speech:
26
Defend my laws, uphold my temples brave,
My blood, from washing of my streets, withhold,
From rauishing my virgins keep, and save
Thine ancestors dead bones and ashes cold,
To thee thy fathers dear, and parents grave
Show their vncoured heads, white, hoarie, old,
To thee thy wife her breasts with tears orespred
Thy sons, their cradles, shows, thy marriage bed.
27
To all the rest, you for her honors sake,
Whom Asia makes her champions, by your might
Upon these thieves, weak, feeble, few, must take
A sharp revenge, yet just, deserud and right,
Thus many words in seu'rall toongs he spoke,
And all his sundry nations to sharp fight
Encouraged, but now the Dukes had done
Their speeches all, the hoasts together run.
28
It was a great, a strange, and wondrous fight,
When front to front those noble armies met,
How every troop, how in each troop each knight
Stood pressed to move, to fight, and praise to get,
Loose in the wind waued their ensigns light,
Trembled the plumes that on their crests were set;
Their arms impreses, colors, gold and stone
Against the sun beams, smild, flamed, sparkled, shone,
29
Of dry topt Oaks, they seemd two forests thick:
So did each host with spears and pikes abound,
Bent were their bows, in rests their lances stick,
Their hands shook swords, their slings held cobles round:
Each stead to run was ready, pressed and quick
At his commanders spur, his hand, his sound;
He chafes, he stampes, careers, and turns about,
He fomes, snorts, neies, and fire and smoke breaths out.
30
Horror it self in that fair sight seemed fair,
And pleasure flew amid sad dreed and fear:
The trumpets shrill, that thundered in the air,
Were music mild and sweet to every ear:
The faithful camp (though less) yet seemed more raire
In that strange noice, more warlike, shrill and clear,
In notes more sweet, the Pagan trumpets jar,
These sung, their armours shined, these glistred far.
31
The Christian trumpets give the deadly call,
The Pagans answer, and the fight accept;
The godly Frenchmen on their knees down fall
To pray, and kissed the earth, and then vplept
To fight, the land between was vanished all,
In combat close each host to other stepped;
For now the wings had skirmish hot begone,
And with their battles forth the footmen run.
32
But who was first of all the Christian train,
That gave the onset first, first won renown?
Gildippes thou were she, for (by thee slain)
The king of Orms, Hircano, tumbled down,
The man's breast bone thou clou'st and rent in twain,
So heaven with honor would thee bless and crown:
Pierst through he fell, and falling hard withal,
His foe praised for her strength, and for his fall.
33
Her lannce thus broake, the hardy dame forth drew
(With her strong hand) a fine and trenchant blade,
And against the Persians fierce and bold she flew,
And in their troop wide streets and lanes she made,
Even in the girdling stead divided new
In pieces twain, Zopire on earth she lade*
And then Alarcos head she swapt off cleene,
Which like a football tumbled on the green.
34
A blow feld Artaxerxes, with a thrust
Was Argeus slain, the first lay in a trance,
Ismaels left hand cut off fell in the dust;
For on his wrest her sword fell down by chance:
The hand let go the bridle where it lust,
The blow upon the coursers eats did glance,
Who felt the raines at large, and with the stroke
Half mad, the ranks disordred, troubled, broake:
35
All these, and many more, by time forgot,
She slew and wounded, when against her came
The angry Persians all, cast on a knot,
For on her person would they purchase fame:
But her dear spouse and husband wanted not
(In so great need) to aid the noble dame;
Thus ioin'd, the haps of war unhurt they prove,
Their strength was double, double was their love.
36
The noble louets use well might you see,
A wondrous guise, till then unseen, unhard,
To save themselves forgot both he and she,
Each others life did keep, defend and guard;
The strokes that against her Lord discharged be,
The dame had care to bear, to break, to ward,
His shield kept off the blows bent on his dear,
Which (if need be) his naked head should bear.
37
So each saved other, each for others wrong
Would vengeance take, but not revenge their own:
The valiant Sultan Artabano strong
Of Boecan isle, by her was overthrown,
And by his hand (the bodies dead among)
Aluante (that durst his mistress wound) fell down,
And she between the eyes hit Arimonte,
(Who hurt her Lord) and cleft in twain his front.
38
But Altamore who had that wing to lead
Far greater slaughter on the Christians made;
For where he turned his sword, or twinde his stead,
He slew, or man and beast on earth down lade,
Happy was he that was at first struck dead,
That fell not down on live, for whom his blade
Had spared, the same cast in the dustie street
His horse tore with his teeth, brus'd with his feet.
39
By this brave Persians valor killed and slain
Were strong Brunello, and Ardonio great;
The first his head and helm had cleft in twain,
The last in stranger wise he did entreat,
For through his heart he pierst, and through the vain
Where laughter has his fountain and his seat,
So that (a dreedfull thing, believed uneath)
He laughed for pain, and laughed himself to death.
40
Nor these alone with that accursed knife
Of this sweet light and breath deprived lie;
But with that cruel weapon lost their life
Gentonio, Guascar, Rosimond and Guie;
Who knows how many in that fatal strife
He slew? What knights his courser fierce made die?
The names and countries of the people slain
Who tells? their wounds and deaths who can explain?
41
With this fierce king encounter durst not one,
Not one durst combat him in equal field,
Gildippes undertook that task alone;
No doubt could make her shrink, no danger, yield,
By Thermodonte was never Amazone,
(That menag'd steeled axe, or carried shield)
That seemed so bold as she, so strong, so light,
When forth she run to meet that dreadful knight:
42
She hit him, where with gold and rich anmaile,
His Diadem did on his helmet flame,
She broake and cleft the crown, and caused him veil
His proud and lofty top, his crest down came,
Strong seemed her arm that could so well assail:
The Pagan shook for spite, and blushed for shame,
Forward he rusht, and would at once requite
Shame, with disgrace; and with revenge, despite.
43
Right on the front he gave that Lady kind
A blow, so huge, so strong, so great, so sore,
That out of sense and feeling, down she twinde:
But her dear knight his love from ground vpbore,
Were it their fortune, or his noble mind,
He staid his hand, and stroke the dame no more:
A Lion so stalks by, and with proud eyes
Beholds, but scorns to hurt, a man that lies.
44
This while Ormondo false, whose cruel hand
Was armed, and pressed to give the traitrous blow,
With all his fellows among Godfredoes band
Entered unseen, disguised that few them know:
The theeuish Wolfes (when night oreshades the land)
That seem like faithful dogs in shape and show,
So to the closed folds in secret creep,
And entrance seek, to kill some harmless sheep.
45
He proched nie, and to Godfredoes side
The bloody Pagan now was placed near;
But when his colors gold and white he spide,
And saw the other signs that forged wear,
See see, this traitor false (the captain cride)
That like a Frenchman would in show appear,
Behold how near his mates and he are crept.
This said, upon the villain forth he lept,
46
Deadly he wounded him, and that false knight
Nor strikes, nor wards, nor strives to be gone;
But (as Medusas head ware in his sight)
Stood like a man new turned to marble stone,
All lances broke, vnsheath'd all weapons bright,
All quiuers emptied were, on them alone,
In parts so many were the traitors cleft,
That those dead men, had no dead bodies left.
47
When Godfrey was with Pagan blood bespred
He entered then the fight, and that was past,
Where the bold Persian fought and combatted,
Where the close ranks he opened, cleft and brast;
Before the knight the troops and squadrons fled,
As Affricke dust before the Southren blast,
The Duke recalled them, in array them placed,
Staid those that fled, and him assailed that chaced.
48
The champions strong there fought a battle stout,
Troie never saw the like by Xanthus old:
A conflict sharp there was meane-while on fout
Twixt Baldwine good and Muleasses bold:
The horsemen also (near the mountains rout,
And in both wings) a furious skirmish hold,
And where the barbarous Duke in person stood,
Twixt Tisiphernes and Adrastus prood;
49
With Emiren Robert the Norman strove,
Long time they fought, yet neither lost nor won;
The other Roberts helm the Indian cloue,
And broke his arms, their fight would soon be done:
From place to place did Tisiphernes roue,
And found no match, against him none durst run,
But where the prease was thickest thither flew
The knight, and at each stroke feld, hurt or slew.
50
Thus fought they long, yet neither shrink nor yield,
In equal balance hung their hope and fear:
All full of broken lances lay the field,
All full of arms that clou'n and shattred wear,
Of swords, some to the body nail the shield,
Some cut men's throtes, and some their bellies tear,
Of bodies, some upright, some groueling lay,
And for themselves eat graves out of the clay:
51
Beside his lord slain lay the noble stead,
There friend with friend lay killed, like lovers true,
There foe with foe, the live under the dead,
The victor under him whom late he slew:
A hoarce imperfect sound did each where spread,
Whence neither silence, nor plain outcries flew,
There fury roares, ire threats, and woe complains,
One weeps, another cries, he sighs for pains.
52
The arms that late so fair and glorious seame,
Now soild and slubbred, sad and sullen grow,
The steel his brightness lost; the gould his beam;
The colors had no pride, nor beauties show;
The plumes and feathers on their crests that stream,
Are strowed wide upon the earth below:
The hosts both clad in blood, in dust and mire,
Had changd their cheer, their pride, their rich attire.
53
But now the Moors, Arabians, Ethiops black,
(Of the left wing that held the utmost marge)
Spread forth their troops and purposed at the back
And side, their heedlesse foes t'assaile and charge:
Slingers and Archers were not slow, nor slack
To shoot and cast, when with his battle large
Rinaldo came, whose fury, haste, and ire,
Seemed earthquake, thunder, tempest, storm and fire.
54
The first he met was Asmire his throne
That set in Meroes hot, sunne-burnt, land,
He cut his neck in twain, flesh, skin and bone,
The sable head down tumbled on the sand;
But when by death of this black Prince alone,
The taste of blood and conquest once he fand,
Whole squadrons then, whole troops to earth he brought,
Things wondrous, strange, incredible, he wrought;
55
He gave more deaths than strokes, and yet his blows
Upon his feeble foes fell often and thick,
To move three toongs as a fierce serpent shows,
Which rolls the one she has swift, speedy, quick;
So thinks each Pagan, each Arabian trowes,
He weilds three swords, all in one hilt that stick,
His readiness their eyes so blinded has,
Their dreed that wounder bred, fear gave it fath,
56
The Affricke tyrants and the Negro kings
Fell down on heaps, drowned each in others blood,
Upon their people ran the knights he brings,
Pricked forward by their guides ensample good,
Killed were the Pagans, broake their bows and slings:
Some did, some fell; some yielded, none withstood:
A massacre was this, no fight; these put
Their foes to death; those hold their throats to cut.
57
Small while they stood, with heart and hardy face
On their bold breasts deep wounds and hurts to bear,
But fled away, and troubled in the chase
Their ranks disordred be with too much fear:
Rinaldo followed them from place to place,
Till quite discomfit and dispersed they wear,
That done he stays, and all his knights recalles,
And scorns to strike his foe that flies or falls.
58
Like as the wind stopped by some wood or hill,
Grows strong and fierce, tears boughs and trees in twain,
But with mild blasts, more temprate, gentle, still,
Blows through the ample field, or spacious plain;
Against the rocks as sea-waues murmur shrill,
But silent pass amid the open maine:
Rinaldo so, when none his force withstood,
Asswagd his fury, calmd his angry mood,
59
He scornd upon their fearful backs that fled
To wreake his ire, and spend his force in vain,
But against the footmen strong his troops he led,
Whose side the Moors had open left and plain,
The Affricanes, that should have succored
That battle, all were run away or slain,
Upon their flank with force and courage stout,
His men at arms assaild the bands on fout:
60
He brake their pikes, and brake their close array,
Entered their battle, feld them down around,
So wind or tempest with impetious sway
The ears of ripened corn strikes flat to ground:
With blood, arms, bodies dead, the hardened clay
Plastred the earth, no grass nor green was found,
The horsemen running through and through their bands,
Kill, murder, slay, few escape, not one withstands.
61
Rinaldo came where his forlorn Armide
Sat on her golden chariot mounted hie,
A noble guard she had on every side
Of lords, of lovers, and much chivalry:
She knew the man when first his arms she spide,
Love, hate, wrath, sweet desire, strove in her eye,
He changd some deal, his look and countnance bold,
She changd from frost, to fire; from heat, to cold:
62
The prince past by the chariot of his dear,
Like one that did his thoughts elsewhere bestow,
Yet suffered not her knights and lovers near
Their rival so to escape withouten blow,
One drew his sword, another coucht his spear,
Herself an arrow sharp set in her bow,
Disdain her ire new sharpt and kindled has,
But love appeasd her, love asswagd her wrath.
63
Love brideled fury, and revived of new
His fire, not dead, though buried in displeasure,
Three times her angry hand the bow up drew,
And thrice again let slack the string at leisure;
But wrath prevailed at last, the reed out flew,
For love finds mean, but hatred knows no measure,
Out flew the shaft, but with the shaft, this charm,
This wish she sent: heavens grant it do no harm:
64
She bids the reed return the way it went,
And pearse her heart which so unkind could prove,
Such force had love, though lost and vainly spent,
What strength has happy, kind and mutual love?
But she that gentle thought did straight repent,
Wrath, fury, kindness, in her bosom strove,
She would, she would not, that it mist or hit,
Her eyes, her heart, her wishes followed it.
65
But yet in vain the quarrel lighted not,
For on his hawberke hard the knight it hit,
Too hard for woman's shaft or woman's shot,
In stead of pearsing there it broke and split;
He turned away, she burnt with fury hot,
And thought he scorned her power, and in that fit
Shot often and often, her shaftes no entrance found,
And while she shot, love gave her wound on wound.
66
And is he then vnpearceable (quoth she)
That neither force nor foe he needs regard?
His lims (perchance) armed with that hardness be,
Which makes his heart so cruel and so hard,
No shot that flies from eye or hand I see,
Hurtes him, such rigor does his person guard,
Armed, or disarmed; his foe, or mistress kind,
Despised alike, like hate, like scorn I find.
67
But what new form is left, devise, or art,
By which, to which exchanged, I might find grace?
For in my knights and all that take my part
I see no help, no hope, no trust I place,
To his great prowess, might, and valiant heart,
All strength is weak, all courage vile and bace.
This said she, for she saw, how, through the field,
Her champions fly, faint, tremble, fall and yield.
68
Nor left alone can she her person save,
But to be slain or taken stands in fear,
Though with her bow a iauelin long she have,
Yet weak was Phebes bow, blunt Pallas spear.
But, as the swan, that sees the Eagle brave,
Threatening her flesh and silver plumes to tear,
Falls down, to hide her among the shadie brooks;
Such were her fearful motions, such her looks.
69
But Altamore, this while that strove and sought
From shameful flight his Persian host to stay,
That was discomfit and destroi'd to naught,
Whilst he alone mantain'd the fight and fray,
Seeing distressed the goddess of his thought,
To aid her ran, nay flew, and laid away
All care, both of his honor and his host,
If she were safe, let all the world be lost.
70
To the ilguarded chariot swift he flew,
His weapon made him way with bloody war:
Meane-while Lord Godfrey and Rinaldo slew
His feeble bands, his people murdered arre,
He saw their loss, but aided not his crew,
A better lover than a leader far,
He set Armida safe, then turned again
With tardie succor, for his folk were slain.
71
And on that side the woeful Prince behield
The battle lost, no help nor hope remained;
But on the other wing the Christians yield,
And fly, such vantage there The Egyptians gained,
One of the Roberts was nigh slain in field;
The other by the Indian strong constrained
To yield himself, his captive and his slave;
Thus equal loss and equal foil they have.
72
Godfredo took the time and season, fit
To bring again his squadrons in array,
And either camp well ordered, ranged and knit,
Renewed the furious battle, fight and fray,
New streams of blood were shed, new swords them hit;
New combats fought, new spoils were borne away,
And vnresolu'd and doubtful (on each side)
Did praise and conquest, Mars and Fortune ride.
73
Between the armies twain while thus the fight
Waxt sharp, hot, cruel, though renewd but late,
The Sultan clombe up to the towers hight,
And saw far off their strife and fell debate,
As from some stage or theater the knight
Saw played the tragedy of human state,
Saw death, blood, murder, woe and horror strange,
And the great acts of fortune, chance and change:
74
At first astonished and amazd he stood,
Then burnt with wrath, and self consuming ire,
Swelled his bosom like a raging flood,
To be amid that battle, such desire.
Such haste he had, he dond his helmet good,
His other arms he had before entire,
Up, up, he cride, no more, no more, within
This fortress stay, come follow, die or win.
75
Whether the same were providence divine,
That made him leave the fortress he possessed,
For that the empire proud of Palestine
This day should fall, to rise again more blessed;
Or that he breaking felt the fatal line
Of life, and would meet death with constant breast,
Furious and fierce he did the gates vnbarre,
And sudden rage brought forth, and sudden war;
76
Nor staide he till the folk on whom he cride
Assemble might, but out alone he flies,
A thousand foes the man alone defide,
And run among a thousand enemies:
But with his fury called from every side,
The rest run out, and Aladine forth hies,
The cowards had no fear, the wise no caire,
This was not hope, nor courage, but despair.
77
The dreadful Turk with sudden blows down cast,
The first he met, nor gave them time to plain,
Or pray, in murdring them he made such haste,
That dead they fell, ere one could see them slain;
From mouth to mouth, from eye to eye forth past
The fear and terror, that the faithful train
Of Syrian folk, not vsd to dangrous fight,
Were broken, scattred, and nigh put to flight.
78
But with less terror and disorder less,
The Gascoignes kept array, and kept their ground,
Though most the loss and peril them oppress,
Unawares assaild they were, unready found:
No rauning tooth or tallon hard I guess
Of beast, or eager hawk, does slay and wound
So many sheep, or fowls weak, feeble, small,
As his sharp sword killed knights and soldiers tall:
79
It seemd his thirst and hunger swage he would
With their slain bodies, and their blood powrd out,
With him his troops and Aladino old
Slew their besiegers, killed the Gascoigne rout:
But Raimond ran to meet the Sultan bold,
Nor to encounter him had fear or dout,
Though his right hand by proof too well he know,
Which laid him late for dead, at one huge blow,
80
They met and Raimond fell amid the field,
This blow again upon his forehead light,
It was the fault and weakness of his eild,
Age is not fit to bear strokes of such might,
Each one lift up his sword, aduanst his shield,
Those would destroy, and these defend the knight,
On went the Sultan, for the man he thought
Was slain, or easlie might be captive brought.
81
Among the rest he ran, he ragd, he smote,
And in small space, small time, great wonders wrought;
And as his rage him led and fury hot,
To kill and murder matter new he sought:
As from his supper poor, with hungry throat,
A peasant hasts to a rich feast ibrought,
So from this skirmish to the battle great
He ran, and quenched with blood his furies heat.
82
Where battred was the wall he sallied out,
And to the field in haste and heat he goes,
With him went rage and fury, fear and dout
Remaind behind, among his scattred foes:
To win the conquest, strove his squadron stout,
Which he imperfect left, yet loath to loes
The day: the Christians fight, resist and die,
And ready were to yield, retire and fly.
83
The Gascoigne bands retired, but kept array,
The Syrian people ran away outright,
The fight was near the place where Tancred lay,
His house was full of noise, and great affright,
He rose and looked forth to see the fray,
Though every limme were weak, faint, void of might,
He saw the county lie, his men orethrowne,
Some beaten back, some killed, some felled down:
84
Courage in noble hearts that nere is spent,
Yet fainted not, though faint were every lim,
But reinforst each member cleft and rent,
And want of blood and strenght supplide in him,
In his left hand his heavy shield he hent,
Nor seemd the weight too great, his curtlax trim
His tight hand drew, nor for more arms he stood,
Or staid, he needs no more, whose heart is good:
85
But coming forth, cride, whither will you run,
And leave your leader to his foes in pray?
What? shall these heathen of his armor won,
(In their vile temples) hang up trophies gay?
Go home to Gascoigne then, and tell his son,
That where his father did you ran away,
This said, against a thousand armed foes,
He did his breast weak, naked, sick, oppoes,
86
And with his heavy, strong, and mighty targe,
(That with seau'n hard bulls hides was surely lind)
And strengthened with a cover thick and large,
Of stiff and well attempred steel behind,
He shielded Raimond from the furious charge,
From swords, from darts, from weapons of each kind,
And all his foes drove back with his sharp blade,
That sure and safe he lay, as in a shade.
87
Thus saved, thus shielded Raimond began respire,
He rose and reard himself in little space,
And in his bosom burnt the double fire
Of vengeance, wrath, his heart; shame filled his face;
He looked around to spy, (such was his ire)
The man, whose stroke had laid him in that place,
Whom when he sees not, for disdain he quakes,
And on his people sharp reuengement takes.
88
The Gascoines turn again, their Lord in haste
To venge their loss his band recordred brings,
The troop that durst so much now stood aghast,
For where sad fear grew late, now boldness springs,
Now followed, they that fled; fled, they that chaste;
So in one hour altreth the state of things,
Raimond requites his loss, shame, hurt and all,
And with an hundredth deaths revenged one fall.
89
Whilst Raimond wreaked thus his just disdain
On the proud heads of captains, Lords and pears,
He spies great Sions king amid the train,
And to him leapes, and high his sword he reares,
And on his forehead strikes, and strikes again,
Till helm and head he breaks, he cleaues, he tears,
Down fell the king, the guiltless land he bit,
That now keeps him, because he kept not it.
90
Their guides one murdered thus, the other gone,
The troops divided were in diverse thought,
Despair made some run headlong against their fone,
To seek sharp death, that comes vncall'd, unsought;
And some (that laid their hope on flight alone)
Fled to their fort again; yet chance so wrought,
That (with the fliers) in the victors pas,
And so the fortress won, and conquered was.
91
The hold was won, slain were the men that fled,
In courts, halles, chambers high; above, below,
Old Raimond fast up to the leads him sped,
And there (of victory true sign and show)
His glorious standard to the wind he spread,
That so both armies his success might know.
But Soliman saw not the town was lost,
For far from thence he was, and near the host;
92
Into the field he came, the lukewarm blood
Did smoke, and flow through all the purple field,
There of sad death the court and palace stood,
There did he triumphs lead, and trophies beild,
An armed stead fast by the Sultan yood,
That had no guide, nor lord the raines to weild,
The tyrant took the bridle, and bestroad
The coursers empty back, and forth he road.
93
Great, yet but short and sudden, was the aid,
That to the Pagans, faint and weak he brought,
A thunderbolt he was, you would have said,
Great, yet that comes and goes as swift as thought,
And of his coming swift, and flight unstaid
Eternal signs in hardest rocks has wrought,
For by his hand an hundredth knights were slain,
But time forgot has all their names, but twain;
94
Gildippes fair, and Edward thy dear lord,
Your noble death, sad end, and woeful fate,
(If so much power our vulgar tongue afford)
To all strange wits, strange ears let me dilate,
That ages all your love, and sweet accord,
Your virtue, prowess, worth, may imitate,
And some kind servant of true love (that hears)
May grace your death, my verses, with some tears.
95
The noble lady thither boldly flew,
Where the fierce Sultan fought, and him defide,
Two mighty blows she gave the Turk untrue,
One cleft his shield, the other pierst his side;
The prince the damsel by her habit knew,
See, see, this mankind strumpet, see (he cride)
This shameless whore, for thee fit weapons wear
Thy neeld and spindle, not a sword and spear.
96
This said, full of disdain, rage, and despite,
A strong, a fierce, a deadly stroke he gave,
And pierst her armor, pierst her bosom white,
Worthy no blows, but blows of love, to have,
Her dying hand let go the bridle quite,
She faints, she falls, twixt life and death she straue,
Her lord to help her came, but came too late,
Yet was not that his fault, it was his fate.
97
What should he do? to diverse parts him call
Just ire and pity kind, one bids him go,
And succor his dear lady, like to fall;
The other calls for vengeance on his foe,
Love bids both, love says he must do all,
And with his ire, ioines grief; with pity, woe.
What did he then? with his left hand the knight
Would hold her up, revenge her with his right.
98
But to resist against a knight so bold
Too weak his will and power divided, wear;
So that he could not his fair love uphold,
Nor kill the cruel man that slew his dear,
His arm, that did his mistres kind enfold
The Turk cut off, pale grew his looks and cheer,
He let her fall, himself fell by her side,
And for he could not save her, with her did.
99
As the high elm (whom his dear vine has twind
Fast in her hundred arms, and houlds embrast,)
Bears down to earth his spouse and darling kind,
If storm or cruel steel the tree down cast,
And her full grapes to naught does bruze and grind,
Spoils his own leaves, faints, withers, dies at last,
And seems to mourn and die, not for his own
But for her death, with him that lies orethrowne:
100
So fell he mourning, mourning for the dame,
Who life and death had made for ever his;
They would have spoke, but not one word could frame,
Deep sobs their speech, sweet sighs their language is,
Each gazd on others eyes, and, while the same
Is lawful, join their hands, embrace and kis:
And thus sharp death, their knot of life untied,
Together fainted they, together died.
101
But now swift fame her nimble wings dispred,
And told each where their chance, their fate, their fall,
Rinaldo heard the case, by one that fled
From the fierce Turk, and brought him news of all,
Disdain, goodwill, woe, wrath the champion led
To take revenge, shame, grief, for vengeance call.
But as he went Adrastus with his blade,
Forestalled the way, and show of combat made.
102
The giant cride, by sundry signs I note,
That whom I wish, I search, thou, thou art he,
I marked each woorthies shield, his helm, his cote,
And all this day have called and cride for thee,
To my sweet saint I have thy head deuote,
Thou must my sacrifice, my offering be,
Come let us here our strength and courage try,
Thou art Armidas foe, her champion I.
103
Thus he defide him, on his front before,
And on his throat he stroke him, yet the blow
His helmet neither bruised, cleft nor tore,
But in his saddle made him bend and bow;
Rinaldo hit him on the flank so sore,
That neither art nor herb could help him now;
Down fell the Giant strong, one blow such power,
Such puissance had; so falls a thundered tower.
104
With horror, fear, amasednesse and dreed,
Cold were the hearts of all that saw the fray,
And Soliman (that viewed that noble deed)
Trembled, his palenesse did his fear bewray;
For in that stroke he did his end arreed,
He wist not what to think, to do, to say,
A thing in him unused, rare and strange,
But so does heaven men's hearts turn, alter, change.
105
As when the sick or frantike men often dream
In their unquiet sleep, and slumber short,
And think they run some speedy course, and seame
To move their legs and feet in hasty sort;
Yet feel their limbs far slower than the stream
Of their vain thoughts, that bears them in this sport,
And often would speak, would cry, would call or shout,
Yet neither sound, nor voice, nor word send out:
106
So run to fight the angry Sultan would,
And did enforce his strength, his might, his ire,
Yet felt not in himself his courage old,
His woonted force, his rage and hot desire,
His eyes (that sparkled wrath and fury bold)
Grew dim and feeble, fear had quenched that fire,
And in his heart an hundredth passions fought,
Yet not on fear or base retire he thought.
107
While vnresolu'd he stood, the victor knight
Arrived, and seemed in quickness, haste and speed,
In boldness, greatness, goodlines and might,
Above all Princes borne of human seed:
The Turk small while resists, not death, nor fight
Made him forget his state, or race, through dreed,
He fled no strokes, he fetched no groan nor sigh,
Bold were his motions last, proud, stately, high.
108
Now when the Sultan (in these battles past
That Antheus like often fell, often rose again,
Ever more fierce, more fell) fell down at last
To lie for ever, when this Prince was slain:
Fortune, that seld is stable, firm, or fast,
No longer durst resist the Christian train,
But ranged her self in row with Godfreics knights,
With them she serves, she ronnes, she rides, she fights.
109
The Pagan troops, the kings own squadron fled,
Of all the East the strength, the pride, the flower,
Late called immortal, now discomfited,
It lost that title proud, and lost all power:
To him that with the royal standard fled,
Thus Emireno said, with speeches sour,
Art not thou he to whom to bear I gave
My kings great banner, and his standard brave?
110
This ensign (Rimedon) I gave not thee
To be the witness of thy fear and flight,
Coward, do thou thy Lord and Captain see
In battle strong, and ronn'st thy self from fight?
What seek'st thou? saftie? come, return with me,
The way to death, is path to virtue right,
Here let him fight that would escape; for this
The way to honor, way to saftie is.
111
The man returned, and sweld with scorn and shame,
The Duke with speeches grave exhorts the rest;
He threats, he strikes sometime, till back they came,
And rage against force, despair against death addressed.
Thus of his broken armies began he frame
A battle now, some hope dwelt in his breast,
But Tisiphernes bold revived him most,
Who fought, and seemed to win, when all was lost;
112
Wonders that day wrought noble Tisipherne,
The hardy Normans all he overthrew;
The Flemmings fled before the champion stern,
Gernier, Rogero, Gerard bold he slew;
His glorious deeds to praise and fame eterne
His lives short date prolonged, enlarged and drew,
And then (as he that set sweet life at naught)
The greatest peril, danger most he sought.
113
He spide Rinaldo, and although his field
Of azure, purple now and sanguine shows,
And though the silver bird amid his shield
Were armed gules; yet he the champion knows,
And says, here greatest peril is, heavens yield
Strength to my courage, fortune to my blows,
That fair Armida her revenge may see,
Help Macon, for his arms I vow to thee.
114
Thus prayed he, but all his vows were vain,
Mahound was deaf, or slept in heavens above,
And as a lion strikes him with his train,
His native wrath to quicken and to move;
So he awakte his fury and disdain,
And sharpt his courage on the whetstone love,
Himself he saved behind his mighty targe,
And forward spurred his stead, and gave the charge.
115
The Christian saw the hardy warrior come,
And leaped forth to undertake the fight,
The people round about gave place and rome,
And wondered on that fierce and cruel sight,
Some praised their strength, their skill, and courage some,
Such and so desperate blows struck either knight,
That all that saw forgot both ire and strife,
Their wounds, their hurts, forgot both death and life:
116
One stroke, the other did both strike and wound,
His arms were surer, and his strength was more;
From Tisipherne the blood streamed down around,
His shield was cleft, his helm was rent and tore.
The dame (that saw his blood besmeare the ground,
His armor broke, limbs weak, wounds deep and sore,
And all her guard dead, fled, and overthrown)
Thought, now her field lay wast, her hedge lay down:
117
Enuiron'd with so brave a troop but late,
Now stood she in her chariot all alone,
She feared bondage, and her life did hate,
All hope of conquest and revenge was gone,
Half mad and half amas'd, from where she sat,
She leaped down, and fled from friends and fone,
On a swift horse she mounts, and forth she rides
Alone, save for disdain and love, her guides.
118
In days of old, Queen Cleopatra so
Alone fled from the fight and cruel fray,
Against Augustus great his happy foe,
Leaving her Lord, to loss, and sure decay.
And as that Lord for love let honor go,
Followed her flying sails, and lost the day:
So Tisipherne the fair and fearful dame
Would follow, but his foe forbids the same.
119
But when the Pagans joy and comfort fled,
It seemed the sun was set, the day was night,
Against the brave Prince with whom he combatted
He turned, and on the forehead stroke the knight:
When thunders forged are in Tiphoius bed,
Not Brontes hammer falls so swift, so right;
The furious stroke fell on Rinaldoes crest,
And made him bend his head down to his breast.
120
The champion in his stirrups high vpstart,
And cleft his hawberke hard and tender side,
And sheathed his weapon in the Pagans heart,
The castle where man's life and soul do bide;
The cruel sword his breast and hinder part
With double wound vnclos'd, and opened wide;
And two large doors made for his life and breath,
Which past, and curde hot love, with frosen death.
121
This done, Rinaldo staid, and lookte around,
Where he should harm his foes, or help his friends;
Nor of the Pagans saw he squadron sound:
Each standard falls, ensign to earth descends;
His fury quiet than and calm he found,
There all his wrath, his rage and rancour ends.
He called to mind, how (far from help or aid)
Armida fled, alone, amas'd, afraid:
122
Well saw he when she fled, and with that sight
The Prince had pirie, courtesy and care;
He promised her to be her friend and knight,
When erst he left her in the island bare:
The way she fled he ran and road aright,
Her palfraies feet signs in the grass out ware:
But she this while found out an ougly shade,
Fit place for death, where naught could life persuade.
123
Well pleased was she with those shadows brown,
And yet displeasd with luck, with life, with love,
There from her stead she lighted, there laid down
Her bow and shafts, her arms that helpelesse prove
There lie with shame (she says) disgrast, orethrowne,
Blunt are the weapons, blunt the arms I move,
Weak to revenge my harms, or harm my foe,
My shafts are blunt, ah love, would thine were so!
124
Alas, among so many, could not one,
Not one draw blood, one wound or rend his skin?
All other breasts to you are marble stone,
Dare you than pierce a woman's bosom thin?
See, see, my naked heart, on this alone,
Employ your force, this fort is eath to win,
And love will shoot you from his mighty bow,
Weak is the shot that dripile falls in snow.
125
I pardon will your fear and weakness past,
Be strong (mine arrows) cruel, sharp against me,
Ah wretch, how is thy chance and fortune cast,
If plast in these, thy good and comfort be?
But since all hope is vain, all help is wast,
Since hurts ease hurts, wounds must cure wounds in thee;
Then with thine arrows stroke cure strokes of love,
Death for thy heart must salve, and surgeon prove.
126
And happy me, if being dead and slain,
I bear not with me this strange plague to hell,
Love, stay behind, come thou with me disdain,
And with my wronged soul for ever dwell;
Or else with it turn to the world again,
And vex that knight with dreams and visions fell,
And tell him (when twixt life and death I strove)
My last wish, was revenge; last word, was love.
127
And with that word half mad, half dead, she seames,
An arrow, poignant, strong and sharp she took,
When her dear knight found her in these extremes,
Now fit to die, and pass the Stygian brook,
Now pressed to quench her own and beauties, beams;
Now death sat on her eyes, death in her look,
When to her back he stepped, and staid her arm
Stretched forth, to do that service last, last harm.
128
She turns, and (ere she knows) her Lord she spies,
Whose coming was vnwisht, unthought, unknown,
She shrikes, and twines away her sdeignfull eyes
From his sweet face, she falls dead in a swoune,
Falls as a flower half cut, that bending lies:
He held her up, and least she tumble down,
Under her tender side his arm he plast,
His hand her girdle loosed, her gown vnlast;
129
And her fair face, fair bosom he bedewes
With tears, tears of remorse, of ruth, of sorrow.
As the pale Rose her color lost renewes,
With the fresh drops fallen from the silver morrow;
So she reuiues, and cheeks empurpled shows,
Moist with their own tears, and with tears they borrow;
Thrice lookte she up, her eyes thrice closed she,
As who say, let me die, ere look on thee.
130
And his strong arm, with weak and feeble hand,
She would have thrust away, loosed, and untwined:
Often strove she (but in vain) to break that band,
For he the ^old he got not yet resined,
Her self fast bound in those dear knots she fand,
Dear, though she feigned scorn, strove and repined:
At last she speaks, she weeps, complains and cries;
Yet durst not, did not, would not see his eyes.
131
Cruel at thy departure, at return
As cruel, say, what chance thee hither guides,
Would thou prevent her death, whose heart forlorn
For thee, for thee deaths strokes each hour deuideth?
Comst thou to save my life? alas, what scorn,
What torment for Armida poor abides?
No, no, thy crafts and sleights I well descrie,
But she can little do that cannot die.
132
Thy triumph is not great, nor well arrai'd,
Unless in chains thou lead a captive dame;
A dame now taken by force, before betrayed,
This is thy greatest glory, greatest fame:
Time was that thee of love and life I prayed,
Let death now end my love, my life, my shame,
Yet let not thy false hand bereave this breath,
For if it were thy gift, hateful were death.
133
Cruel, my self an hundredth ways can find,
To rid me from thy malice, from thy hate,
If weapons sharp, if poisons of all kind,
If fire, if strangling fail, in that estate;
Yet ways enough I know to stop this wind:
A thousand entries has the house of fate.
Ah, leave these flattries, leave weak hope to move,
Cease, cease, my hope is dead, dead is my love.
134
Thus mourned she, and from her watrie eyes,
Disdain and love dropped down, rolled up in tears;
From his pure fountains ran two streams likewise,
Wherein chaste pity and mild ruth appears:
Thus with sweet words the Queen he pacifies,
Madame, appease your grief, your wrath, your fears,
For to be crowned, not scorned, your life I save;
Your foe, nay but your friend, your knight, your slave.
135
But if you trust no speech, no oath, no word;
Yet in mine eyes, my zeal, my truth, behold:
For to that throne (whereof thy fire was Lord)
I will restore thee, crown thee with that gold,
And if high heaven would so much grace afford,
As from thy heart this cloud, this veil unfold
Of Paganism, in all the East no dame
Should equalize thy fortune, state and fame.
136
Thus plaineth he, thus prays, and his desire
Endeares with sighs that fly, and tears that fall;
That as against the warm'th of Titans fire,
Snow drifts consume on tops of mountains tall:
So melts her wrath, but love remains entire.
Behold (she says) your handmaid and your thrall;
My life, my crown, my wealth use at your pleasure:
Thus death her life became, loss proved her treasure.
137
This while the Captain of The Egyptian host,
That saw his royal standard laid on ground,
Saw Rimedon, that ensigns prop and post,
By Godfreies noble hand, killed with one wound,
And all his folk discomfit, slain and lost,
No coward was in this last batrell found,
But road about and sought (nor sought in vain)
Some famous hand of which he might be slain:
138
Against lord Godfrey bouldly out he flew,
For nobler foe he wished not, could not spy,
Of desprate courage showed he tokens true,
Where ere he ioind, or staid, or passed bie,
And cried to the Duke as near he drew,
Behold of thy strong hand I come to die,
Yet trust to overthrow thee with my fall,
My castles ruins shall break down thy wall.
139
This said, forth spurred they both, both high advance
Their swords aloft, both stroke at once, both hit,
His left arm wounded had the knight of France,
His shield was pierst, his vantbrace cleft and split,
The Pagan backward fell, half in a trance,
On his left ear his foe so hugely smit,
And as he sought to rise, Godfredoes sword
Pierced him through, so did that armies Lord.
140
Of his great host when Emiren was dead,
Fled the small remnant that alive remained;
Godfrey espied as he turned his stead,
Great Altamore on foot, with blood all stained,
With half a sword, half helm upon his head,
Against whom an hundredth fought, yet not one gained,
Cease, cease this strife, he cride: and thou brave knight,
Yield, I am Godfrey, yield thee to my might.
141
He that till then his proud and haughty heart
To act of humblenes did never bend,
When that great name he heard, from the north part
Of our wide world, renowned to Aethiops end,
Answered, I yield to thee, thou worthy art,
I am thy prisoner, fortune is thy friend:
On Altamoro great thy conquest bold
Of glory shall be rich, and rich of gold:
142
My loving queen, my wife and Lady kind
Shall ransom me with jewels, gold and treasure.
God shield (quoth Godfrey) that my noble mind
Should praise and virtue so by profit measure,
All that thou have from Persia and from Inde
Enjoy it still, therein I take no pleasure,
I set no rent on life, no price on blood,
I fight, and fell not war for gold or good.
143
This said, he gave him to his knights to keep,
And after those that fled his course he bent;
They to their rampires fled and trenches deep,
Yet could not so deaths cruel stroke prevent,
The camp was won, and all in blood does steep,
The blood in rivers streamed from tent to tent,
It soiled, defilde, defaced all the pray,
Shields, helmets, armours, plumes and feathers gay.
144
Thus conquered Godfrey, and as yet the son
Diu'd not in silver waves his golden waine,
But daylight served him to the fortress won
With his victorious host to turn again,
His bloody cote he put not off, but run
To the high Temple with his noble train,
And there hung up his arms, and there he bows
His knees, there prayed, and there performed his vows.
FINIS.
Printed at London by Ar. Hatfield for John Jaggard and M. Lownes. 1600.


