THE First and best Part OF Scoggins Jests: Full of witty mirth and pleasant
shifts, done by him in France, and other places: being a preservative against
melancholy.

Gathered by Andrew Board, Doctor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Williams. 1626.

The Prologue.
THere is nothing beside the goodness of God, that preserve health so much, as
honest mirth, especially mirth used at dinner and supper, and mirth toward bed,
as it does plainly appear in the Directions for health: Therefore considering
this matter, that mirth is so necessary a thing for man, I published this
Book, named, The Jests of Scogin, to make men merry: for amongst diverse other
Books of grave matters that I have made, my delight has been to recreate my
mind in making something merry. Wherefore I do advertise every man in
avoiding pensiveness, or too much study or melancholy, to be merry with
honesty in God, and for God, whom I humbly beseech to send us the mirth of
Heaven, Amen.

I Have heard say, that Scogin did come of an honest stock or kindred, and his
friends did set him to school at Oxford, where he did continue until the
time he was made Master of Art, where he made this Jest:

A Master of Art is not worth a fart,
Except he be in Schools,
A Bachelor of Law is not worth astraw,
Except he be among fools.
A Table of the merry Jests and witty shifts of Scogin.
What shift Scogin and his chamberfellow made to fare well in Lent. 5 What
shift Scogin made, when he lacked money. 5 How Scogin deceived the skinner. 6
How Jack got his dinner. 8 How Jack made his masterpay a penny for her ring
bones. 9 How Jack made of two eggs three. 10 How a husbandma^ put his son to
school with Scogin. 10 How Scogin and his scholar went to seek his horse. 11
Scogins scholar took orders 12 The scholar said, Tom Miller of Osney was
Jacobs father 14 Scogins scholier made priest 16 How the Priest excused
himself for not preaching. 17 How the Priest fell asleep at Mass. 20 How the
Priest said Requiem eternam on Easter day. 20 How the Priest said, Deus qui
gint i filij tui. 21 How the priest was accused for keeping a wench. 23 How the
parson said, Anupsimus quesimus Domine. 24 How Scogin told the hunter he had
found a hare. 25 How Scogin told his fellows of a Pickerell. 26 (...) How
Scogin drew out an old woman's tooth. 28 How Scogin gave a medicine to make one
go to it. 29 How Scogin gave one a medicine to find his horse. 30 How Scogin
was robbed. 30 Scogin parbraked a Crow. 31 How Sogin caused his wife to be let
blood. 33 How Scogin and his wife made an heir. 34 How Scogin got the Abbots
horse. 36 How Scogin brought a dogs ^urd to know what powder it was. 36 How
Scogin did draw a Tooth-drawers tooth. 37 How Scogin did serve the poor
folks. 39 How Scogin came to the court, and won 20 pound. 40 How he leapt over
the Tables. 44 How Scogin gave one a goose leg. 45 Scogin was desired to sweep
a Lords chamber. 45 How Scogin said he had a wall eye. 45 How Scogin drew his
son up and down the Court. 46 How Scogin greased a fat low. 47 How the King
gave Scogin a (...) How Scogin played horse play. 49 How Scogin let a fart, and
said it was worth forty pounds. 50 How Scogin begged 500 Oaks. 51 How Scogin
would make a shepherd ask blessing. 51 How a Cowheard taught him his cunning
in the weather. 53 How a man told Scogin he thought the building of Paul's cost
forty shillings. 54 Of him that thought Paul's steeple so high, that none might
look over it. 55 How Scogin desired to say, Aue Maria in the Kings ear. 55
How Scogin chalked his wife the way to Church. 56 How Scogin desired the Queen
to know whether riches would not tempt women. 57 How Scogin escaped beating 58
How Sogins wife came to the Queen. 59 How Scogin whined like a dog. 62 How
Scogin would fly into England. 63 How Scogin prayed for an 100 French Crowns.
64 How Scogin was new christened. 65 How Scogin deceived a Doctor of Physic.
66 And a Tapster. 68 (...) And the Draper. 72 How Scogin told a shoemaker he
was not at home. 75 How the shoemaker gave Scogin forty shil'ing to have his
house made greater. 75 How Scogin could not do two things at once. 77 How the
French King showed Scogin the King of Englands picture. 78 How Scogin put
french earth into his shoes. 78 How Scogin deceived the poor folks. 79 How
Scogin talked with a fellow that kept Oxen. 80 What shift Scogin made for
boots. 81 How Scogin and the priest prayed for money. 82 How Scogin came to
court like a monstrous beast. 85 How Scogin asked the King and Queen
forgiveness. 87 How Scogin told the Queen what a great study he was in 88 How
diverse Gentlemen came to Scogins house to make merry. 89 How Scogin fell sick.
90 How Scogin was shriuen. 91 Where Scogin desired to be buried. 91 What Scogin
said when he took (...)
The merry Jests, and witty shifts of Scogin.
What shift Scogin and his Chamber-fellow made to fare well in Lent.
ON a time in Lent Scogin consulted with a Chamber-fellow of his, a
Collegioner, and said, How shall we do to fare well this Lent? The scholar
replied, I cannot tell, for I lack money. Nay said Scogin, if you will be ruled
by me, we will fare well. The scholar answered, I will do as you shall counsel
me. Then Scogin said, feign your self sick, and go to bed, groan and cry out
for help, and call for me to come unto you, which was done; and when Scogin
came to his chamber-fellow he fained himself sore sick. Scogin asked how he
did? I am so sick quoth he, that I think I shall die, then said Scogin, be of
good comfort, I see no peril of death in you: O sir, said the scholar, you
do not feel the pains that I feel. I pray you sir, as my trust is in you,
keep me, and go not from m, until I am amended, for every Lent is unto me
very evil, unless that I have some good cherishing; as you see this little
sickness has made me so faint and weak, that I cannot stand on my legs,
and I fear I shall pine away: not so, said Scogin, be of good cheer, and pull
up your heart, here be of your fellows, which will take the pains to go to
the Eowcers of your place, to entreat them to take care of you. When it was
known in the College that Scogins chamber-fellow was so sore sick, some were
afraid that it had been the pestilence, or else some other infectious
sickness: wherefore Scogin was put in trust both for the keeping, and to do
other necessary things for his chamber-fellow, and had every night the keys of
the Bowcery and Buttery delivered, whereby he provided for bread and drink,
good salt Eeles, salt Salmon, and other salt fishes, so they did lack no good
cheer, besides fresh fish which came out of the Kitchen.

This done, the fellows of the place would that the patients urine should be
had to the Physician, to know what manner of sickness the Patient had. Scogin
then being afraid that the Physician would now know that his fellow was not
sick, said to him, we shall be both shamed and sh^nt, except thou will suffer
me to burn thy lips and singe thy nose with a candle, and then let me alone
with the Physician, for I must have your water to him Scogin did burn his
chambersellowes nose and lips, and had his water to the Physician. The
Physician said, he that does owe this water or urine, is a whole man. Nay, said
Scogin, that is not so, the man is a sore sick man, and does break out about
the lips and nose. Ah said she Physician, a water or urine is but a strumpet, a
man may be deceived in a water: and if he be as you do say, (said the
Physician to Scogin) then has he a great heat in the liver, and in the
stomach Yea sir, said Scogin he does complain of his stomach. Then said the
Physician, you shall have a bill of the Apothecarie, and let him take such
medicines as shall be there made: Sir, said Scogin, it is but a poor scholar,
and he has little to spend. Then said the Physician, for your sake it shall be
but a groat matter: which when he had bought, and brought home, he cast the
medicine into the fire, saying to his fellow, I have deceived the Physician,
and now let us make merry, and fill all the pots in the house After this Scogin
showed the Bowcers and the fellows, how he was with the Physician, and that he
had sent the patient medicines: but for all that, Scoggin said that the
Physician cannot tell as yet unto what infirmity this matter will turn: but
said Scogin, I fear much the pestilence, which he said, because none should
visit the patient: this continued until that Lent was done, and on maundie
Thursday, Scogin said to his chamberfellow, we will make our maundy, and eat
and drink with advantage: be it said the scholar. On Maundy thursday at night
they made such cheer, that the scholar was drunk. Scogin then pulled off all
the scholars clothes, and laid him stark naked on the rushes, and set a form
over him, and spread a couerlet over it, and set up two fallow candles in
candlesticks over him, one at his head, the other at his feet, and ran from
chamber to chamber, and told the fellows of the place that his chamberfellow
was dead; and they asked of Scogin if he died of the pestilence. Scogin said
no, I pray you go up and pray for his soul, and so they did. And when the
scholar had slept his first sleep, he began to turn himself, and cast down
the form and the candles. The fellows of the house seeing that Scogin did run
first out of the chamber, they and all that were in the chamber (one running
and tumbling down on another neck) were afraid. The scholar seeing them run
so fast out of the chamber, followed them stark naked; and the fellows seeing
him run after them like a ghost, some ran into their chambers, and some ran
into one corner, and some into another, Scogin ran into the chamber, to see
that the candles should do no harm, and at last fetched up his chamberfellow,
which ran about naked like a mad man, and brought him to bed, for which matter
Scogin had rebuke.

What shift Scogin and his fellow made, when they lacked money.
AFter this, Scogin and his chamber-fellow lacked money, and Scogin said, if
thou will be ruled after me, we will go to Tame market, where we shall
overtake going or coming some that drive sheep, now do as I shall tell thee,
and we will get some money: and as they went to Tame, they did see a man drive
sheep. Then Scogin said to his fellow, go thou before, and make bargain with
him, that the sheep be no sheep, but Hogs, and when that thou have made a
full bargain, ask by whom the matter shall be tried, and say thou, by him
that shall next overtake us. The scholar did overtake him that drove the
sheep, and said, Well overtaken my friend, from whence have thou brought these
fair hogs? Hogs quoth the fellow, they be sheep: said the scholar, you begin
to jest. Nay, sir, said the fellow, I speak in good earnest. Art thou in
earnest, said the scholar? Thou will lay no wager with me to the contrary. Yes
by the book of a pudding, I will lay all the money in my purse. How much is
that, said the scholar? The fellow said, I have two shillings. Two shillings,
said the scholar, that is nothing, will thou lay half thy hogs, and two
shillings, and I will lay as much against it? strike hands, and he that loses
shall pay. Be it, said the fellow. Now said the Scholar, by whom shall we be
tried? the fellow said, we shall be tried in the town of Tame. Nay, said the
scholar, Tame is out of my way, let us be tried by him that shall next
overtake us. Be it, said the fellow: by and by Scogin did overtake them,
saying, well overtaken good fellows. Welcome master, said the scholar and the
fellow. Master, said the fellow here is a scholar of Oxford has made a
bargain with me of two shillings and the price of half my Sheep, that they be
hogs that I do drive before me. Scogin did set up a laughing, saying, Alack
good fellow, do thou think these be sheep? yea sir, said the fellow. Alack
good fellow, thou have lost thy bargain, said Scogin, for they be fair Hogs.
Then said the Scholar, give me my money, and divide these Hogs, for I must have
half of them. Alack, said the fellow, I bought these for sheep, and not for
hogs, I am undone. Nay, said Scogin, I will be indifferent between you both,
let the Scholar have the two shillings, and take thou the hogs away with thee.
The fellow said, blessed be the time that ever you were borne: hold Scholar,
there is two shillings. The fellow was glad he lost not his hogs, which were
sheep.

How Scogin deceived the Skinner.
When Scogin had brought to Oxford such things as he had in London, he lacked
furs for his gowns, and Miniuer furs for his hood. Whereupon he went to
an Alderman in Oxford, which was a Skinner, and said unto him. It is so that I
must proceed Master of Art at the next Act, and I have bestowed my money at
London, and now I have need of furs, (as you know) wherefore if I shall have
of you as much as shall serve me, I will content you with thanks. Then said
the Alderman, make your gowns and your hood, and send them to me, and they
shall be furred as other Masters be. Then said Scogin you shall have them within
these two days, and then I pray you make me a bill what I shall pay for every
thing. It shall be done said the Alderman. When as the gowns and hood were
furred, he went to fetch them home, and said to the Alderman, I pray you let me
see my charge: the bill was brought forth and the sum did rise to six pound
and odd money. The Alderman said, when shall I have my money? Scogin answered,
within these seven weeks, or else the next time that you and I do meet after
the said term set. The term of time passed over, and the Alderman sent for
his money. Scogin said to the messenger, have me commended to Master Alderman,
and tell him when he and I do meet, I will content him according to my promise:
so on a time Scogin went to Korfax, and he espied the Alderman, and then he
returned back. The Alderman made good footing after him to overtake him and
said unto him, Sir, you said that you would pay me my money within seven
weeks, or else any time after that we did meet together. It is true, said
Scogin, my day is expired, but my promise is not broken: no, said the Olderman,
so that you pay me my money now. Now said Scogin, nay not so, we meet not
together yet, for now you did but overtake me, and when we do meet, you shall
have your money: but if I can, said Scogin, I will not meet you this seven
years, if I can go backward. Wherefore a plain bargain is best, and in
bargains making, fast bind, fast find.

How Jack by playing of the Whiting, got his dinner.
When the sickness was at Oxford, on a time Scogin went out of Oxford, and
did lie at S. Barthelmewes by Oxford, and he had a poor scholar to dress
his meat: On a Friday he said to his scholar, Jacke, here is two pence, go to
the market and buy me three whitings, the which his scholar did: and when he
was come home, Scogin said, Jacke, go sees me a whiting to my dinner: Jack
heard him say so, and deferred the time, thinking he should fare ill when that
his master had but a whiting to dinner. At last Scogin said; does the fish
play? Jack said, would you have one play without a fellow? Scogin said, Jacke
thou say truth: put another whiting into the pan. Then Jacke prepared his
fish to sees them: then Scogin said, Jacke, does the fish play now? Jack said,
I trow they be mad or else wood, for one does fight with the other, that I have
much ado to keep them in the pan. Then said Scogin, put the other whiting
betwixt them to break the strife. Jacke was then glad, thinking he should get
somewhat to dinner, and sod the fish, and had his part.

How Jack made his Master pay a penny for the herring bones.
ON a time Scogin did send Jacke to Oxford to market, to buy a penny worth of
fresh herring. Scogin said, bring four herrings for a penny, or else bring
none. Jack could not get four herrings, but three for his penny; and when he
came home, Scogin said, how many herrings have thou brought? and Jacke said,
three herrings, for I could not get four for a penny. Scogin said, he would
none of them: sir, said Jacke, then will I, and here is your penny again. When
dinner time was come, then Jack did set bread and butter before his Master, and
roasted his herrings, and sat down at the lower end of the table, and did eat
the herrings. Scogin said, let me have one of thy herrings, and thou shall
have another of me another time. Jacte said, and if you will have one herring,
it shall cost you a penny. What said Scogin, thou will not take it on thy
conscience: Jacke said, my conscience is such, that you get not a morsel here,
except I have my penny again. Thus contending together, Jack had made an end of
his herrings: A Master of Art of Oxford, one of Scogins fellows, did come to
see Scogin, and when Scogin had espied him, he said to Jack, set up the bones
of the herrings before me; sir, said Jacke, they shall cost you a penny. Then
said Scogin, what whorso^ will thou shame me? no sir, said Jack, give me my
penny again, and you shall have up the bones, or else I will tell all. Scogin
then cast down a penny to Jack, and Jack brought up to Scogin the herring
bones: and by this time the Master of Art did come in to Scogin, and Scogin had
him welcome, saying, if you had come sooner, you should have had fresh herrings
to dinner.

How Jack by sophistry would make of two eggs three.
SCogin on a time had two eggs to his breakefast, and Jack his choler should
roast them, and as they were rosting, Scogin went to the fire, to warm him, and
as the eggs were rosting, Jacke said, sir, I can by sophistry prove that here be
three Eggs. Let me see that, said Scogin, I shall tell you sir, said Jacke: Is
not here one? Yes, said Scogin. And is not here two, said Jack? Yea, said
Scogin, of that I am sure. Then Jacke did tell the first egg again, saying,
is not this the third? O said Scogin, Jack thou art a good sophister Well, said
Scogin, these two eggs shall serve me for my breakfast, and take thou the third
for thy labor, and for the herring that thou did give me the last day. So
one good turn does ask another, and to deceive him that goes about to
deceive, is no deceit.

How a Husbandman put his son to School with Scogin.
THere was a Husbandman beside. Oxford, and he would feign have his son to go
to School with master Scogin, and that Scogin should help to make him a
Priest, and to obtain Scogins favor and good will the husbandman gave Scogin
a horse. Scogin was pleased, so that he would pay for his sons board. The
husbandman was contented, and Scogin pleased. The slouenly boy almost as big as
a knave, would begin to learn his A. B. C. Scogin did give him a lesson of
nine of the first letters of A. B. C. and he was nine days in learning of
them, and when he had learned the nine Christ-crosse row letters, the good
scholar said, Am itch past the worst now? Yea, said Scogin. Then said the
Scholar, would God ich were, vor dis is able to comber any man's wits alive.
Scogin then thought his scholar would never be but a fool, and did apply him
as well as he could to learning: but he that has no wit, can never have
learning nor wisdom.

How Scogin and his scholar went to seek his horse
ON a time Scogin had lost his horse; wherefore in the morning he called up his
scholar, saying, Will ho. Will heard him call, and would not speak: at last
Scogin said, what Will I say, arise, and let us go look my horse. Will said,
Master, hold your peace, vor ich am vast azleepe. What old luske, said Scogin,
arise and meet with me at Shotouer, which is a great wood nigh S. Bartholmewes
beside Oxford. Will followed his master with an evil will, they seeking one in
one place, and the other in another place for his horse. At last Scogin did
lewer and whoop to him. Will said, as he was brought up with his father, what a
devil will you have now? Scogin said, have thou found my horse? No, I may, but
ch'aue found a better thing. What is that, said Scogin? By my vay, said Will,
ich have found a birds nest. Well Will, said Scogin, mark the place, and look
out my horse. By my day, said Will, chill mark the place, vor ich have shit
under the tree, and now chould ich could find another birds nest, for all your
horse. Thus you so a soole will not leave his babble for a thing of better
worth.

How Scogins scholar took orders.
WHen that Scogin had taught his scholar that he with help might be
Subdeacon, he said to him, thou shall go to take orders, and I will go with
thee. And if thou do stand in any doubt, take heed to my book, and give an
ear tame, and I will help thee as much as I can. When all they that should
take orders, were come to oppositions, Scogin did come forth with his scholar.
And the Ordinary did oppose him with a verse of the Psalter; which was this,
Moab, Agareni, Gebal, Amon, and Amaleck, cum habitantibus Tirum. Scogins
scholar was blanke oramazed. Sir, said Scogin to the Ordinary, you shall
understand that Moab, Agareni, Gebal, Amon, and Ameleck, cum habitantibus
Tirum, were unhappy fellows, for they did trouble the children of Israel, and
if they trouble my scholar, it is no marvel: but now I do tell thee my
scholar, be not afraid of Moab, Agareni, Gebal, Amon, and Ameleck, cum
habitantibus Tirum, for I will stand beside to comfort thee, for Moab, Agaren^*
etc. can do thee no haime, for they be dead. By reason that Scogin did so often
repeat these words, the scholar did read this verse aforesaid: and through
Scogins promise, the Ordinary was content that his scholar should take Orders,
and be Subdeacon. After this, when the Orders were given again, Scogin did
speak to his scholars Father, to send in a letter three or sour pieces of
gold. The scholars Father was content so to do: so that his sou might be
Deacon. Then said Scogin to his scholar, thou shall deliver this letter to the
Ordinary, when he does sit in oppositions, and as soon as he feels the
letter, he will perceive that I have sent him some money, and he will say to
thee, Quomodo valec magister tuus? that is to say, how does thy Master? thou
shall say, Qiud petis? what thing do thou ask? Then thou shall say,
Diaconatum, to be Deacon. Then the Ordinary will say, Es tu literatus? art thou
learned? and thou shall say, Aliqualiter, some, what. Now said Scogin, thou
have no more but three words to bear in mind in Latin, which is to say, Been,
Diaconatum, and Aliqualiter. The father and the scholar were glad that by
Scogins letters and the money he should be Deacon, and went to the oppositions,
and delivered his letter with the money. The Ordinary perceiving money in the
letter, said to the scholar, Quid petis? that is to say, what do thou ask
or desire? The scholar remembering Scogins words, that the first word, was
Been, he said, Been that is, well. When the Ordinary heard him say so, he said;
Quomodo valet Magister tuus? Now does thy Master? The scholar said,
Diaconatum, that is to say, Deacon. The Ordinary did see he was a fool, and
said; Tues stu^tus thou art a fool: the scholar said, Aliqualiter, that is to
say, somewhat. Nay, said the Ordinary, not Aliqualiter, but Totaliter, a stark
fool. Then the scholar was amazed, and said, sir, let me not go home without
mine Orders, and here is another Angel of gold sor you to drink. Well, said
the Ordinary, on that condition you will promise me to go to your book and
learn, you shall be Deacon at this time. Here a man may see that money is
better then learning.

How the scholar said, Tom Miller of Osney, was Jacobs Father.
AFter this, the said scholar did come to the next Orders, and brought a
present to the Ordinary from Scogin, but the scholars father paid for all.
Then said the Ordinary to the scholar, I must needs oppose you, and for
Master Scogins sake, I will oppose you in a light matter. Isaac had two sons,
Esau and Jacob, who was Jacobs father? The scholar stood still, and could not
tell. Well said the Ordinary, I cannot admit you to be Priest, until the next
Orders, and then bring me an answer. The scholar went home with a heavy heart,
bearing a letter to Master Scogin, how his scholar could not answer to this
question, Isaac had two sons, Esau and Jacob, who was Jacobs Father. Scogin
said to his scholar, thou fool and asse-head, do thou not know Tom Miller
of Osney? Yes said the scholar. Then said Scogin, thou know he had two
sons, Tom and lack, who is lacks father? The scholar said Tom Miller. Why
said Scogin, thou might have said, that Isaac was Jacobs Father: then said
Scogin, thou shall arise betime in the morning, and carry a letter to the
Ordinary, and I trust he will admit thee before the Orders shall be given. The
scholar rose up betime in the morning, and carried the letter to the Ordinary.
The Ordinary said, for Master Scogins sake I will oppose you no farther then I
did yesterday. Isaac had two sons, Esau and Jacob, who was Jacobs Father?
Marry said the scholar, I can tell you now that was Tom Miller of Osney. Go
fool, go, said the Ordinary, and let thy Master send thee no more to me for
Orders; for it is impossible to make a fool a wise man.

How Scogins scholar was made Priest.
THe aforesaid scholars Father was sorry that he could not have his son made
Priest and made his moan to Master Scogin. Master Scogin said, you must get him
his Dimissaries to be made Priest in some other Diocese, for our Ordinary will
not admit him: sir, said the scholars father, get him his Dimissaries and make
him a Priest, and I will give you twenty nobles: sir, said Scogin, let me have
the money and it shall be done. The next Orders after, Scogin and the scholars
father, and the scholar did ride all to London, and Scogin went to the
Ordinary, and gave him forty shillings to have his scholar made Priest. The
Ordinary said, I must oppose him; sir, said Scogin, my scholar is well
learned, but he has no utterance; wherefore I pray you at my request, oppose
him in Te Deum, and his father shall bring him to you. I am pleased, said the
Ordinary. On the morrow the scholar and his father went to master Ordinary:
The Ordinary said, be you master Scogins scholar? Yea sir, said he. Would you
be Priest at the beginning of these Orders? Yea sir, said the scholar. Then
said the Ordinary, I must oppose you, and it shall be in Te Deum, and I will
begin, and answer you me, and say; Tibi Cherubin and Scraphin incessabili voce
proclamant, Sanctus said the scholar, Sanctus said the Ordinary, Sanctus said
the scholar. Hold thy peace knave, said the scholars father: will you check
the Gentleman, that is so good to us? The Ordinary did laugh, and said to the
Scribe: put this man's name in the Book to be Priest. Go said he Ordinary, and
come to morrow, and the Bishop will make you a Priest: the which was done.

What talk this wise Priest and his Father had as they rode home.
ANd as he was riding home with his father, he espied the Moon, and said,
father, this is like the Moon we have at home. I marvel said he, whereof the
Moon is made. His father said, I cannot tell. Then said the wise Priest, it is
made like a Cheese, and if it be a Cheese, I would I had a gobbot, for I am
hungry. Father he said, how may a man climb up to it, and cut out a piece?
then said the Father, I would I were at home, for all the Moons in this
Country. At last they came to Uxbridge, and there the young Priest had espied
a Cowturd, lying upon a beam in the top of the house: then he said to his
father, here is a thing to be marvelled on, whether the Cow went up to shite on
the beam, or the beam came down to let the Cow shite on it. Then said the
father, belike one of the two it was.

How the Priest excused himself, because he did not preach?
AFter that this man was made Priest for money his father had not him a
benefice: then the parishioners where he was parson, were not contented that
they had no sermons of him: upon the which he went to master Scogin to ask his
counsel Then said Scogin Christmas day is at hand, and then go into the
Pulpit, and take this for thy antheme, P^er natus (...), etc. Then say, Masters
to yeu ali, what is Pu^^ natus est nobis? and if no man will answer, ask of
the Clarke: and if he cannot tell, then say; Now Masters to you all, what is
(...) datus est nobis? if none can tell, ask the Clarke: if he cannot tell,
then say; Masters, what is Cuins imperium; if none can tell, then ask the
oldest man in the Church what Cuius imperium is: is he cannot tell, then say;
Masters, this man has dwelt in this Parish this many years, and he cannot
tell what Cuius imperium is. I have not been half a year among you, and you
would have me to preach, I tell you all, by that time I have been in this
Town as long as this old man has been. I will preach, and tell you what
Cuius imperium is. On Christmas day this noble Priest went into the Pulpit and
said; Puer natus est nobis, Filius datus est nobis: cuius imperium. Now Masters
to you all what is Puer natus est nobis? There was no man could answer him:
then said the Priest to the Clarke, what is Puer natus est nobis? The Clarke
said, A Child is borne to us. It is well said (said the priest,) Now Masters
to you all, what is Filius datus est nobis? No man said a word: Clarke, what is
Filius datus est nobis (...) The Clarke said, a son is given to us. It is
well said (said the Priest) although he knew not whether he said right or
wrong. Then said the Priest, now masters to you all, what is Cuius imperium?
There was none in the Church did answer. Then said the Priest to the Clarke,
what is cuius imperium? the Clarke said, I cannot tell Then the Priest said,
how long have thou dwelt here? The Clarke said, nine or ten years. Then there
sat before the Priest an old man with a bald head: thou old Father, said the
Priest, what is cuius imperium? I cannot tell, said the old man, why, said the
Priest, how long have thou dwelt in this parish? The old man said, I was borne
in this Town. Why said the priest, how old art thou? The old man said,
fourscore years and odd: Then said the priest, lo masters all here is a
Clarke which has dwelt here this nine or ten years, and this old man has
dwelt here fourscore years and odd, and yet they cannot tell what Cuius
imperium is and I have not been here ten weeks, and you would have me preach
I tell you all, by that time I have dwelt here as long as this old man has
done, I will preach, (...) tell you what Cius imperium is. For he is (...)
starcke fool that can make no excuse for himsel^^ that is culpable.

How the Priest fell asleep as he was at Mass.
ON a certain time Scogin went to his scholar, the aforesaid Parson, to dine
with him on a sunday: and this foresaid Priest or Parson all the night before
had been at Cards playing at the Post, he made short mattens, and went to
Mass, and when he did come to his first memento, he leaned him to the Altar,
and fell asleep. When Scogin had espied it, he called the Clarke to awake him;
the Clarke went and shoot him, and bad him awake. Pass said the Priest, awake
said the Clarke. I will none of it, said the Priest, what sir, said the Clarke,
you are at mass. Hold thy peace, says the Priest, I beshrew thy heart, thou
have let me of a good sleep Awake for shame, said the Clarke. At the last he
awaked, and made an end of his Mass. When Mass was done, Scogin reprehended
him, and they of the Parish complained of the Priest to Scogin, for that fault
and many other. Scogin said, that the Priest had great pain in his brows,
that he could not hold up his head: and therefore pardon him for this fault,
considering his sickness.

How the Priest said, Requiem aeternam on Easter day.
ON an Easter day, this aforesaid Parson could not tell what Mass he should
say: wherefore he said to the Clarke, I pray thee run to my next neighbor, the
Parson of Garsington, and let him send me word what Mass I shall say to day:
the Parson said to the Clarke, let him say the Mass which does begin with a
great R. The Priest turned over his Book and found Requiem aeternam, and said
the Mass which is used for a soul or souls: When Mass was done, one said to
him, Master Parson, for whose soul did you say Mass to day? sir said he, for
Gods soul, which died on Friday last: For I was sick yesterday, and could not
say Mass for his soul: sir, said the man, God is alive, and not dead. No,
said he? if he had not been dead, he should not have been buried. All this
is true, said the man, but after he was dead, he rose from death to life, and
is alive, and shall die no more. By my faith said the Parson, I will never
after this pray for him any more. No, said the man, you must never pray for
God: but you must pray to God to send you some wit, or else you will die a
fool, etc.

How the Priest said, Deus qui viginti filij tui, when he should have said,
Deus qui vnigeniti.
ON a time master Scogin said to his fellows that were Masters of Art, I pray
you let us go to make merry with the Parson of Baldon, which was once my
scholar. Be it said they: On the morrow in the morning, they went to Baldon,
and one Master of Art went before all the other, and did go into the Church,
and the Priest began Mass of the Cross: and when he came to the Collect, he
did read; Deus qui viginti filij (...), etc. when he should have said, Deus qui
vnigeniti, etc. And as he was reading the Collect, he heard a great noise in
the Churchyard, and ere he had fully made an end of it, master Scogin and the
other Masters of Art came into the Church. Then at the Collect end, he turned
about and said; Dominus, vobis cum. He spying so many scholars, said, I^^
missa est. For he thought the scholars did come for to check him in his
Mass. And when Mass was done, they went to dinner with the Parson. And after
dinner, the Master of Art that did come first into the Church, that heard the
Parson read, Deus qui viginti filij (...), said, Master Parson, I pray you for
my learning, tell me how many sons God had. The Parson was astonished: sir said
he, I will tell you by and by. He went to Scogin, saying, sir, I pray you tell
me how many sons God had. Scogin said, go and tell him, sir, you did ask
of me how many sons God has: it shall not skill how many nor how few he
has, I am sure that you be none of them. Why sir, said the Master of Art, you
said to day in your Mass, that God had twenty children, for you said, Deus qui
viginti filij tui, yea sir, be content said Scogin, has God more or less, my
priest says you be none of them: we have good cheer, and costs us nothing,
therefore one good turn asks another without reprehension.

How the Priest was complained on for keeping a young wench in his house.
THis aforesaid Parson had a wench to keep his house, and to dress his meat,
and because both the Priest and she were young, they were complained on to the
Ordinary, which sent for the Priest by a citation. The priest was afraid, and
said to the Sumner, I will give the 15 pence to tell me the cause why I should
come to the Ordinary: sir said he, for keeping this wench within your house
wherefore you must appear the next court day. The priest went to Scogin and
showed him the whole matter, Scogin said, I will write a Letter to the
Ordinary, the contents whereof was this: After commendations, I certify you,
that where my Priest is complained on for a woman that he keeps in his house,
to wash his dishes and to gather rishes, to milk his cow, and to serve his
sow, to feed his hen and cock, to wash shirt and smock, his points to
unloose, and to wipe his shoes: to make bread and ale, both good, and eke
stale, and to make his bed, and to look his head, his garden she does weed,
and does help him at need: no man can say, but night and day, he could not
miss to clip and kiss: she is saire and fat, what for all that, I can no more
tell, but now fare you well. The parson did bear this letter to the Court, and
delivered it. The Ordinary said, Master parson you ^ee complained on because
you do keep a young wench in your house: Master said the Parson, she is not
young, for she is of the age of my horse. Why said the Ordinary, how old is
your horse? Master said the Parson, eighteen years old. Well said the
Ordinary you must put away your wench. Now, said the Priest, I had rather loose
my benefice: for then must I brew and ba^e, and do all things my self, and
that I will not do. Well said the Ordinary, I will come home to your house one
day, and see what rule you keep: sir said the Parson, you shall be welcome.
The Ordinary came to the Parsons house, and when he did see the wench, he
said; Vxor tua sicut vitis abundantis in lateribus domus tua. The Parson
thought the Ordinary had opposed him in our Latin Mattins, and said; Ec filij
tui sicut nouellae Oliuarum in circ^^t^ mensae tuae. The Ordinary was abashed,
and supposed that some man had told him of his children that he had in his
house of his own, sitting round about at his Table, was ashamed to rebuke the
Parson, and said nothing else, but farewell Master Parson. Thus a man may
perceive, that diverse times fools be fortunate. And it is evil and a foolish
thing, for a man to reprehend another man for a fault that he himself is
guilty in.

How the Parson said, Anupsimus quaesimus domine.
ANother time Master Scogin, and other Masters of Art in Oxford, did visit the
said Priest again, and found him at Mass, and at the last Collect, the Parson
said; An^p^mus quaesimus Domine. One of the Masters of Art said, Master Parson,
you must say; Sumpsimus quaesimus Domine. The Parson looked back, and said to
the Master of Art; I have said these dozen years, Anupsimus quaesimus Domine,
and I will not leave my old Anupsimus for thy new Sumpsimus: so they went to
dinner, and the Parson said to Scogin, I have not meat enough for you all. Well
said Scogin, such as you have set on the board, and so he did. Then one of the
Masters said grace, and began, Benedicite domine apposita, and apponenda. Nay
said Scogin put apponenda in your purse, and bless apposita, for here is on
the table all the meat at this tune you shall have, and I beshrew some of us,
and not me, for we had fared better, if Sumpsimus had not been here:
wherefore it appears, that he which tells the truth, oftentimes shall fare
the worse, or else be shent.

How Scogin told the hunter he had found a Hare.
SCogin had a great Hares skin, that was new killed, and he went to a wheat
land, that was an handful and an half high, and did lay there a foul great
mard; they that can speak French, can tell what a mard is, and couched the
Hares skin over it, and set up the Hares ears, and then he came to Oxford,
and said to them that used hunting, that he had found a Hare sitting. They ran
for their Greyhounds to kill the hare, and Scogin went with them to the land
where the Hare did sit. At last one espied the ears, and the head of the Hare,
and said, so how? stand you there, said the other, and give her the law of the
game. Scogin got him home to Oxford, and one that came to see the game, was bid
to put up the Hare, and when he came almost at the Hare, up whore he said, or I
will prick you in the buttocke by and by, but the Hare did not stir. At last
when he came to the place, he thrust his staff at the Hares skin, and did
turn it over, and under it was a great mard, he returned again as if he had
a flea in his ear to Oxford. Why said they do you not put up the Hare? Go
put her up your self with a vengeance said he, and went home again in an
anger: they that held their Gray hounds did marvel what he meant, and that
Scogin was gone: they went to see where the Hare should sit, and they found a
Hares skin and a great mard. Well said they, we can never beware of Scogins
mocks and jests, would part of this hare were in his mouth, and so they
departed: whereby you may see that fair words make fools feign.

How Scogin told his fellows he knew where was a Pickerell.
ON a, time Scogin said to his fellows, I have found where a Pickerell does
lie in a ditch behind Saint Wenefrides Well: said the one I can get a net, Go,
said Scogin and fetch it, and meet me behind S. Wenefrides Well. Scogin took a
long quarter staff, the which craftily he had cut more then half asunder.
Scogin did look into the water, and said, here about he should be. Then said
the one to the other, some must leap over. Hold the staff said Scogin. The
one of them took the staff, and pitched it into the water, and would have
lept over. The staff brook, and laid the Scholar in the middle of the water.
Then were the scholl ers ready to take him up with their net, and other policy.
Scogin shrunk away, and went home. When the scholar was taken out of the
water, Scogin was asked for and no man could tell where he was. The scholars
went home and found him out, and said: Is this the Pickerell that you would
show us? I pray you, said he, if you have taken him, let me have part with you:
Here a man may see daily, if a man have shrewd turns, he shall be mocked also
for his labor.

How Scogin sold powder to kill fleas?
SCogin diverse times did lack money, and could not tell what shift to make, at
last he thought to play the Physician, and did fill a box full of the powder of
a rotten post, and on a sunday he went to a Parish Church, and told the wives,
that he had a powder to kill up all the fleas in the country and every wife
bought a penny worth, and Scogin went his way ere Mass was done, the wives
went home, and cast the powder into their beds, (...) in their chambers, and
the fleas continued still. On a time Scogin came to the same Church on a
sunday, and when the wives had espied him, the one said to the other, this is
he that deceived us with the powder to kill fleas: see said the one to the
other, this is the selfsame person. When Mass was done, the wives gathered
about Scogin, and said; You be an honest man to deceive us with the powder to
kill fleas Why said Scogin, are not your sleas all dead? We have more now (said
they) then ever we had: I marvel of that, said Scogin, I am sure you did not
use the medicine As you should have done. They said, we did cast it in our
bed, and in our chambers. A, said he, there be a sort of feoles that will buy a
thing, and will not ask what they should do with it. I tell you all, that you
should have taken every slay by the neck, and then they would gape, and then
you should have cast a little of the powder into every fleas mouth and so you
should have killed them all. Then said the wives, we have not only lost our
money, but we are mocked for our labor.

How Scogin drew out an old woman's tooth.
THere was an old woman that had but one tooth in her head, and that did a^e
very sore, she went to Master Scogin for remedy. Come with me mother, said
Scogin, and you shall be healed by and by. He then got a packthreed, and went
to the Smiths forge with the woman, and he said to the Smith, I pray you heat
me a Coulter in your forge. I will said the Smith. Then he went to the old
woman and said, Mother, let me see your tooth, and she did so: he took his
packthree^, and bound it fast about the tooth, and tied the other end of the
thread at the ring of the forge door, whereas the Smith used to tie his horses
and mares, and when the culter was glowing hot, coggi^ took the culter, and
ran with it against the old woman saying; A whore do thou stand here like an
old mare: I will run thee through with this hot culter. The woman being afraid,
gave a braid with her head, and ran her way, and left her tooth behind her.
Scogin ran after the woman, and she cried out for help (for she was afraid
that Scogin would have burnt her.) The Smith ran after Scogin for his culter,
for he was afraid that Scogin would run away with it. Whereby you may see what
a terrible thing fear is.

How Scogin gave one a medicine to make him go to it.
ON a time there did a young man come to Scogin to have a medicine, saying, Sir,
I would have a medicine to make me go to it lustily, (he meant of Venus acts)
Scogin did give him an extreme purgation. The young man went to bed with his
Lemman. Within a while his belly began to rumble, and there was no remedy but
he must needs go to it so long, that he did defile both the chamber and the
bed, so that he and his lemman bathed themselves that night in dirt, Wherefore
it is good for all men, when they ask counsel of any man, to be plain in his
words, and not to speak in parables.

How Scogin gave one a medicine to make him find his horse.
THere was a man that had lost his horse, and he came to master Scogin, and
said, sir, I here say that you be a good Physician, and I have lost my horse,
and would fain know a remedy how I might find out my horse. Scogin gave that
man such a purgation, that he was constrained to run to every bush and hedge,
and peaking so about here and there, at last he found his horse. Then he
reported that Scogin was the best physician in the world.

Scogin was robbed as he went to London.
When Scogin did pretend to leave Oxford, he went to dwell at London: and as
he went toward London, he met with thieves, and they robbed him. And when he
came to London, he espied one of the thieves, and then he said to the
sergeants of London, yonder man robbed me when I came from Oxford. The thief
had spied Scogin talking with the sergeants, and fled his way. The sergeants
followed the thief, the thief did run, and the sergeants after. One came to
Scogin, and said, wherefore does yonder men run so fast? Scogin said for a
wager, but the foremost man has won, for lately he had all my money from me.
The sergeants cried hold the thief: the thief said, hold me not, I do run for
a wager. And when he was within S. Martins, he said, I have run well now, or
else I had been hanged.

Scogin told his wife he had parbraked a Crow.
AFter a while that Scogin came to London, he married a young woman, taking her
for a maid, as other men dee. At last he thought to prove his wife, and fained
himself sick. Oh good wife, says he, I will show you a thing, and if you
will promise me to conceal it. His wife said, sir, you may tell me what you
will, I were worse then accursed, if I should disclose your counsel: O wife
said Scogin, I had a great pang to day in my sickness, for I did parbrake and
cast out a Crow. A Crow, said she? Yea, said Scogin, God help me. Be of good
comfort, said she, you shall recover and do well. Well wife, said Scogin, go
to Church and pray for me: she went to the Church, and by and by one of her
gossips met with her, and asked how her husband did. I wi^ said she, a sore
sick man he is, and like to die, for there is an evil sign and token in him.
What is that Gossip said she? Nay by gisse, I will not tell it to any man
alive. What said the woman, you may tell me, for I will never bewray your
counsel: By gisse, said Scogins wife, if I wist that you would keep my counsel,
I would tell you. Then said the woman, whatsoever you do tell, I will lay it
dead under my feet. Oh said Scogins wife, my husband parbraked two Crows.
Jesus, said the woman, I never heard of such a thing. This woman as she did
meet with another gossip of hers, showed that Scogin had parbraked three
crows. So it went from one gossip to another, that ere Mattens were finished,
all the parish knew that Scogin had parbraked twenty Crows. And when the
Priest was ready to go into the Pulpit, one came to request him and all the
Parish to pray for Scogin, for he had parraked twenty Crows. The Priest
blessed him, and said to the Parishioners, I do pray you pray for Scogin, for
he is in peril of his life, and has parbraked 21 Crows. By and by one went
to Scogin and said; sir, is it as it is spoken in the Church of you? What is
that, said Scogin? The Priest said in the Pulpit that you parbraked 2^ Crows:
said Scogin, what a lie is this? By and by the bells were told for sacring, and
Scogin hied him to Church lustily and merry, and when the men and women did see
him in the Church, they looked upon one another, and marvelled of this matter.
After Mass, Scogin asked what were they that should bring up such a tale upon
him. At last the matter was so boulted out, that the original of the cause
began at Scogins wife. Here a man may see, that it is hard to trust a woman
with a ma^s secrets: wherefore it is good to prove a friend ere one have need.

How Scogin caused his wife to be let blood.
AFter that Scogins wife had played this aforesaid pranke, she used so long to
go a gossipping, that if her husband had spoken any word contrary to her mind,
she would crow against him, that all the street should ring of it. Scogin
thought it was time to break his wife of such matters, and said to her, I
would you would take other ways, or else I will displease you. Displease me,
said she, beware that you do not displease your self: Yea, said Scogin, I
will see tha^ one day, how you will displease me: she still continued in
opprobrious words: ^t last Scogin called her into a chamber, and took one of
his servants with him, and said to her, Dame you have a little hot and proud
blood about your heart, and in your stomach, and if it be not let out it will
infect you and many mo: therefore be content, there is no remedy, but that
blood must be let out, I (...) thee, said Scogins wife: (and was up in the
house top) yea, said he, come said Scogin to his servant and let us bind her to
this form: she scratched and clawed them by the faces, and spurned with her
feet so long that she was weary: so at the last she was bound hand and foot
to the form. Now said Scogin to his servant go fetch me a Surgeon, or a
Barbor that can let blood. The servant went and brought a Surgeon, Scogin said
to him, sir, it is so that my wife is mad, and does (...) and I have been with
Physicians, and they have counseled me to let her blood: she has infectious
blood about the heart, and I would have it out: sir said the surgeon, it shall be
done. Sogin said, she is so mad that she is bound to a form. The better for
that, said the surgeon: when Scogin and the surgeon entered into the chamber,
she made an exclamation upon Scogin. Then said Scogin, you may see that my
wife is mad. I pray you let her blood both in the arm and in the foot, and
under the tongue: Scogin and his man held out her arm and they did open a
vein named Cardica. When she had bled well, now stop that vein, said Scogin,
and let her blood under the foot. When she saw that, sir said she, forgive me
and I will never displease you hereafter: well said Scogin, if you do so, then
I do think it shall be best for us both: by this tale it proves that it is a
shrewd hurt that makes the body fare the worse, and an unhappy house where the
woman is master.

How Scogin and his wife made an Heir.
ON a time they died in London, and Scogin and his wife did lie in the
Country, and while he did lie there, he did purchase a copihold, and went to
ask counsel of a man of law, saying; I have purchased a copyhold, and I am
come to ask your counsel, and I will give you for your labor: sir, said the
man of law, your copy must be made (...) make as heir: sir said Scogin, in
this matter I will go home, and ask counsel of my wife, and to morrow I will
come again to you. Scogin went home and told his wife what the man of law had
said, that the Copy must be made under the form of law, and that it were good
to make an heir. Then Scogin said, wife let us go to bed, and we will make an
heir by and by. They went to bed, and Scogin pulled the sheet and the clothes
over his own head and his wives, and did let a great fart: now fiste thou woman
said Scogin, and we shall have an heir by and by: so long they lay together,
that with stink they were almost choked. Ah, said Scogin to his wife, I will
buy no more copihold, for it is naught to make an heir. On the morrow Scogin
went to the man of Law, saying, sir, be you ready to go to Westminster?
wherefore said the man of law* Scogin said to make my copy: sir said the man of
law, I can make it here in my house. Nay, said Scogin, you said to me yesterday
that it must be made under the form of law, and in Westminster is the best
form of law in England; and therefore let us go sit under one of those forms.
Tush said the man of law, the copy must be made according to the law, and
beside you and your wife, set in the copy one of your children, why said
Scogin, you bad me make an heir, and I and my wife made such an heir in our
beds yesternight, that she and I were almost poisoned: whereby it appears that
mis-hearing of a tale, makes misunderstanding therefore plain speech is
best, although Scogin knew what was spoken, and turned it to a jest.

How Scogin got the Abbots horse.
ON a time Scogin was sent for to the Abbot of Bury, to pastime with them,
where he fell sick and like to die, whereupon he was shriuen and would have
been hoasted, and he durst not for fear of casting. The Abbot said, Creed
and manducasti, that is to say, believe, and thou have received. When Scogin
recovered, the Abbot sent him his own horse to ride home on. Scogin sent not
home the Abbots horse, wherefore the Abbot sent for his horse, but Scogin
answered the messenger, and said when I was sick at home with your Master. I
would have received the holy Sacrament of the Altar, and he had me believe, and
I had received the sacrament of the Altar: so in like manner, let him believe
that he has received his horse, and it is sufficient, and tell him his horse
he shall never have: by this a man may perceive that a man should not lend his
horse, nor his weapon, nor his wife to no man, if he love himself, or his own
profit: for by it never comes gains.

How Scogin brought a dogs turd made in powder to the Apothecaries, to know
what powder it was.
When that Scogin did lie sick at Bury, he sent to the Apothecaries of London
for many medicines, and some were bitter, and some were sower, and some sweet.
When he was recovered and made whole, and at home in his own house, he walked
about the fields, and found upon a molehill, a white dogs turd, he put it in
a napkin, and after that he dried it in an oven, and made it into powder, and
went to the Apothecaries in London, and said, my friend has sent me a powder
to eat, and I cannot tell what it is: the Apothecary tasted it, and they could
not tell what powder it should be. At last he came to an old Apothecary, and
said, sir I pray you tell me what powder this is. The old Apothecary tasted it,
and spit it out again, and said, fie cocks dodykins, that is a turd. O good
Lord, said Scogin, cunning is worth much money, your fellows here in the City
have good mouths to taste lamp oil, and you have judged right. Here a man may
see that diverse times a man shall not only have a shrewd turn, but a mock
for his labor.

How Scogin did draw a tooth-drawers tooth.
ON a time there went a tooth-drawer round about the country, with a banner full
of teeth (as blind Physicians and Surgeons do now adays) the which
tooth-drawer said, he would draw out a tooth without any pain, which was false,
for when he pulled out some men's teeth, he pulled out a piece of the
cheek-bone; and took many men's money, and did much harm, and little good At
the last he came to Scogins house, and Scogin hearing of his doings, caused him
to come in, and said, Sir you be called a cunning drawer of a tooth. I have
pain in a tooth, and I would it were out of my head: sir, said the
tooth-drawer, and you will, I will have it out without any pain. I pray you
said Scogin, how will you do? sir, said he, I will raise the flesh about the
tooth, and then with a strong thread I will pull it out: sir, said Scogin, I
can pull out a tooth so: and because you say it is no pain to pull out a tooth
so, I will first pull out one of your teeth. Nay sir, said the tooth-drawer, I
have no pain in my teeth. Although you have not, said Scogin. I will pull a
tooth out of your head, and if you have no pain, you shall have an Angel for
your tooth: but if you have pain, you shall have nothing: sir, said the
tooth-drawer, I will have none of my teeth pulled out. Scogin said to his
servant, bring me a pair of manacles, for surely I will pull out one of thy
teeth, ere that thou shall pull out one of mine; therefore sit down, and take it
patiently, lest thou be put to greater pains. The tooth-drawer sat him down
with an evil will, and Scogin did raise the flesh about the tooth-drawers
tooth, that it was in such case, that the water did run down the
tooth-drawers eyes. Scogin said, does the water run forth of your eyes for
joy, or else for pain? The tooth-drawer said for joy, for I trust to get an
Angel of you, Be it, said Scogin. Scogin did knit a strong ^hreed about the
(...) ^oth-drawers tooth, and gave it a great twitch. Oh, said the tooth-drawer
what do you feel pain, said Scogin? yea said the ^^oth-drawer, you pull not
quickly. Then said Scogin, you have lost your ^ngell: Nay, said the
tooth-drawer: well, said Scogin, the tooth shall come now I trow, and Scogin
did twitch and pull hard at the tooth, and pulled it out. Out alas said the
tooth-drawer: Why said Scogin cry you out? Marry says the tooth-drawer, the
devil would cry out of this pain: Sir, said Scogin you taught me how I should
do, and you have lost your Angel: and seeing your cunning is no better, I
will have never a tooth pulled out now: and if you pull any of my neighbors
teeth after such sort as you have done, if you come in my walk, I will pull
out all the teeth in your head. Eat and drink ere you go, and so farewell.

How Scogin served the poor folks that came to his house to ask alms.
WHiles Scogin did lie thus in the Country, there resorted to his house
vagabonds and common beggars, and when he did see he could not be rid of
them, he said; come this day fortnight, for then I do give money for my
friends soul. Scogin had an old barn, that was ready to fall down, and in
the mean time he stopped all the holes with fur bushes, broom, old fearne,
and straw, and laid such trumpery about the barn. The day appointed, all the
vagabonds and beggars in the Country resorted unto Scogins house, and as they
did come, they wet put into the barn, and said they should have the^ alms
within a while. Scogin kept them fasting till three or four of the clock in
the afternoon and then he commanded his servants privily (...) set fire on the
straw, and the furs round about the bar^e, which was done. At last when the
vaga^ bonds and beggars did see that they were compasse^ round with fire, they
said one to another, we mu^^ run through the fire in some place, or else we
sha^^ be burnt up: so some ran through the fire in on^ place, and some in
another, and durst not look behind them. Scogin cried, saying, ^ary whoreson
whores, you have set my barn on fire, you shall be hanged every one. They fled
for fear, and never durst come again to Scogins house for alms Here a man
may see every promise is kept, or els^ broken, and it is good for every man to
keep himself out of the danger of all men, and especially of great men.

How Scogin came to the Court like a fool, and won twenty pounds with
standing under a spout in the rain.
When Scogin had dwelt in the country, he returned again to London, and fel^
acquainted with Gentlemen of the Kings privy chamber, which would feign that he
should come to the Court, and they would bring him into the Kings service.
Scogin was more beholding to one Gentleman, then to all the other, and said to
him, sir I will come to the Court like a dizard or fool, and when that I come,
I will ask for you, and when that we do meet, call me aside, that I may
speak with you: so on a rainy day Scogin came to the Court like a fool, and
the Kings Porters asked what he would have, and he said my fellow sir Neuill:
What manner of man is he, said the Porters? Scogin said, he has a nose, and
goes up and down on two legs: Then said the Porters this is a stark Idiot
fool, do thou know thy master, said the Porter, and if thou se^st him? I
know him, said Scogin, by his ^ap. Then said the Porters the one to the other,
who do you think should be this fools master? some said one, some said
another; at the last one said, I trow he be Sir William Neuils Fool. When
Scogin heard him say so, he leapt about and did laugh. Then one of the Porters
went to Sir William Neuill, and asked him if he had not a Fool. Yes said Sir
William Neuill: marry said the Porter, it is a mad merry Fool. Yea, said Sir
William Neuill, he is a very Jdest, he is not wise: Said the Porter, shall he
come to you? Nay, said Sir William Neuil, I will go my self to the Fool.
When Sir William Neuill and Scogin did meet, Sir William Neuill said, A Tom,
how do thou? (it rained ^ore) and Scogin said, I cannot be in rest, for
these knanes do power water still upon me, and no man touched him, but the
rain that fell down) Well Tom, said Sir William Neuill, come with me, and thou
shall go to the fire and dry thee. He brought him to his chamber, and then
said Scogin to Sir William Neuill, go and say, you have a natural fool come
to you, and if he were set under one of the spouts that do run so fast with
rain water, he will not come out. And make some great wager with some great
man, and lay down the money, that I will stand still under the spout, until
the time that I be fetched away by you, for I lack money, and I care not, said
Scogin to be wet. Then sir William went round about the Court with his fool,
and another Knight met with him, and said, What, have you got a fool? yea,
said Sir William Neuill, he is such a fool, that if he be set under one of
these spouts of the leads that runs now with rainewater, he will never come
away, until I do fetch him out of it. It is not so, said the Knight: yes,
said Sir William Neuill, and on that I will lay twenty pound: I hold it, said
the Knight, lay down the money. Scogin was glad of that: then sir William
Neuill said, Tom, come with me, and thou shall have a fig. A fig fellow, said
Scogin, where is it? Come said Sir William Neuill, and thou shall see. He
brought him under one of the spouts that did run with water, and said, here
is water to wash thy fig, stand still and I will bring thee a fig by and by: Sir
William Neuill departed, and Scogin stood so long under the spout, crying and
calling for his fellow sir William Neuill, that the water ran out at his heels
and his breethes, as fast as it did fall into his neck, and upon his head and
body, still calling and crying upon his fellow sir William Neuill. ^he Knight
seeing this, thought he should lose his bargain, said to sir William Neuill
Will you give me leave to entice him away by any craft or policy? yea, said
sir William Neuill, I am pleased, do what you can, so that by no strength ou
take him away: Nay said the Knight, that I will not. ^he knight went to Scogin
and said, A Tom, thy Master has left thee alone, and is dead, come with me to
a fire, and dry thee. Tehee said Scogin, fellow hoe, where art thou? why said
the Knight, thy fellow is dead, come and eat figs with me. Nay said Scogin,
(...) y fellow will give me a better fig then you will. The Knight meant of a
fig, but Scogin meant of the money that was laid on the bargain, in the
which he did know that his part was, so that by no manner of means, nor
policy, or craft, no man could get Scogin from standing under the spont. Every
man pitied Scogin, and said, this ^^ole will dye under the spout then said the
Knight and every man, go you master Neuil^ and fetch him away, for it is a
fool of all fools Then said Sir William Neuil^, if I fetch him away I have
won the bargain. The Knight said, it is so. Then sir William Neuill went to
Scogin, and as soon as Scogin had espied him, he leapt and danced under the
spout, saying, have thou brought my fig? no ^om, said Sir William Neuill but
come with me, and thou shall go to a fire. Nay said Scogin, give me a fig.
Come with me, said Sir William Neuill and thou shall have a fig. Sir William
Neuill brought him to his chamber, where he had a good fire, and gave him the
wager that was won.

How Scogin leapt over the Tables when dinner was done.
SCogin did mark the fashions of the Court, and amongst all other things, her
did mark how men did leap over the table in the Kings Hall, to sit down to
dinner and supper, which is not used now. Scogin seeing this, that as many as
did sit at the Table had meat, and they that stood in the hall beside, had
none, all that time he made shift for himself. And when dinner was done, and
all the tables taken up, Scogin set out trestles and leapt over them, and leapt
over the tables, and leapt from one table to another, that every body marvelled
what he meant. At last one did ask of him what he meant by leaping over the
tables. Scogin said, I do learn against supper to leap to sit down, for he
that cannot leap, gets no meat here. Therefore to forecast, and some
provision is good at all times.

How Scogin gave one a Goose leg, that was given him, and afterward told him
he had eaten an hundred lice.
IN the Court one gave Scogin a goose leg, saying, hold Tom, eat this. He put
it in his bosom. At last he came to one, and gave him the goose leg: and
within a while after Scogin met with the man unto whom he had given the goose
leg? and said to him: Have thou eaten the goose leg? the man said, yea: Much
good do it thee, said Scogin, thou have eaten an hundred lice. The man took a
conceit, and did cast up all his meat again. Here it is good to mark that a
man believe not every word that another does speak; for some do lie, some do
jest, some do mock, and some do scorn, and many men do say the very truth.

How Scogin swept a Lords Chamber.
SCogin on a time was desired to sweep a Lords chamber, and when he had swept
all the dust together, he threw it out against the wind, and the wind blew it
again into his face. Then said Scogin to the wind, let me cast out my duff
whoreson I say. Every man laughed at Scogin, seeing him to chide with the wind.

How Scogin told those that mocked him, that he^ had a wall eye.
SCogin went up and down in the Kings hall, and his hosen hung down, and his
(...) (...) awry, and his hat stood a booniour, so every man did mock Scogin,
some said he was a proper man, and did wear his raiment cleanly: some said,
the whoreson fool could not put on his own raiment: same said one thing and
some said another: at last Scogin said, Masters, you have praised me well, but
you did not espy one thing in me. What is that Tom, said the men? Marry said
Scogin, I have a wall eye. What meanest thou by that, said the men? Marry, said
Scogin, I have spyed a sort of knaves that do mock me, and are worse sooles
themselves.

How Scogin drew his son up and down the Court.
AFter this, Scogin went from the Court and put off his fools garments, and
came to the Court like an honest man, and brought his son to the Court with
him, and within the Court he drew his son up and down by the heels. The boy
cried out, and Scogin drew the boy in every corner. At last every man had pity
on the boy, and said, sir, what do you mean to draw the boy about the Court?
Masters, said Scogin, he is my son, and I do it for this cause; every man
does say, that that man, or child, which is drawn up in the Court, shall be
the better as long as he lives: and therefore I will every day once draw him
up and down the Court, after that he may come to preferment in the end.

How Scogin greased a fat sow on the arse.
SCogin had got a fat Sow, and killed her under the Court wall, besides the
Kings gate, he made a great fire, and got a great spit, and put the Sow on the
spit, and roasted her, and bought twenty pounds of butter, and still he powered
the butter with a ladle on the sowes buttocks Diverse men came to him, and said,
why do thou grease this fat sow on the arse? He said, I do as Kings and
Lords, and every man else does; for he that has enough, shall have more, and
he that has nothing shall go without, and this sow needs no basting nor
greasing, for she is fat enough, yet shall she have more then enough.

How the King gave Scogin a house to do what he would with it.
SCogin through Sir William Neuils procuration or preferment, was brought to
the Kings presence. The King said to him, Art thou he that did play the fool
in my Court, and did leaps to and fro in my Hall over the tables? Yea, and it
like your Grace, said Scogin. And art thou he that did grease the fat sow on
the arse? Yea, said Scogin. And why did thou so? said the King: Scogin said,
I do as your Grace does, and all your Lords as well spiritual as temporal
and as all rich men do, which do give to them that have enough, more then
enough, and he which has nothing, except he be an importunate crauer, shall
go without, and unless that he have some man to speak for him, he may go
pipe in an Juy leaf. Why said the King, what living have thou? Nothing, said
Scogin, nor never a house of mine own to put my head in. Would God, said
Scogin, that I might have some Cottage to dwell in. The King said, if thou will
be my Servant, I will give thee a house in Cheapside. I thank your Grace,
said Scogin, but I pray you give it me, so that I may do with my house what I
will. Yea, said the King, make thy writings after thine own mind, with the
best counsel that thou can, and it shall be sealed. Scogin was glad of that,
and he did make to do with his house what he would, his writings sealed with
the Kings sign Mannel. A little after the sealing, Scogin did buy a load of
firres, and two load of straw, and did cause it to be cast down in
Cheapeside, before the house that the King did give him. Diverse men did marvel
what it should mean. And within a while, Scogin with his men of Law, and
other, did come to the house to take possession: so after the form of law he
took possession. Then said Scogin, this house is old, and to pull it down were
a great cost and charge; wherefore I will burn it up with these firres and
straw: peradventure I will make of it a Church, or Chapel, that a Priest may
sing for me, so long as the world does continue. Go, said Scogin to his
servants, and fetch me hither some men to carry into my house straw and firres:
sir, said the good man of the house, I pray take a little respite, I have goods
in your house, and you cannot burn your house, but you shall hurt the whole
street. What is that to me, said Scogin, I have no charter of my life, I am
about a charitable act for my souls health: for charity first must be showed
to a man's own self, and after that to his neighbor: sir, said the Merchant
that was good man of the house, let it stand, and I and my neighbors will give
you as much as it is worth. Nay, said Scogin, I will not sell it. ^hen said the
Merchant, what shall I and my neighbors give you to let it stand still, and I
will pay you more then it was rented for before? There goes a bargain, said
Scogin, go to all your neighbors, and bring me word what they will give me
The neighbors did cast their heads together, and considering that he was (as
they thought) in the Kings favor, would gladly give him 40 pounds. When Scogin
heard these tidings, he was glad, and said, come bring me the money, and I am
contented that my house shall stand still, so that it may be over rented
according to my tenants promise. Thus Scogin by policy got money.

How Scogin played horse play in the Q. chamber.
SCogin said on a time to the Queen then being, Madam, and it like your Grace,
will you have horse play played in your chamber? Yea, said the Queen. Scogin
untrussed his points, and put down his breeches, as if he would have bewrayd
the chamber, and then kicked with his heeled, and said, wehee. Then he said to
his servant, come and comb me here, and then turn and kick and winse with
thy heels, and say, wehee. Out knave, said the Queen, out of my chamber.
Scogin went out of the chamber, saying, That he did it not, but by her leave;
and with her leave he might do her a great piece of service. After that the
Queen would have no more horseplay in her chamber. Therefore it is good for a
man to know what will happen, before he give leave to a business.

How Scogin let a fart, and said it was worth forty pounds.
THat time that Scogin was conversant, both in the Kings chamber, and in the
Queens, Scogin would peake here and there, about in the Queens chamber, or
lodging: the Queen by custom, (as most commonly all great women, and Ladies,
and Gentlewomen do:) she let a fart, saying, the same is worth to me twenty
pound. Scogin hearing this, girt out a fa^t like a horse or mare, saying, if
that fart be so dear of twenty pound, my fart is worth forty pounds. Pere a
man may see, that a knave may do that which an honest man may not speak.

How Scogin asked of the King five hundred oaks.
ON a time Scogin said to the King then being, and if it shall please your
Grace to give me five hundred Oaks to build me a house in the country, I were
much bound to your Grace. The king said, will not an hundred Oaks serve thee?
Yes and it like your Grace, said Scogin, it would do me good ease. Well said
the King, as for an hundred Oaks thou shall have with the better. I do thank
your Grace, said Scogin, for if I had asked but an hundred Oaks at the first, I
had had but twenty. Therefore it is good to ask enough of great men, for then
he shall have somewhat.

How Scogin would have made a shepherd ask him blessing.
ON a certain time the King rode a progress, and Scogin rode with the King,
and as they did ride, Scogin spied a shepherd, and then he said to the King,
I will make yonder shepherd to ask me blessing, for I will face him down
that I am his godfather. Let me see that said the King. Scogin did prick
forth his horse, and saluted the shepherd, saying, Good fellow where were thou
borne? He said in Lewksbury. Yea, said Scogin, I do know that better then thou
do, for I am thy Godfather, I am he that did lift thee from the cold water.
Nay, not so, said the fellow, I know my Godfather. Scogin said, I am one of
them, therefore sit down on thy knees, and ask me blessng, and thou shall
have a groat. Nay, said the Shepherd, I will none of your groat, nor I will
not sit down on my knees: No, said Scogin, if thou will not sit down and ask
me blessing, I will make thee; therefore do it by saire means. I will, said
the shepherd, ask of thee no blessing. Scogin leapt down off his horse, and
drew out his wood-knife, saying, sit down thou old knave, and do thy duty to
thy godfather. The shepherd said, put up thy knife, or else I will bless
thee with me sheep-hook, yea, said Scogin, that would I feign see: Scogin did
fly at the shepherd, and the shepherd at him, that at the last Scogin did
bear off the shepherds blows with his head and shoulders, and elbowes. The
King seeing that Scogin had the worst, said, stand to him Scogin, stand to him
Scogin. Scogin answered the King, I would you stood as nigh to him as I do:
for then he would not only beat out all the dust in your coat, but make some of
your gingles fly about your face. Scogin was weary of his god-fathership, and
ran to his horse. The shepherd followed him, and gave him three or four good
stripes over the back and shoulders, saying, take your leave good godfather
of your child are you go. Scogin leapt upon his horse, and rode to the King.
Then the King said to Scogin, have you given your blessing to your god-sonne,
or has your god-sonne blessed you? I hen said Scogin. a man cannot have a
shrewd turn, but he must be also mocked for his labor. Here a man may see,
that diverse times a man may do a thing in sport, and at the last it does turn
into good earnest.

How Scogin gave a Cowheard forty shillings to teach him his cunning in the
weather.
ON a time as Scogin was riding to the Abbot of Bury, he asked of a Cowheard
how far it was to Bury. The Cowheard said twenty miles. May I, said Scogin,
ride thither to night: Yea, said the Cowheard, if you ride not too fast, and
also if you ride not a good pace, you will be wet ere you come half way there.
As Scogin was riding on his way, he did see a cloud arise that was black, and
being afraid to be wet, he spurred his horse and did ride a great pace, and
riding so fast, his horse stumbled and strained his leg, and might not go.
Scogin reuoluing in his mind the Cowheards words, did set up his horse at a
poor man's house, and returned to the Cowheard, supposing that he had been a
good Astronomer, because he said, if you ride not too fast, you may be at Bury
to night, and also if you do not ride fast, you shall be wet ere you come
there. Scogin said to the Cowheard, what shall I give thee to tell me, when I
shall have rain or fair weather? There goes a bargain said the Cowheard:
what will thou give me? Scogin said, twenty shillings. Nay said the Cowheard
for forty shillings I will tell you and teach you, but I will be paid first.
Hold the money said Scogin. The Cowheard said, Sir do you see yonder Cow with
the cut tail? Yea, said Scogin: sir, said the Cowheard, when that she does
begin to set up her rumpe, and draw to a hedge or bush, within an hour after
you shall have rain: therefore take the Cow with you, and keep her as I do,
and you shall ever be sure to know when you shall have fair weather or foul.
Nay said Scogin, keep thy Cow still, and give me twenty shillings of my money.
That is of my gentleness said the Cowheard, howbeit you seem to be an honest
man, there is twenty shillings. Here a man may see, that wit is never good till
it be bought.

How a man told Scogin, that he thought the building of Paul's cost forty
shillings.
ON a time a poor man did come to London, to speak with Scogin, and Scogin
had him to Paul's Church to talk with him, and both walked round about the
Church: the poor man said, here is a goodly Church. Yea, said Scogin, what do
you think it cost making? The poor husbandman said, I trow it cost vorty
shilling. Yea, said Scogin that it did, and vorty shilling thereto. Ho there
said the poor man. Here a man may see, that little portion of money is a great
sum in a poor man's purse, and he that is ignorant in a matter, should be no
judge.

Of him that thought Paul's steeple had been so high, that one might look
over it.
THis aforesaid poor man desired that he might see Paul's steeple, that every
one said was so high. Scogin had the man into Finsbury field, and showed him
Paul's, saying; yonder is Paul's steeple. Tush, said the man, is that so high a
steeple: a man may look over it. The poor man thought it had been so high,
that no man might see or look over it. And thus you may see what the effect of
simplicity is.

How Scogin desired the King that he might say, Aue Maria gratia plena,
Dominus tecum, in his ear at certain times.
ON a certain time Scogin went to the kings Grace, and did desire that he might
come to him diverse times and sound in his ears, Aue Maria gratia plena,
Dominus tecum. The King was content he should do so except he were in great
business Nay, said Scogin, I will mark my time: I pray your Grace that I may
do thus this tweluemoneth, I am pleased said the King. Many men were suitors to
Scogin to be good to them, and did give him many gifts and rewards of gold and
silver, and other gifts, so that within the year, Scogin was a great rich man:
so when this year was out, Scogin desired the King to break his fast with
him. The King said, I will come. Scogin had prepared a Table for the King to
break his fast, and made him a goodly Cubboor^ of plate of gold and silver,
and he had cast over all his beds and tables, and co ners of his chamber full
of gold and silver: when the King did come thither, and see so much plate, and
gold, and silver, he asked of Scogin where he had it, and how he did get all
this treasure? Scogin said, by saying the Aue Maria in your ear, and seeing I
have got so much by it, what do they get that be about your Grace daily, and
be of your counsel, when that I with six words speaking have gotten so much?
He must needs swim that is held up by the chin.

How Scogin chalked out his wife the way to Church.
ON a time Scogins wife desired him that he would let her have a man to go
before her when she went abroad, or to Church. Why said Scogin, know you not
the way to the Church? The next sunday he arose betime in the morning and took
a piece of chalk, and made a strike all along the way from his house to the
Church. When his wife would go to the Church, she desired him again that one
of his servants might go before her to Church. It shall not need said Scogin,
for if you follow this chalk it will bring you the right way to the Church
door: so Scogins wife was feign to go to Church without a (...)

How Scogin desired of the Queen to know whether riches would not tempt men,
and especially women.
ON a time Scogin was jesting with the Queen, and said, Madam, riches, as
gold, silver, precious stones, and dignity do tempt men, and especial women
very sore, and cause women to fall to lechery and folly. The Queen said, a
good woman would never be tempted with gold or silver, or other riches. I pray
you Madam, said Scogin, if there were a goodly Lord or a Knight, that would
give you forty thousand pound to dally with you, what would you say to it? The
Queen said if any man living would give an hundred thousand pounds, I would
not leese my honesty for it. Then said Scogin, what if a man did give you an
hundred thousand thousand pounds, what would you do? I would said the Queen,
do no folly for so much. Then said Scogin, what if a man did give you this
house full of gold? The Queen said, a woman would do much for that. Lo, said
Scogin, if a man had g^ods enough, he might have a sovereign Lady. For the
which words the Queen took high displeasure with Scogin. Wherefore it does
appear, that it is not good jesting with Lords or Ladies: for if a man be
plain, or do tell the truth, he shall be shent for his labor.

How Scogin when he should have been beaten amongst the Ladies and
Gentlemomen, bad the strongest whore of them all give the first stroke.
THe Queen taking high displeasure with Scogin, desired of the King to have
Scogin punished, The King said, punish him as it shall please you. The Queen
said to her Ladies and Gentlewomen, get every one of you a napkin, and lay a
stone in it, and let half of you stand at the one side of the chamber, and the
other half at the other side, and when that Scogin shall come through, you
shall strik him with your stones. Scogin was sent for, and he seeing the Queen,
and the Ladies, and the Gentlewomen, standing at every side on a row, Scogin
said, shall we have here a play, or a procession? Nay knave said the Queen,
thou have diverse times played the knave with me, and I have license of the King
to punish thee as I shall think best: wherefore come hither to me, for every
Lady and Gentlewoman that is here, shall beat thee with stones. God forbid,
said Scogin, for then you will kill me; it were better that I did beat you with
stones. But Madam, ere I have this great punishment, let me speak a few words
shall I put off my raiment, and come naked among you? No, not so said the
Queen, come through as thou art. And if I go through you, said Scogin, I
shall kill you. Come forth said the Queen. I come said Scogin, and the
stro^gest whore of you all strike the first stroke. The Ladies and the
Gentlewomen looked one upon another, one said I am no whore, the other said, I
am as honest of my body as the best of you all, so there fell a contention
among them Then Scogin said, Madam and it like your Grace, will you command me
any more service? Go knave said the Queen, and bid thy wife come and speak
with me. Scogin said, and it like your Grace my wife cannot hear, except you
speak very high: let her come said the Queen, and I will deal with her well
enough.

How Scogins wife came to the Queen, and how Scogin was banished the Court.
WHen Scogins wife came to the Court, she was brought to the Queen, the
Queen with a high voice said to Scogins wife, art thou Scogins wife? Scogin
had showed his wife before that the Queen could not hear, and she cried out
to the Queen, and said, yea Madam, I am Scogins wife. The Queen cried out to
Scogins wife, and said, if thou be no honester then thy husband, it is pity
that thou should live, wherefore counsel him that he do not rail so largely
as he does with me. Scogins wife cried out to the Queen, saying and it like
yeur Grce he will not be ruled by me: why do thou cry out so loud said the
Queen? Madam, said Scogins wife, my husband showed me, that you could not
hear. Why what a knave is that, said the Queen, he told me that thou could
not hear. Alas, said Scogins wife, I ask you merry, for I had thought you
could not hear. Well, said the Queen, I will be even with the varlet thy
husband, for mocking thee and me. Whereupon the Queen went to the King,
saying; I pray your Grace that you would banish Scogin from the Court. The King
sent for Scogin, and said thou have displeased the Queen, wherefore I do
banish thee the Court, and if thou do come hither any more, my hounds and dogs
shall be set upon thee. Scogin went his way, and within two or three days he
had got a quick hare and was going to the Court: when the Kings servants had
espied him, they showed the King that Scogin was come to the Court. The King
said; take all the hounds and dogs, and set them upon Scogin. Every man did
run, some with hounds, and some with dogs. Scogin made no great have. When the
Kings servants had espied him, they did maintain their dogs to run at
Scogin. When the hounds were nigh Scogin, he cast before them the quick Hare,
and said to the hounds; Now, now, whoresons. The Hounds espied the Hare, and
followed her, and left Scogin: so Scogin went to the Court, and the Hare
escaped from the Hounds. The Kings servants showed what Scogin had done,
whereupon the King sent for Scogin, and said, thou did cast a Hare before my
Dogs, when they were set upon thee, go and look out the said Hare, or else
thou shall suffer death. The said Scogin, I can get you another quick Hare,
but it will be hard for me to find out the self same Hare. I will have the
self same Hare said the King: why said Scogin, I cannot tell where, or whither
I shoud go to look him. The King said, thou must look him as well where he
is not, as where he is. Well said Scogin, then I trust to find him out: Scogin
in the morning did go upon the Kings leads, and took with him a pickare and
a great beetle, and over the King he tore up the leads, and did beat down the
battlement: some of the privy chamber seeing this, went to Scogin, and said;
what art thou doing thou mad fellow? What am I doing, said Scogin, I am doing
the Kings commandment. Why said the Gentleman, the King did not command thee
to cast down his palace. Well said Scogin, if I do otherwise then I was
commanded to do, show your mind to the King. The Gentleman went to the King,
and said; Did you command Scoggin to cast down the battlement of your place,
and to pull up your Lead? Nay said the King. The Gentleman said, that Scogin
was making a foul work upon the leads. Go said the King, and bid him come
speak with me. Scogin came to the King, which said to him, why do thou pull
up my lead, and cast down the battlement of my place? Scogin said, I was doing
your commandment. My commandment said the king? yea said Scogin, and it like
your Grace, for yesterday you did command me upon pain of my life, to look
out the Hare that I did cast among your hounds, and I said, I could not tell
where I should look him: and you said, I must look him as well where he was
not, as where he was: and peradventure he is crept under the leads of this
place, or else some other of your places; and I will seek and search all the
places in England, but I will find out the Hare. Nay, said the King, thou shall
not do so, for I charge thee upon pain of thy death, to go out of my Realm,
and to tread upon none of my ground here in England.

How Scogin in the French Kings Court, came to a Gentlewomans door, and whined
like a dog.
WHen Scogin was thus commanded by the King, he got him into France, into the
French Kings Court, and there he iested. And first there was a Gentleman which
made a gentlewoman promise to come to her bed at nine a clock at night, he did
promise to come to her chamber door, and would scrape and s^rtch at the door
like a dog, and would whine. Scogin hearing this bargain, before nine a clock
came to the door, and scrapt with his nails, and did whine like a dog. Then
the Gentlewoman did rise and let him in; within a little while after, the
Gentleman did come, and scrape and whine at the door like a dog. Scogin arose
and went to the door, and said, arre, arre, like another dog. And after that,
the french Gentlewoman did love and Englishman. Wherefore in such matters, let
a man make no body of his counsel, lest he be deceived.

How Scogin told the French men he would fly into England.
ON a time Scogin made the Frenchmen believe that he would fly into England,
and did get him many goose wings, and tied them about his arms and legs, and
went upon an high tower, and spread his arms abroad as though he would fly,
and came down again, and said, that all his feathers were not fit about him,
and that he would fly on the morrow. On the morrow he got him up upon the
Tower, and there was much people gathered together to see him fly. Scogin did
shake his feathers, and said, all my feathers be not fit about me, come to
morrow, and I will fly. On the morrow Scogin got upon the Tower, and did shake
his feathers, saying, Go home fools, go home, trow you that I will break my
neck for your pleasure? nay, not so. There was a French man had indignation at
Scogin and he said, to morrow you shall see me fly to Paris. And he got him
wings, and went up upon the Tower, and spread his wings abroad, and would have
flowne, and fell down into the mote under the Tower. Every man was diligent to
get the man out of the water, and Scogin did take him by the hand, and said,
sir you be welcome from Paris. I think you have been in a great rain. Here a
man may see that one cannot have a shrewd turn in playing the fool, but he
shall have a mock for his labor.

How Scogin prayed to a Roode for an hundred French Crowns.
When Scogin was at Paris, he went to a Church, and kneeled down before the
Rood, and made his prayers as hereafter follows: O thou most blessed God,
whom I have honored and served all my life, take so much pity on me, as to
give me but a hundred french crowns, for now my need is so great that I must
needs have so much, and no less, for if I have but one less, I will not take
it. Scogin still continued his prayers, and would have no less then a hundred
french crowns The Parson of the Church was in the Roodloft, and heard all his
prayers, and thought he would try him, whether he would do as he said or no,
and went and did stand behind the Rood, and cast down before Scogin one French
Crown: Scogin seeing this, was glad, and said; O thou most blessed Lord, thou
know that this will do me but little pleasure. Scogin continued still in
his prayers, and desired the Roode to cast him down the rest, declaring what
great need he had. At the last when he saw there would no more be cast down,
he said, perchance, O Lord, thou have no more money here now, and therefore I
will take this in part of payment, till thou have more store: for I know, O
most blessed Lord, that thou art so pitiful a Lord, that if thou had so much
here, I should have it, and then he took up the french Crown and went his
way. When the Parson saw this, he repented him that he had cast down the
French Crown, and said; If I had thought thou would have had it, I would
not have cast it down to lose it so easily.

How Scogin was new christened, and confirmed a knave by the French Bishop.
THere was a Bishop in France, which was of the French kings Privy Counsel.
This Bishop had a man, whose name was Peter Arcadus: This Peter Arcadus
favored Scogin much because he was so merry, in so much, that he got Scogin
to be his chamberfellow, through whose procuration Scogin came in favor with
the Bishop. And on a time, Scogin in his jesting said, that the Bishops nose
was so long, that he could kiss no body: for which the Bishop was angry, and
commanded him to come no more within his gates. Then Scogin went and bought a
couple of Woodcocks, and because he could not be suffered to come in at the
Bishops gate, he got a long pole or rafter, the which he laid over the mote or
ditch of the Bishops house, intending to come unto the Bishop, and give him the
woodcocks for a present. As Scogin was half way over the rafter slipped, and he
fell into the Mote: at last, Scogin got out, and came in where he found the
Bishop at dinner, and said; If it please your honor, here I have brought you a
couple of Woodcockes. The Bishop seeing him, said, why thou knave, I commanded
thee to come no more within thy gates. Scogin said, I came not in at your
gates, for I came over your mote, where I was new christened, and now you have
confirmed me a knave, so by this means I must needs be a knave: Therefore I
desire you my Lord, not to be displeased, although I play the knave. Where at
the Bishop and all that were in the house laughed, and then the Bishop said, I
will pardon you for this time, so that hereafter you will be an honest man.

How Scogin deceived a Doctor of Physic.
THere was one Master Cranwood a Doctor of Physic in Paris, and he in a
morning did fetch from a Goldsmiths a silver Cup, the which he had bargained
for the day before, and he paid for it 26 french crowns, the which when he
came home, he delivered to his wife, and bad her set it up in her bubbord, and
he told her he would go visit his patients All this Scogin saw, and drew so
near to the Doctor, that he heard what he did say to his wife, and when he was
gone to his patients, Scogin went to the market and bought a Pickerell, for it
was on a sriday, and came to mistres Cranwood the Doctors wife, and said,
Mistress, your Husband here has sent you here a Pickerell, which he does
desire you to make ready against dinner, for he intends to have one of his
friends to dine with him to day, and he prays you to send him by me the
silver cup that he bid you set up in your Cubboord, for he will have the
Goldsmiths grave his name in it. Mistress Cranwood delivered to Scogin the
Cup, who incontinent went home to his chamber-fellow Peter, and told him what
he had done. When the Doctor came home, and did see such good cheer, he
asked his wife where she had the Pickerell: she smiled on him, and said, sir
you know well enough, for you sent it me in the morning by him that brought
you your silver Cup. Why said the Doctor, I sent you no Pickerell, nor no body
brought me my silver cup: yes that you did, said his wife, for he that came for
it, said, that you would have your name graven in it. When the Doctor did
perceive that he was deceived of his Cup, he began to chafe with his wife, and
at the last said, I trow he might well give a Pickerell, seeing he has for it
my silver Cup, which cost 26 Crowns.

How Scogin and three or four more deceived Tapster.
ON a night Scogin and his chamber-fellow and two or three of the Bishops
servants being merrily disposed, consult how they might have good cheer and
pay no money, and every one invented a way as they thought best. At las^ Scogin
said, I have invented a cleanly shift: At the sign of the Crown against
Peter's Church, is a new Tapster, which ere this has not seen any of us, and
he is also purblind, so that if he see us hereafter, he cannot know us
Therefore we will go thither and make good cheer, and when we have a
reckoning, we will contend who shall pay all, then will I say to avoid the
contention, that the Tapster shall be blinded, and we will run round about him,
and whosoever he catches first let him pay for all, and so we may escape away.
Every man liked Scogins device best, so in conclusion they came thither, and
had good cheer, for they spared no cost: so that in the end their reckoning
drew to ten shillings. Then as Scogin had devised before they did. The Tapster
was blinded, so they ran round about him, and fist Scogin got out, and then
another, so that at the last they got all away, and left the tapster groping in
every place about the house for him that should pay the shot. The master of the
house being in a chamber next to the place where they were, and hearing the
stamping that they made, came in to see what they did, whom the Tapster caught
in his arms, saying, sir you must pay the reckoning. Marry said his Master, so
I think I must indeed, for here is no body else to pay it. Then the Tapster
and his Master sought and enquired for Scogin, and the rest, but they could
neither and them, nor hear news of them.

How Scogin deceived the Poulters wife.
ON a time the aforesaid Bishop should feast diverse French Lords, and he gave
unto Peter Archadus (Scogins chamber-fellow) twenty French Crowns to bestow at
the Poulters, in Feasant, Partridge, Ploner, Quail, Woodcock, Lark and such
other: and because Scogins chamber-fellow had great business to do, he wrote all
such things as he would have bought in a bill, and desired Scogin to bestow the
money, who was well contented. When Scogin had this money, he imagined in his
mind how he might deceive some Poulter, and so to have the money to himself.
At last he came to a Poulter in Paris, and said, sir, it is so that my Master
the Abbot of Spilding, does feast a great many of his friends, and I must have
so many of every sort of your wares as is mentioned in this bill, therefore I
pray you lay them out quickly, and let the bill be prised reasonably, and to
morrow in the morning I will fetch them, and you shall have your money. The
wares were laid out and prized, and the sum came to six pound and odd money.
Then on the morrow Scogin did come to the Poulter, and asked if every thing
were ready. Yea, said the Poulter, and here is your bill reasonably prized.
Then said Scogin, let some body go with me for to receive your money: the
Poulter said, my wife shall go with you. Scogin went to S. Peter's Church, where
there was a Priest that had on his Albe, and was ready to go to Mass: Scogin
went to the Priest, and said; Master, here is a woman that will not be
persuaded that her Husband ought to be her head, and I have brought her to you,
to the intent you should persuade her. The Priest said, he would do what he
could. I thank you, said Scogin. Then Scogin came to the woman, and said, if
you will have your money, come to my Master, and hear what he does say. Then
Scogin came to the Priest, and said, Master, here is the woman, will you
dispatch her after Mass is done? yea, said the Priest. Then said Scogin to the
woman, you hear what my master does say, therefore I pray you send me by some
token whereby I may receive the wares. The woman sent him by a true token, and
then Scogin did hire two Porters, and did fetch away all the wares from the
Poulters house, and did carry it to his chamber: when mass was done, the
Priest called the Poulters wife unto him, and asked why she would not
acknowledge her husband to be her head? Why, said the woman, I cannot tarry to
reason of such matters, therefore I pray you to pay me my money, that I were
gone: wherefore said the Priest? the woman said, for wares that your man has
received. What man, said the Priest? he that spoke to you when you went to
mass: the Priest said, he is none of my man, and he said to me, that you would
not be persuaded that your husband ought to be your head. What master Abbot
said the woman, you shall not mock me so, I must have 6 pound and 8 shillings of
you for wares that your man has received, for you promised to pay me when you
went to mass. I am no Abbot, said the Priest, nor none of my men never
received any thing of you, nor I promised nothing when I went to mass, but
that I would persuade you to obey your Husband, who ought to be your head, and
so the Priest went his way. The woman perceiving that she was deceived, went
home to see if Scogin had received the ware and he had received them, and was
gone an hour before. Then both she and her husband sought for Scogin, but they
could not find him.

How Scogin deceived the Draper.
WHen Scogin should be made Master of Art, he wanted money to buy his apparel,
and he mused in his mind what shift he might make. At last he went to London
to a Draper, and said, sir, it is so, that I have a master which is Deane of
Wels, and he would have four gown clothes of sundry colors, but they must
be sad colors, and fine cloth, and he must have three pair of hose clothes
and lining; and I pray you make me a bill of the price of every thing, and to
morrow you shall have money. On the morrow in the morning Scogin went to Paul's
Church, and he did see a lusty Priest come in with two or three servants, and
did ask where he might say mass, and when the place was appointed, Scogin did
run to the Draper, and said, Sir, you must come or send one to receive your
money, for my master will say mass, and then in all have he must go to West
m^nster, therefore let one of your servants cut off the cloth. The Draper and
Scogin went to Paul's, and by that time the Priest had on his Alte, ready to go
to mass. Scogin went to the Priest, and said, master, it is so, that I have a
friend here which is troubled with a chin-cough, and he and I desire you that
after mass he may have three sups of the chalice, and for your pains he does
pray you to come to him to breakfast. The Priest said, I am pleased, I will do
your desire Then Scogin went to the Draper, and said, sir, come and hear what
my master does say. Then Scogin said to the Priest, master, here is the
Gentleman, will you dispatch him when mass is done? yea, said the Priest. Then
said Scogin, here is your bill of accounts, now send me to your servants, by
what token I shall receive that which my master has bought. The Draper said,
by the same token that I did tell them yesternight, that if they would not take
heed in time, they should never thrive. Upon this token all the stuff was
delivered to Scogin, and he carried it to the Carriers, and sent it to Oxford.
When the mass was done, the Priest called the Draper, and said, Gentleman come
hither to me, if you will have 3 sups of the chalice, sit down on your knees.
Why, said the Draper, should I sup of the Chalice? and wherefore shall I sit
down on my knees? Marry sir, said the Priest, your servant, as I suppose, did
come to me before mass, saying, that you had the chin-cough, and that you
would have three sups of the chalice, to be mended of your disease. The Draper
said, Master Deane of Wells, you shall not mock me so, I must have 13 pound
of you for clothes that your servant has of me for four gown clothes, and
three hose clothes, and lining for them, and here is a bill of every parcel,
and you said before mass that I should have it. What, said the Priest? Money,
said the Merchant. Nay, not so, said the Priest, I am not Deane of Wells, nor
I never bought nor sold with you, and you shall have no money of me, for I
promised nothing before mass, but 3 sups of the chalice, and if thou will have
that, take it, or else fare ye well. A fart for thy 3 sups of the chalice, said
the Draper give me my money. I owe thee none, said the Priest, nor none shall
thou have of me. The Merchant could not tell what to say, but hied himself home
to seek for Scogin, which was gone. Then said the Draper, I trow we have spun
a fair thraed, where is the man that should have the cloth? The servants said,
sir, he has it, and is gone. Which way, said the Merchant? We cannot tell, said
his servants. Why, said the Draper, did you deliver him all the stuff? yes,
sir, said they, because you sent us a true token. Then said the ^raper, I would
I had been ware my self first, for if I make many such bargains I shall
never thrive.

How Scogin told a shoemaker he was not at home.
THere was a shoemaker in Paris, which was a widower, and he was not very
wise, of him Scogin bought all his shoes, and on a time Scogin came to the
shoe-makers house to speak with him. The shoo-maker was at dinner, and bad his
maid say that he was not at home. Scogin by the maids answer perceived that her
master was within, but for that time he dissembled the matter, and went home:
shortly after the shoo-maker came to Scogins chamber, and asked for him; Scogin
hearing the shoo-maker enquire for him, said aloud, I am not at home. Then said
the shoo-maker, what man think you that I know not your voice? why, said
Scogin, what an dishonest man are you: when I came to your house, I believed
your maid that said, you were not at home, and you will not believe me mine
own self.

How the aforesaid shoo-maker gave Scogin forty shillings to have his house
made greater.
THe aforesaid shoemaker married a rich widow, whereby his household was
greatly increased. And on a time Scogin came thither, and seeing that he had so
many servants, and much household scuffe heapt up in every corner of his house,
said that he had need have a greater house. Yea, said the shoemaker, I would
spend forty shillings that the house were butthree yards brother: Scogin said,
give me the money, and you shall have it made as broad as you will. Hold said
the shoo-maker, here is the money. Then Scogin caused one of the shoo-makers
horses to be tied to the house side, and got a chair with wheels in the feet,
wherein he bad the shoo-maker sit, and said, when the house is as you would
have it, speak. Scogin bad one of the shoe-makers men that he should make the
horse draw a little, and he himself stood behind the shoo-maker, and ever as
the horse drew, Scogin would pull the chair to him that the shoo-maker did sit
in, and asked him if the house were broad enough yet. The shoemaker for the
noise that the horse made with drawing, and for Scogins talking, did not
perceive how Scogin did pull the chair, but thought that the horse did pull
the house broader. When Scogin had drawn the chair a good way, the shoo-maker
said, this side is broad enough, now let the other side be drawn out as much.
Then Scogin tied the horse to the other side of the house, and turned the
chair, and caused the shoo-maker to sit in it again, and did as he had done
before, and drew the chair a good way back, saying is the house broad enough
yet? the shomaker said, yea; I thank you it is as broad as I would have it.
Then Scogin had the shoo-makers man set up his horse, and he took his chair
and went his way.

How the shomaker would have made his house greater, and brake down the one
side of it.
Within two or three days after this, the shomaker thought to make his house
greater, and caused the horse to be tied to the house side again and he
himself sat down in a chair in the midst of the house, to see when it was
broad enough, and bad one of his men to make the horse draw. The horse pulled,
but the house was never the broader. Then the shomaker caused another horse to
be tied to the house side. Then both the horses drew so much, that they pulled
down four or five posts of the house, which caused the tiles to fall, so
that the shooe-makers head was broken in two or three places. Then the shomaker
was feign to bestow a great deal of money in mending his house, and at the
Surgeons for healing his head. After this he met with Scogin, and told him what
a great mischance he had. Why said Scogin, when it was well you could not let
it alone.

How Scogin told the French King that he could not do two things at once.
ON a time the French King and Scogin did ride together, and the King said to
Scogin, why do thou not speak? Why sir, said Scogin, will you have me do
two things at once? will you have me ride and speak too? nay, said he, that
were too much: for it is hard to serve two Lords, and two Masters, and please
does the parties.

How the French King had Scogin into his house of office, and showed him the
King of Englands picture.
ON a time when the French King went to his stool, he did take Scogin with
him: then said the French King to Scogin, look behind thee who is pictured on
the wall. Scogin looked, and said; it is a fair picture. The King said thou
may see what I do make of a picture of thy King. Scogin beheld the picture
of the King of England, and said to the French King; Jesu Christ, here is a
wonderful thing, what would you do if you did see the King of England in the
face as he is, when that for fear you do beshite your self, when that you
look but upon a picture of him? Then the French King banished Scogin out of
France, and he came into England again.

How Scogin put French earth into his shoes, and came into England.
WHen Scogin was banished out of France he filled his shoes full of French
earth, and came into England and went into the Kings Court, and as soon as he
came to the Court, the King said to him, I did charge thee that thou should
never tread upon my ground of England: It is true, said Scogin, and no more I
do. What Traitor, said the King, whose ground is that thou stand on now.
Scogin said, I stand upon the French Kings ground, and that you shall see, and
first he put off the one shoe, and it was full of earth, then said Scogin this
earth I brought out of France: Then said the King, I charge thee never to look
me more in the face.

How Scogin came to Cambridge, and how he deceived the poor folks.
AFter the King had commanded Scogin to look him no more in the face, he went
to Cambridg^^* and through one Master Euerid that was his friend, he got him a
chamber in Jesus College: so on a time about Mid-summerfaire he lacked money,
and at last he got him a pair of crutches, and a patched Cloak, and took a
coard, and bound up one of his legs behind him, and went to Barnwell with his
crutches, like as if he had lacked one leg, and came among the poor folks
like a stout beggar And after he had been there a little while, he would
needs keep all the money that was gotten, and at the end of the fair, he
said, it should be parted equally among them all. At last with much ado they
were contented: so when the fair was almost ended, Scogin said to the poor
folk, I must go into that corn and ease me, and I will come again by and
by. Scogin went into a Rye land, and put off his cloak, and untied the coard
that he had bound his leg with, and ran as fast as he could to Jesus
College. The poor folks espied him, and followed after him as fast as they
could: some that had not gone without crutches a long time before, had almost
overtaken him. Scogin was there before them, and had the key of his chamber,
and had put on other apparel, by that time the poor folks were come to the
College, and were searching in every place for him. At last Scogin came out of
his chamber to them, and said; what do you all here? Marry, said they, there
is a naughty man that has deceived us of all that we have gotten this Fair
time, and he came running into this College, and for him do we seek. What
manner of man is he, said Scogin? sir, said one of them, if your mastership
would not be angry, I would say you were as like him as ever any man might be.
Well, said Scogin, you must get you away, for you let us of our study. The
poor folks went their way, cursing him a hundred times that had so deceived
them.

How Scogin rode to New Castle with Master Euerid, and what talk he had with
a fellow that kept Oxen.
AFter that Scogin had been at Cambridge a little while, his friend Master
Euerid would go to New Castle, (to take possession of certain houses) and he
said to Scogin; If you will go with me to New Castle, I will bear your cost
and charges. Scogin was content, and went with him, and when they were within
twelve miles of New Castle, Scogin did see a fellow that was keeping of Oxen,
that sat under a bush clouting of his shoes. Scogin said to the fellow, How
far is it to New Castle? I cannot tell said the fellow. Then said Scogin what
is it a clock? The fellow said, he could not tell. Then said Scogin, what
Town is this before us? I cannot tell, said the fellow. Then Scogin thought he
had been a fool, and said, did thou not see an empty cart come by this way,
with two great milstones in it? The fellow said, no. Then Scogin laughed, and
was riding away. The fellow called him again, and said; Sir, I did not see no
such cart as you ask for, come this way, but here came a naked boy by, with a
white loaf in his bosom, and a straw in his arse to pick your teeth. Scogin
rode his way, and said nothing, whereat Master Euerid and his men laughed.

What shift Scogin made for boots, and how he deceived two shoo-makers.
When Scogin should ride home again his boots were naught, and he could not
tell what shift to make. At last he devised what he might do: whereupon he
sent his man for a shoo-maker to bring him a pair of Boots. The shoo-maker
brought the boots, and when he had pulled on the right foot boot, and was
pulling on the other boot, Scogin said, it was marvelous strait, and that it
did pinch his leg: wherefore he prayed him to carry it home, and set it on the
last an hour or two: for (quoth he) I have a thing to write that will hold
me two hours, and all that time I will sit and write, and keep this other
boot on my leg still until that be ready. The shoo-maker took the boot and
went home, as Scogin had bidden him. When the shoo-maker was gone, he sent his
man for another shoo-maker, and caused one to pull off the boot which the first
shoo-maker had pulled on When the other shoo-maker was come, Scogin caused him
to pull on the left boot, and when he was pullin^ on the right foot boot,
Scogin found fault with it, as he did with the first shoo-maker and sent him
away in like sort: when he was gone, he caused his man to make ready their
horses, and he pulled on the boot again, which the first shoo-maker had left
behind him, and so he rode away with the two boots of two shoo-makers:
shortly after the shoo-makers came and enquired for Scogin, but he and his man
were gone, almost an hour before.

How Scogin ouertooke a Priest and kept company with him, and how he and the
Priest prayed for money.
WHen Scogin and his man had ridden ten or twelve miles on their way, he
ouertooke a Priest that was riding to London, to pay his first fruits, with
whom he kept company until he came to Stamford, and all that way as they
rode, Scogin made the Priest very good cheer, and would let him pay no money,
so that Scogin had but two shillings left: and riding between Stamford and
Huntington, Scogin complained him to the Parson in this sort: I marvel master
Parson (quoth he) how men do when they want money, to get it? For when I want
money, I know not how to get any, except I should steal. No, no, said the
Priest, do you not know that they that serve God well, do not want, and how
that God promises, that if you call upon him in your afflictions, that he
will help you? You say well master Parson, said Scogin, and rode before: and
when he saw a fair place, he kneeled down and lifted up his hands, and
prayed to God, till Master Parson and his man did overtake him, but nothing he
could get: when they were come, he told them he prayed, but could get nothing.
But (quoth he) I will try once again, and then if I can get nothing, both you
Master Parson and my man shall help me to pray, for I do not doubt but God
will help something, when he hears allour prayers. And then Scogin did ride
before again, and when he saw his place convenient, he alighted him from his
horse and tied him to a tree, and kneeled down, and prayed as he had done
before, until such time as they came to him. Then said the Parson, How do you
now Master Scogin? By my troth, said he, I can get nothing, wherefore alight
sir, quoth he, to his man, and tie your horse to yonder tree, and then he
went to the Parson and took his horse by the bridle, and told him he must
needs help him to pray. The Parson for fear durst not say him nay, but
alighted, and took his capcas^ from the saddle bow, wherein was fifty pounds.
Then Scogin asked his man how much money he had in his purse? He said, twenty
pence By my troth, said Scogin, and I have but twoshillings, and how much have
you Master Parson? said he. The Parson thought that if he had told him all,
he would surely have borrowed a good part of it, and he said, five pounds
Well, let us pray heartily, said Scogin, and the^ they kneeled down, and prayed
for the spac^ of half an hour: and Scogin said, let us see whether God have
heard our request, or no And then he looked in his own purse, where wa^ but two
shillings, and then he looked in his man^ purse, where was but twenty pence
Then Scogin came to the Parson, and said: Now Master Parson let us see what you
have, for I do not doubt but God has heard our prayers, and took the Priests
capcase and opened it, wherein was a bag with fifty ^ounds in it, which the
Parson should have paid for his first fruits: Then Scogin spread his cloak
abroad, and powered out the money, and when he had told it, he said; By Lady
Master Parson God has heard our prayer: and then he gave him five pounds, and
said, Master Parson, here is the five pound that thou had before we began to
pray, and the rest we will have: for I see that you are so well acquainted with
God, that with praying half an hour, you can get as much more: and this will
do us great pleasure, and it is but a small matter for you to pray half an
hour. The Parson desired Scogin to let him have the rest of the money, for he
said that he did ride to London to pay his first fruits. Well said Scogin,
then you must pray again, for we will have this, and so they rode away and
left the Priest behind them: and the Priest was feign to ride home again for
more money.

How Scogin came to the Court like a monstrous beast, and should have been
hanged.
SCogin was weary of Cambridge, and could not tell how to do, because the King
had commanded him to look him no more in the face. At last he got him a Bears
foot, and an Ox foot, and tied them under his feet, then he took a horse foot
in one of his hands, and his other hand served for another foot, and Scogin lay
about the Court, and on a certain night there sell a snow. Scogin within half
a mile of the Kings place, went with his aforesaid three feet, and his hand
which served for the fourth foot, and when he had set a circuit, he went into
an old house, where there was an oven, and he crept into it, and set out his
arse. In the morning the trace of this monstrous beast was found, and well was
he that might first come to the Court to tell the King what a monstrous beast
this should be, that the one foot was like a Bears foot, and the other like
an Ox foot, and the other foot like a horse foot, and the other like a man's
hand. As soon as the King heard of this, he called his hunters to go with
him to find out the trace of this monstrous beast. And that found, there was a
great yelping of hounds, and blowing of horns, and at last the hounds did come
to a bay. The King and the Lords pricked forth their geldings, and rode to the
old house, and looked into the oven, and Scogin did set out his bare arse. What
knave is this, said the King? I sir, said Scogin, whom your charged not to
look you in the face, wherefore I must needs turn mine arse to you. Well
knave, said the King, thou shall be hanged for this pranke doing. Scogin leapt
out of the oven, and pulled up his breech, and said; I desire your Grace, if I
shall be hanged, let me choose the tree I shall be hanged on. I am content, said
the King. Four men were appointed to hang Scogin, Scogin had provided a bottle
of wine, and sucket, and marmalade, and green ginger and said to them that
should hang him, Masters, the Kings Grace has given me license (as you know)
to choose what manner of Tree I shall hang on, and in the Forest of Windsor be
goodly trees, and thither will I go. Scogin went before them, and ever looked
upon many oaks and trees, and ever was eating of his sucket, and marmalade, and
green ginger, and drank still on his bottle, saying, God knows the pangs of
death are dry. When night was come, and the men being all day without meat and
drink, fainted, and said, Good Scogin, the night draws on, and we have eaten
no meat to day, and where we shall lie to night we cannot tell: choose one tree
or other to be hanged on. O Masters, said Scogin, make no haste for my
hanging, for it would grieve the best of you all to be hanged. Scogin wandered
about here and there until it was a good while within night. Then said Scogin,
here is a fair tree, let us go lie under it all night. The men said, we are
so faint that we cannot tell what to do. Well, said Scogin, you seem to be
honest men, go to your King, an^ have me commended to him, and tell him that I
will never choose a tree to be hanged on: and s^ fare you well. He is a mad
man that may save his own life, and will kill himself.

How Scogin asked the King and Queen forgiveness.
SCogin seeing that he had lost the favor (...) the King and Queen, he
mused how he might be pardoned of the King and of the Queen. He heard say
that the King would ride a progress and at a convenient place, Scogin said to
his servant, cast a couerlet over me, and say that I am dead, and say that at
my departure, I desire thee to pray the King and Queen to forgive me. When the
King and Queen did come by, Scogin lying under the couerlet by the high way,
h^^ servant said, Here does lie Scogin dead, and when he departed, he prayed
both your Graces to forgive him. Now (said the King and Queen) Go^ forgive him,
and we do: Scogin start up, an^ said, I do thank both your Graces, and
hereafter I will no more displease you. For I see it (...) more harder to keep
a friend, then to get one.

How Scogin told the Queen what a great stud^ he was in.
AFter that Scogin had got his pardon (...) the King and of the Queen, as it is
rehearse^ he used honest jesting with the King and Queen. And on a time before
the Queen he stood in a great study. Whereon do thou muse Scogin, said the
Queen? Muse, said Scogin, I am musing on a matter that would trouble any man's
brains living: for it makes me to sweat on the brows to bring it to pass.
Tell me, said the Queen the matter. I shall, said Scogin: Every man tells
me, that our Parson is my ghostly father, and that the Church is my mother,
then would I feign know, what kin I am to the steeple? The Queen said, thou
must needs be alianced to the steeple. I thank your Grace, said Scogin, for
you have brought me out of a great doubt.

How diverse Gentlemen of the Court came to Scogins house to make merry.
ON a time diverse Gentlemen of the Court said to Scogin, Gentle master Scogin,
we would laugh, and therefore we will come to your house to make merry, and
we will tarry all night, so that you will provide for us beds and horse meat:
you shall not lack, said Scogin. The Gentlemen came to Scogins house, thinking
that Scogin had provided all things necessary for them. When they were come to
his house, there was no manner of provision, neither for horse meat, man's meat,
nor lodging. Scogin seeing his friends were come to his house, said, Masters,
you be welcome, and that is the best cheer that I have: and as for meat for
you, I have it not at this time, but only an apple, and therefore I pray you
not to be discontented, considering the old proverb in Latin is, Dat p^ra vel
poma, qui non habet alia dona. The which is to say, he that has no other gift,
must give an apple or pear: I say, said Scogin, I have at this time no better
cheer, therefore I pray you be contented with your fare. Why said the
Gentlemen, have you meat for our horses? Masters all, said Scogin, I have a
house, but I have no land; I have neither hay, grass, nor corn, nor pasture,
unless it be in the Churchyard, and there I have seven foot that I do
challenge, therefore let your horses go there. Then said the Gentlemen, how
shall we do for our beds and lodgings? Masters all, said Scogin, as for beds
care not, for I have enough for you all Then we care not, said the Gentlemen:
has^ thou beside thy apple, any drink? yea, said Scogin, as good as any is in
the well. Why then said the Gentlemen, bring us to our beds: that I will, said
Scogin, which did bring them to his garden, saying, Masters, choose every man
his lodging in these beds, for these be the best bedsthat I have. Then one
Gentleman said, we^ came hither to laugh, but I suppose we shall weep ere we
have done. Here a man may s^^ that the thing which men do suppose; God dot^
dispose, and let no man think that there was never so great a flood, but there
may be as low an ebb: And in this case is to be considered, that no man can
ask more of a man then he is able to do.

How Scogin fell sick of a perilous cough.
THe time was come that Scogins days drew to an end, who was infected with a
perilous cough. His Physicians did counsel him neither to eat cheese nor
nuts. And why so, said Scogin? The Physician said, for such things do cause
and provoke coughing. Nay, said Scogin, that cannot be so, for a sheep does
neither ^ate cheese nor nuts, and there is no beast living that has the cough
so much: then said the Phy^itian, if they did or ^ould eat it such things ^ould
augment and increase their infirmity. therefore it is good to refrain from
contagi^us meats and drinks, according to the infirmi^y of a man's disease.

How Scogin was shriuen and hosted.
SCogins sickness increased more and more, and he sent for the Priest to be
shriuen and ^osted. The Priest coming to him with the Sacrament of the Altar,
said, Master Scogin ^ere I have brought to you our blessed Lord God in form of
bread that dyed on the Cross (...) all sinners, do you believe in him? Yea,
said Scogin, or else would I were burnt at a stake. Then said the Priest, ere
you do receive him, you must be contrite of your offenses, and be shriuen,
and recognize your self a sinner. That will I gladly, said Scogin: He being
shriuen, and being penitent, received the Sacrament devoutly, and that done,
Scogin said, good Lord, I do thank thee for all thy benefits: but Masters, I
tell you all that stand about me, if I might live to eat a Christmasse pie, I
care not then if (...) dye by and by after: for Christmasse pyes be good meat.
Here is to be noted that a man is loath to dye, although there be no remedy,
and he that can rejoice him in God, and in mirth without sin, that man is happy.

How Scogin desired that he might be buried at the East side of Westminster.
SCogin waxing sicker and sicker, his friends advertised him to make his
Testament, and to show where he would lie after he was dead: Friends, said
Scogin. when I came into this World, I brought nething with me, and when I
shall depart out of this world, I shall take nothing away but a sheet: take you
the sheet, and let me have the beginning again naked. And if you cannot do
this for me, I pray you that I may be buried at the East side of We^^minster,
under one of the spouts of the leads, for I have ever loved good drink all the
days of my life: and there was he buried. Whereas now the (...) ancient and
sapient King Henry the seventh (...) build the most sumptuous Chapel in the
(...) whereas the said sapient King does lie, as (...) (...) seems an
armipotent Prince and King to lys.

What Scogin said when the holy Candle was pu^ in his hand.
When the extreme pangs of death came upon Scogin, the holy Candl* was put in
his hand to bless himself. When Scogin had done so, in surrendering thanks to
God, he said, now the ^rouerbe is fulfilled, that he that worst may shall hold
the Candle, for ever the weakest is thrust to the w^ll.

FINIS.

