THE GVIDE OF HONOR, Or the Balance wherein she may weigh her Actions.

A Discourse written (by way of humble advise) by the Author then residing in
Foreign parts, to a truly Noble Lord of England his most honored Friend.

Worthy the perusal of all who are Gently or Nobly borne, whom it instructs
how to carry themselves in both Fortunes with applause and security.

By ANTONY STAFFORD, Gent.

Printed at London, by T. C. for S. Cartwright, dwelling at the Bible in
Ducklane. 1634.

October. 1. 1633.
PErlegi hunc Libellum cui titulus (A discourse written by way of humble
advise, etc.) qui continet folia 30. paginas vero 57. in quibus nil reperio
sanae Doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium, nec (...) quiequa^ quo minus cum
publica utilitate ^^^rimatur, modo intra tres Menses proxime sequentes, Typis
mandetur.

Guilielmus Haywood, Arch Cantuar. Capell. domesticus.

TO THE CONstant lover of Virtue, and Knowledge, the right Honorable, George,
Baron of Barkeley, Mowbray, Segrave, and Brufe, and Knight of the Order of the
Bath to his Majesty now reigning.
MY LORD,
TWelve years are past, since this Handmaid of Honor, made her first address
to your Lordship, and will not now part from you. Indeed she can not leave
you, and keep her shame, in that she owes her Essence to you, being Composed
of your Heroic Virtues. He that Converseth with you need not see her; for you
two differ in nothing, save in the lively Grace which all Originals have above
their Coppies. If in your Lordships eye she appears not fair enough, look
into yourselfe, and form her anew out of your own bosom, where Perfections
dwell, to which I can not penetrate. I could wish too, you would apparel your
own Child in your own Phrase, Gentle, and Sweet as your own Disposition.
My Noblest Lord, it is impossible for me to flatter you, since I can not
out-speake my love, or your Merit. He that thinks I insinuate, let him in my
hearing take but one Syllable from this, and I here promise, he shall find
me a greater Prodigal of life then of Language. I pay my God only Love,
Thanks, and Reverence for my Creation; and a greater return, you can not
expect, whom he has made the Noble mean of my Preservation. Of that due
Oblation you may rest Confident; For I can never be so unmanned as to be
ungrateful. I can only say, I am truly sorry that (for your sake) I am not
Master of many Life's; not that I desire to live long, but to dye often in your
service. I am barred further protestation by the haste I make to profess my
self

Your Lordships most humble, loyal servant Antony Stafford.

To the Noble Reader.
FOr to such only this Maiden Guide of Honor, desires access. The detracting
brood, whom Malice has begot on Ignorance, she holds not worthy of her
Salutation, much less of her Service. She knows that Hercules after his
fifty Labors, grappell'd with Envy, and expects the like encounter. These Fly
wits (that search all over a body for a sore, and where they cannot find they
make one) imitate in this their great patron Momus, who (when he could not espy
any member, or feature in Venus justly liable to detraction) cride out upon the
creaking of her pantables. They rail at the Ages past, condemn the Present,
and already judge the Future. These severe Judges will have a man as serious in
his first Book as his last Will. Some of them lately have not spared even
Apollo's first borne, incomparable, and inimitable Sir Phillip Sydney, whose
Arcadia they confine only to the reading of Chambermaids; a censure that can
proceed from none but the sons of Kitchinmaids. Let me perish, if I think
not his very Skull yet retains more: wit then the passive brains of these
wretched things, between whose Souls, and Knowledge, there is a Gulf. But
how come I to descend to these poor Abjects, whose inflexible dullness, and
obstinacy, Reason herself cannot bend. I confess nothing could make me
voutsafe them a word, were I not fired with their under valluing of that truth
Worthy who (next her Kings) is the first glory this Island can boast of. A man
deserving both the Laurels, and the Crown to boot, The polish Crown
designed him by the Votes of many brave Spirits, who discovered in him all the
requisits of a King but the Title.

This is no digression, Noble Reader; for the Guide I have given you, is also
the Champion of Honor and of her sacred seed, of which he was the first in
worth, though not in time. Are you enflamed with a Desire of Domestical Glory?
Imitate the truly great Sydney, whose only Example is far above all my
Precepts. Can you with the Arcadians boast your self ancienter then the Moon?
If you live out of virtues Shine, your Antiquity does not illustrate, but
obscure you. Has Fortune sterv'd the rest of humanity to feed you? Without
learning you are as blind as your Goddess. Has Nature bestowed her utmost
Art on you? Without Knowledge you are, at the best, but an unhabited Paradise.
Blush then to sit in the Theater, one stone upon another. Shame forbids that
your inward, and outward sight, should have one and the same Horizon. Which
ignominy that you may eschew, emulate the ever famous, ever blessed Sydney,
who is as far above the Envy, as the Understanding of his Detracters, more
capable of a Bastinad^ then an Apology.

Now for this true Servant of Honor* I assure you she had never kissed your
hands, but that I feared another would send her to you without or Equipage, or
my consent. Heaven be praised, she comes not from me with such labor that she
needs a Midwife to bring her forth. She is now by my Command come to wait on
you: If you follow her close, she will bring you into the embraces of her
Mistress, between whose arms Posterity shall find you sleeping. Which
supreme humane happiness is unfainedly wished you, by

Your most humble servant, Antony Stafford.

THE GVIDE OF HONOR, OR A DISCOVRSE Written by way of humble advice, by the
Author then residing in Foreign parts, to a Noble Lord of England, his most
Honored Friend.
ALl the present occurrences, both of these, and other parts, my last will
present to your Lordships gracious acceptance. I will lay aside therefore
Foreign business, and humbly advise your Lordship concerning your own. I
may truly say your own, by reason your Honor, and Happiness in this life,
and your Fame with Posterity depend upon it. Could intelligence Anatomize all
States, laying their entrails, and nerves open to you, it would rather augment
your subtility then your virtue, your general Knowledge, then your particular
Goodness. It is an error as great as common to Study to know more, not to
live better. The wisest, and most judicial observations can be given us of
this Worlds affairs, can neither strengthen our Virtue, Dear Sir, or better
our Prudency, unless we apply them to our selves, by practicing in our lives
the sounder part of them, the rotten cast away. But I, all this while only
fetch the Wind, to come with the fuller gaile into the Haven. My counsel is,
that you set the whole frame of your life upon these three legs: Religion,
Care of your private estate, Discretion in all your actions. Take away any of
these and you fall either a ridiculous subject to your enemies, or a sad object
to your Friends. For example: Ruin by negligence, or prodigality your private
Fortune, and you become a laughing stock to those that hate you: on the other
side; abandon your Religion or Reputation to the just censure of others, and
you become a corrasive in the hearts of all your Honourers. With your Lordships
leave, I will a little enlarge my Discourse upon these three severallie, and
demonstrate the comforts with which they fill his Soul, in whom jointly they
make their blessed union, and happy mansion.

Religion.
I Place Religion first, in obedience to Gods Commandment, who wills us first
to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, promising that
all other things shall be added unto us. Again, I give it the leading for
order sake, imitating the Builder of an house, who begins with the foundation;
which excelling both for matter, and well laying the whole Frame, will unmoved
withstand the blasts, and rage of Wind, and Weather. This preceding, all things
else readily follow which any way tend to the perfection, and happiness of
living. It is so, it is so, most honored Lord: Religion was never seen to go
alone, without always a glorious train of Virtues to attend, and (for the
most part) felicity to accompany it. I say for the most part; because though
God ever affordes his Children the true, ever flourishing, internal felicity,
yet, he often suffers even the dearest in his eyes, to want the fading
external. On the contrary, where Religion does not wait on human
endeavors, there the whole body of their actions is clothed with
imperfections. There is nothing which so much distinguishes Man, and Beast, as
Religion; which is discovered in us, long before the use of our reason, it
being ingrafted in us by Nature; as we read of Saint John Baptist, and diverse
other Saints, who have made clear, and miraculous demonstrations of their
Zeal, even in the narrow compass of the womb. This is a Heavenly prerogative
peculiar to man alone; for that the other living creatures are rational, many
have disputed; but that they are religious, no man was ever so stupid to
maintain. It is an observation infallible throughout all Story, that the more
Noble Nations were ever the more Religious. Valerius said to the Romans, that
though they regarded not their City, yet they should stand in fear of their
Gods: which by their enemies were taken prisoners. It was with this polisht
people a custom as commendable as usual, that the Consul, or Praetor, ever
offered the richest of his spoils to the same Gods in the Capitol, unto whom
there first he pronounced his vows. In imitation, and emulation of these
truly brave Heathen, do you offer up likewise the first fruits of your noble
heart, as a rent due to him that made it. Love with all your soul the Creator
of it. The cause why you love him you must make himself, and the measure of
that love must be without measure. Submit your will to his, humbly desiring
his direction, and protection in all your ways, and proceedings. Let this
assurance fully content you, denying harbor to vain curiosities, which will
disquiet, not amend your mind. Weary not your self with Controversies, and
needless nicities in Divinity, but leave them for learneder men, amongst whom
I find some who will not be ignorant of Gods secrets, as if it were a matter
of nothing to be saved, unless we also know what God will have unknown.
Think that sufficient which God has thought enough for you, and seek to know
all that to salvation is necessary, not to contestation. When Aquinas, and
Scotus have vented, and banded all their subtility each against other, many
wise men will judge it no other then a profound scolding. The Jews proceeding
this way infinitely takes me, who as often as they fell upon any difficult
place in Scripture, would say, Veniet Elias, and enodabit: we know that Elias
will come, and tell us all things. Those stirring wits that itch to propound
acute questions are fitly compared to the Sun in March, who then exhales
humors, but dissolves them not. And were their positions only frivolous, they
were more tolerable, but they commonly end in horrid Blasphemy. Laurentius
Valla hearing a Cardinal dispute sublimely of God, and his subordinate
Spirits, said to his companion, And I could produce too such keen Arguments
against my Christ, but I spare so great a Majesty. In a word; Be not in
Divinity an Aculeo, nor a Curio: but in all your doubts have recourse to this
sure decider of all differences, Dominus dixit. What folly, nay, madness is it
to spend a man's whole age in speculations, neither necessary to this life, nor
that to come? We have a wicked custom in England, of Gentlemen's studying the
Controversies for ornament; not taking them to heart, nor handling them with
that reverence they ought. Do not you so, but love goodness in what Religion
soever you find it. Put not your sickle into the Divines Harvest, but leave it
to those whom God has marked for his Ministry. Rail at no Sect, for they that
delight in wrangling, desire rather the confusion then the reformation of him
they oppose. Much disputing, it may be, God loves not, and for certain, most
men abhor. To this I may add, that Truth is no way more involved then by
that way she is sought. Read you therefore such Books as may inflame your
zeal, laying aside those which only satisfy your curiosity. Neither be only
conversant in those works, which make against vice in general, but enquire
after such also as treat of those vices, to which you find your self most
prone. Physicians, after they have given a general Purgation, use such
Medicines as purge Elective, that is, take away only that humor which is
predominant in the patient. So you must not run over only those Authors which
merely write against sin, without descending unto particulars; but
intentively peruse, and dwell upon such as inveigh against your own 2secret
sins, only known to God, and your self. If to any notorious vice you be
inclined (next your invocation of God) the only remedy is to shun the cause.
Praesentia objecti naturaliter movet Potentiam: The presence of the object
stirs up the Desire. To express my self more clearly: Fly that thing or
that company, from whence your enticement comes. If in a friend an imperfection
appears, Friendship winkes at it: but if a vice, the hate of that makes her
loath the thing beloved. Be not you such as was Fabius, a Decemvir, of whom
Livy says, that he chose rather to be like Appius then himself. I am not of
Bions opininion, that all friends good, or bad, are to be retained, least we
either confess our weakness in conversing with the vicious, or our baseness in
forsaking the virtuous. Another maine help is the rectifying of your will. The
way to subjugate this, and render it conformable to the laws of Reason, is a
secret in the cure of the soul, known but to a few, and by fewer practiced.
In this untroden path which leads to the Temple of Virtue, I will with alacrity
be your Lordships humble, and happy Guide. Your understanding must often, and
earnestly inform your will. The reason why some who know enough, commit such
gross errors, is, that their understandings check not their wills, or, if they
do, it is so seldom, and so coldly, that they rather yield then conquer. On my
faith, this one rule observed is able to make you Lord of more perfections then
now you are of Akers. That you may obtain from the Almighty a blessing of
these and all your other endeavors, receive often the Sacrament. Remember him
often that never forgets you. Frequency of Communion is a great, though not an
infallible sign of continuance, and promotion in righteousness. Saint
Augustine counsels the more perfect to receive every day. I advise not you to
do so, but think it enough if quarterly you fail not to execute this your
holy duty. Your manifold affairs will hardly permit you oftener to make a
serious and devout preparation, which must necessarily precede the approaching
to this sanctified Supper. You must expel the old man out of your heart, and
give up the sole government of it to the new, who admittes no Rival. You must
not only strive to clear your self of the infection of mortal sins, but
of the affection also to those which comparatively we call venial. Having once
shaken them off, you must beware that they take not hold again* In these
spiritual fevours, relapses are most dangerous, Great Divines doubt whether or
no Saint Peter had done worse, had he committed three several sins, then he
did in falling into one, and the same thrice. Final impenitency lightly
follows obstinacy in sin; from which that you may be free, maintain in your
bosom a perpetual warfare betwixt your Earthly and Heavenly desires.
Oppression, Blood, Sodomy, Blasphemy, and the rest of that lowd-mouth'd pack,
I am confident you will make strong head against; Only my extreme love, not
your disposition, begets in me a jealousy that you may be captivated by
the two English Evils, Drink, and Women.

Drunkenness dispraised.
THe former is unworthy of Man, and Beast, it having no ground in Nature, and
therefore Seneca properly styles it a voluntary Folly. He that makes another
drunk co^mits the greatest of thefts; in robbing him of a Jewel (his Reason)
beyond value in its own Nature; but if you consider its great original, God,
it is then much more endeared. So that here the common Posy ( not the gift,
but the giver) holds not, for both the one, and the other are in their own
estimation, and value incomprehensible. Neither is this a solitary vice, but is
ever accompanied with Incontinency, wherefore wise Antiquity ever pictured the
lecherous Satyrs Attendants on Bacchus. Yet are some wits like Franckincense,
till they have taken heat from Wine they send forth no vapor. But from such
nothing solid proceeds, only flashes, and fumes that vanish into nothing.
Against this vice there is no stronger Remedy then often, and seriously to
consider the loathsome looks, gestures, and speeches of Drunkards.

Under this I comprehend Gluttony, since Excess is the common mother to both,
and in each of them the creature much abused. All hold that there is a great
resemblance betwixt the Macrocosme, and Microcosme, the great, and the little
World, which is Man In the greater there is an established order; and should,
nay would be in the lesser, could the inordinate appetite of man be brought
to know the limits of Necessity. The irrational Creatures we see do neither
eat, nor drink beyond their hunger, or thirst, therefore in my mind, this
Phrase ( Drunken Beast) is as improper, as usual; it being withal a great
disparagement to the poor creature altogether innocent of this excess.
Neither is this vice an enemy to piety, but to wisdom. Sapientia in sicco
remanet, non in paludibus, and lacunis: Wisdom delights in a dry Habitation,
not in boggs, and ditches. For this makes that of Heraclytus, Lux sicca, anima
sapientissima: A dry light, a most wise Soul. That you may never err in
matter of Diet, look that the quallity of that you eat, or drink, be
agreeable to your constitution, and the quantity no greater then your stomach
can well overcome; which Galen implies when he maintains Oportere patientem
esse proportionatum Agenti: that the Patient must be proportionable to the
Agent. We see for the most, part old men eat not so much as young; and the
reason of this is none other then that the Agent, or natural heat is not of
force to digest the Patient, or food, if in great quantity it be received.
This is the sum of Physic, and I dare be bound that a sound body, keeping
this diet, shall dye through a meare resolution of parts, Ex resolutione
partium.
without ever knowing Disease. This will deliver you from Physicians, who purge
men of their humors, and the World of men. I insist the longer upon this,
because I would have your life lengthned in this world, and your sobriety
crowned in the other.

Jncontinencie discommended.
I Now come to the second English Evil, Women. If you sail by these false
Compasses, you shall be sure to sink. Over and above the incurring of Gods
displeasure, you will suck from their lips their effeminate humors, and
become incapable of any charge in the Commonwealth, and of all advise from
your friends. No man in the state of Grace can imagine what one of these pretty
ones will persuade him to, he being once enchanted. Enquire this truth of
Slaves that have long served in these Galleys. Your Lordship has a great
privilege in having a lawful remedy; So that if you can not honestly command
your lust, you may honestly obey it. Yet do I earnestly beseech you to
moderate this pleasure, remembering that all things lawful are not expedient.
It is no slight treasure that these wantons rob us off. Assay often, and
vehemently to subdue these, and all your other affections rebelling against
your nobler part; So shall you worthyly receive your Lord, having this master
Comfort, that you eat, and drink your own Salvation. Mithridates King of
Pontus, having invented Mithridate, did by the often eating of it, so
strengthen his nature, that afterward, when he would have poisoned himself
to shun the servitude of the Romans, he could not possibly effect his
design. That immaculate Lamb of God our sweet Savior, has instituted this
Holy Sacrament, that whosoever eats his body, and drinks his blood
worthily should not die, but have life everlasting. The frequent eating of this
Heavenly Manna is so strong an Antidote, that neither the poison of bad
affections, nor the contagio^ of wicked conversation can work upon that soul
to hurt it, which is once fortified with it. This is the tree of life, by which
we triumph over Death, and with the Lord of life, become fellow heirs of
that Kingdom which from before all ages he has prepared for us. Before you
pluck and taste this Divine fruit, knock your self on the Breast, and say,
Lord I am unworthy. Thus doing, I with joy assure my self, dearest Sir, that
your days shall be long in the land which the Lord your God has given you.
Thus doing, blessings shall not stay your wishes, but come before and above
your expectation. Thus doing, you shall sleep, and wake, rise, and lie down in
security, knowing that you are under the protection of a Guard, which neither
the policy, nor power of Man, or Devil, can force. Thus doing, you shall give
your enemies no cause to rejoice, and your Friends none to greive. To conclude,
thus doing, you shall go out of this World with honor, and enter the other
with Glory, leaving behind you the Fame of a life well lead, and so ended.

Care of your private Estate.
I Have seen one of the Athenian Sages, pictured with one eye cast up to
Heaven, the other fixed on the Earth. The conceit, no doubt, implies that the
view of these two remote objects do beget in a wise breast two different cares;
the first whereof has an eye to the end of his journey, the latter to the
means. The one seeks for the fairest, and the nearest way, the other looks
to the Viaticum, or provision for the voyage. Thus must you do, excellent Sir,
you must not with too much thinking whither you are going, forget where you
are. As you mind the joys and glory of the other life, so must you also the
necessities of this. Thales the Philosopher was derided by the old Governesse
of his house, in that through the earnest fixing of his mind, and sight upon
the stars he fell into a ditch; the Contemplation of things a far off taking
from him the remembrance of those near hand. So are they worthily censured,
and scoffed at, whom an ignorant zeal makes give over this World, while they
are yet in it, neglecting their estates and posterity, nay utterly forgetting
those humane offices, wherein being defective, we can not deservedly be styled
men. These should consider, that if Nature would have exempted them from the
condition of men, she would by a third sex have distinguished them from the
rest. The misunderstanding of our Saviors words; in the 6. of S. Matthew,
verse 25. has abused many; they thinking that Christ in this place forbids all
thought for this life, whereas, indeed, he only prohibiteth such a care as any
way tends to a distrust of Gods Providence. My humble advice is, that you walk
doubly provided, at once relying upon Gods supernatural help, and yet using
the ordinary means he has given you. Do so, be an understanding Lord, and
let your wisdom warrant you worthy your Title. Think twice how to maintain
your Greatness, for once how to set it forth, and (your Honor admitting it)
oblige more your Posterity, then your Ancestors have done you. To be plainer,
increase your Estate, if you can do it without the decrease of your
Reputation. Be not like those who think it the prime and essential part of a
Lord to be ignorant of what he has. Enquire into the particularities of your
fortunes. Know how, and where your Manors, and Rents lie. Let not your least
revenue pass unexamin'd, but inform your self of the former, and present
vallue of it. Learn what successively it has yielded your predecessors, and
(the Lease being expired) let it according to the current rate of these times;
else in showing your self a Merciful Landlord, you may prove a cruel
Father. Consider who have been true to your Parents, and your self, and let
your reward ore weigh their deserts. Omit not to take a role of all them who
hold any thing of you, and mark such Names as have been faithful to your
Family. These cherrish both with your purse, and countenance, taking the better
deserving of them into your service. To the offspring of those whom you shall
find branded with disloyalty to your House be neither uncharitable, nor
uncourteous: yet let them neither have so great a share of grace, or benefit as
the former, except you see apparent, and extraordinary signs of Truth, and
merrite in them. Believe me, or (if not me) Story, that there is a Fatality in
these things, and that perfidiousnesse often runs in a Blood. I may add, the
despair will possess the most honest heart ever to please you, who shall come
to your service clogged with the memory of his forefathers demerits; and the
comfortable advantage he shall come with who can assure himself that his
errors shall be buried in the merits of his Ancestors. With the former take
this general caution; that you set your Leases at such rates, as no man can
have just cause to call you oppressor. Wisely consider that though a poor
wronged man can not take from you your Titles, Riches or Friends; yet he may
fortake you from them. Despair as she hopes no good, so she fears no ill.
Vitae tuae Dominus est quisquis suam contempsit; He is Master of your life who
will forsake his own. Of this we have a fresh example in one of your Lordships
own Rank. This is one of the crying sins, and the voice of it reaches a
note higher then any of the rest.

Thus far of your commings in, Of your Expenses.
now of your layings out. Keep a good set table that may not fear the
approache of half a score good fellows. To this (in case Strangers of
extraordinary quality come) you may add according to your pleasure. An
orderly, yet liberal table continued, is by much more commendable, then these
intemperate Feasts, which commonly are followed by as penurious fasts; So that
vaine-gloriously to entertain our guests, we basely starve our Servants. Men
of great rank I would seldom invite, for it draws money from you, and censure
from them; such ever making 2the prodigallity, or defects of your table the
discourse of theirs. I may add the dangerous engagements they will invite you
to, which you must either with the loss of your Wisdom grant, or with the
purchase of their envy deny. But if any emine^t Person without any invitation
of mine should voutsafe me a visit, I would like himself, and my self receive
him. Some, and those wise, know every night the expenses of the passed day. I
am not of opinion that your Lordship should be so strict, or put your self to
that trouble, but I would persuade you to take an account of every weeks
charges, and that at an appointed day, and hour, which I would not break
without a cause of great importance. Entertain not many followers, least you
leave behind you many beggars, and few admirers. Those you take once into your
service, maintain so as the World may witness for you, they want nothing due
to back, or belly: And when your last day comes, (which Jesus grant I may
never see) leave them legacies, suitable to their several quallities, and
deserts. So shall their childrens children magnify your goodness, and one
Generation bequeath your praises to another. Choose your Officers sober,
discreet, and honest men; for if a man's nature lead him to wast and sharke, all
your vigilance will be in vain. Dispositions quickly put on Habits. Bannish
riot, and roaring your house, but always beware of punishing a fault too
severely in an old, and faithful Servant: Yet if you can not reform him, give
him means to live from you; so shall you do him good, and keep your family
from infection. We read of Cato Vticensis, that he with great study kindled,
and nourished dissension amongst his servants, by which means he came to know
all their actions, and conspiracies. Do you shun this course as you would do
infamy, to which it leads. Let all your endeavors serve to settle a firm
concord amongst them, otherwise your house will become a common Pleas, and
amongst other inconveniences, this ensuing will be one. You cannot so
indifferently carry your self, but that your affection will appear more to
some, then to others. Now, if your people be at variance, one will repine at
the grace you show the other, judging himself wronged, and undervallued by
you. From hence will proceed a mixed report, one exalting, and the other
debasing you. And though your praisers surpass in number your revilers, it
will nothing at all avail you; men in these days being more prone to harken
after a man's vices then his virtues. Withal build on this, that those with
whom you live are they must judge you. Who will desire your Character from any
other then from such as are Ear, and Eyewitnesses of your Words, Deeds, and
Carriage? Take heed therefore that Malice reign not in your house, still
remembering that Heaven is the true pattern of a perfect society, and there
Envy has no place.

Wear good clothes but make it not your study to excel others in bravery.
Follow the received Fashion, but do not adore it. Totus nitidus, says Seneca,
Totus stultus: All neat, al Fool. Your Lordship shall observe in the course of
your life, that such as give themselves wholly over bodies, and souls into the
hands of a Taylour, are likely little wiser then he that fittes them. They may
have a superficial, but not an essential worth. It may be objected that they
often attain to high degrees of honor; to which I answer that no man is
properly styled wise from the event. It has been long my observation that they
who strove to have the leading in Fashion, came behind in all the maine
requisites of a Gentleman. We see Women to be their chief admirers, and I
dare be bound that none of them was ever yet found who could see through a
Millstone. On my credit the clothes oftentimes, judge the wearer. We see the
wisest of our Western Nations, the Spanish, and the Italian, to be this way
the most moderate; They finding this thrift, and modesty in habit to be
infinitlie beneficial to the Commonwealth. There is no Country under the
Sun, that has such an Apocryphal Gentry as the English, where the sons of
Brokers blend with it, and outbrave, and precede the most Ancient of it, as if
clothes had the gift to ennoble blood. All are permitted to wear what they
can get, and their own vallue depends on that of their raiment. Amongst the
ancient Romans, all sorts of men were distinguished by their habit, so that at
the first sight you might know a man's calling by his clothing.

Of Liberallity.
OF all the virtues in Man, Liberallity is the King, it being often called
Humanitas as derived ab Homine. The holy Fathers of the Church commonly usurp
Pium pro Liberali: Pious for Liberal. Let your house be like that of a
Tribune, never shut to the distressed: make your life nothing else but a giving
to the poor. They followed Simo by troops, and he releived them with
handfuls. These voices are worthy the purchasing at a dear rate, because upon
them, places in Heaven depend. The only way to be truly great, is to give to
these little ones. Make not your gifts common. In the giving see that your
judgment, and affection concur. To the deserving be like a tree overcharged
with fruit, which boweth, and offers it self to be plucked. Confer your
benefits on such as have honesty, and merit conjoined. In my opinion he is not
truly said to be a man of good parts, whose chief part, the heart, is rotten.
On my life where that is false, nothing of vallue can harbor. Be not your
own Chronicle too 2much in boasting of the favors you do. Set not down your
benefits in the Almanake. The Noble Giver, says Seneca, should instantly
forget the gift, but the grateful Receiver never. This virtue is not placed
just in the middle, but is nearer to Prodigality then Avarice. Not without
cause therefore I add this caution, that you be not too profuse in the
distribution of your Money. Call to mind that it is as well the nerve of Peace
as war. By the help of it all things are acquired, save those of the mind,
which are to be had elsewhere, and by other means; yet to the obtaining of
these too does Diva Moneta afford no small aid. I may also truly aver that
Magnanimity can not truly show herself without it. Aristotle's two extremes I
would have you shun. Some men, says he, are so sparing in their expenses as if
they were to live for ever, some so profuse, as if they were instantly to die.
I have heard of some who have quaited away their money, and played at Duck, and
Drake with pieces; but my comfort is, I have yet read no Sentences of their
co^posing. Charles the fifth, as wise a man as the best of them, would tie a
knot in a broken point, and reweare it; yet was the most liberal Prince of
those, or these times. One of my Ancestors was so beyond measure free of his
purse, that the Painters drew him with a Silver hand; if they had added an
empty purse, the Device had been most perfect.

Discretion in all your Actions.
IT now remains that I treat of the discretion, whereof all your Actions must
savor. This has a large sense, but I will reduce it to as few heads as
possibly I can. Guiccardin gives Ferdinand of Arragon, King of Naples, this
testimony, That he was a Prince for his counsels Deliberate, in his actions
Resolute, and touching his affections very moderate. My God! what can man
speak more of man? We will examine the first part of the Testimony.

For his Counsels Deliberate.
A Wise Man considers, and weighs all the circumstances of an action before
he subscribes to it. Make a long pause betwixt the invention, and execution of
a fact. Interpose a thousand doubts with their solutions annexed before you
embarque your self in a business of importance. It is an over-worne but a
true Proverb, Two eyes see more then one. There is nothing more laudable in a
Noble nature, then a desire to be informed. He that neither has the skill to
advise another, says Livy, nor the grace to be advised by another, is simply
of the worst disposition, and good for nothing. Consult with many concerning
your Affair in hand. You shall never find a Jesuit fooled alone, but with him
the whole corporation of his Society is deluded. We see often the hand, foot,
or some other particular member to receive hurt, but rarely the whole body.
Here Guiccardin puts in a Caveat. Though nothing, says he, in great
deliberations be more necessary then counsel, yet nothing withal is more
dangerous. His meaning is that Faith is a thing so hard to be found, that a
man can not without great hazard communicate his intentions. It is not now as
in the Romans time, when between the many Conspirators against Caesar, there
passed not one oath, they having no other mutual engagement of Secrecy then
the word of a Roman Gentleman. Since therefore you can not, like a Jesuit,
find friends obliged by Sacramental Oath, to keep your counsel, take advise
of the dead; I mean of your Books. These will present to your view Truth
naked, without any disguising Coverture. These will not flatter you, being
senseless of your love, or displeasure: They neither hope for advancement, nor
fear oppression. Have recourse to History, wherein you shall find your present
affair in a hundred several shapes. Amongst all the examples which have any
resemblance to your present Case, ponder well which carry with them reason, and
which only success. Direct your course after the former, not the later; for
if you judge of things by their event, you will miserably abuse your self. It
follows,

Jn his Actions Resolute.
WHat else? A brave Spirit (having once showed himself in an enterprise, and
called it his) will go through stich with it, and maintain it against the
World. Having well deliberated, and chosen an even course, let no man stop you
in it, but run over your opposers. Being in the right, weigh no more the
aspersions of the baser sort, then you would the dashing of an Ass, or the
barking of a Dog. Spreta exolescunt, says Tacitus, si irascare agnita
videntur: If you despise them they of themselves fade, and are griped by
oblivion; but if they vex you, it will seem that you acknowledge your self
guilty. It is hard to do a thing that appears fair in the eyes of all men;
for that a good action, what dignity soever it has (if it bring not with it
the favor of the Times wherein it is done, and the opinion of those into whose
hearts it seeks to insinuate) it is but as a Candle that burns dim, whose
shadow seems greater then the light. To this the Italian Proverb is not
dissonant; Assaiben salta, a chi-Fortuna canta: He cannot dance amiss, to
whom Fortune sings. Having the assurance of your own conscience, that your
proceedings are fair, and honest, slight the Censure of the muddy vulgar. Let
Resolution and Constancy wait on all your intentions, and enterprises. Cockles,
and Weeds we see are with one wave carried to the shore, and by another
brought back into the Sea, but the Rocks stand firm. Seek to approve your
self to the good, resting careless what the bad think of you; for we owe
neither the Devil nor his limbs any satisfaction. But if any man of your own
Rank do you an affront, show that you are sensible of you Honor. Your
Reputation, according to Aristotle, is your Stocks; This is not so consonant
to the Doctrine of Christ, as I would it were. Wherefore prudently and
Christia^ly shun all occasio^^ of quarrel. What a wretched age do we live in
that makes effusion of blood, the only means for reparation of honor, and
teaches us to make Gods dishonor the foundation of our Fame?
not yours, to which you should be a bad Guardiant should you let it fall, and
catch a crack. I have read a Fable, how that Reputation Love, and Death made a
covenant to travail ore the world, but each was to take a several way. When
they were ready to depart, a mutual enquiry was made how they might find each
other again. Death said, they should be sure to hear of him in Battles, in
Hospitals, and in all parts where either Fammine, or Diseases were rise. Love
bade them harken after him amongst the Children of Cottagers, whose Parents had
left them nothing, at Marriages, at Feasts, and amongst the professed servants
of Virtue, the only bond to tie him fast. They long expected a direction from
Reputation, who stood mute. Being urged to assign them places where they might
find him, he sullenly answered his nature was such, that if once he departed
from any man, he never came to him more. The Morrall is excellent, implying
that Honor once lost never returns again. Loose then your fortunes, and
life, rather then suffer this radiant Diamond to loose his luster. Else your
posterity will wish you had never been, and your friends blush at the sound of
your Name. Permit not this Worlds most terrible, and horrid Accident to daunt
you. Standing environed on all sides with Wealth, meditate on poverty. The
greatest amongst the Romans, on certain set days of the year used course
diet, and worse lodging, that so their Evil Genius might not find them
unprepared. Avoid all miseries as much as in you lies. Plus miserest says
Seneca, quam necesse est, qui miser est antequam necesse est: He is miserable
more then needs who is miserable before he needs. But if afflictions come never
so thick, and deprivation of the Suns light be one of them, embrace them
with a smooth forehead, and a manly heart, it being a thing most vain to
repine at what Necessity commands. A Palmy mind the heaviest weight of Fortune
can never suppress. Experience has taught me that to be irresolute is not
to temper evil Fortune, but to tempt it. Seneca tells you, Sine morsa animi
velle transire vitam, ignorare est rerum naturae alteram partem; To seek to
end this life without tasting any grief, is to be willingly ignorant of the
one half of Nature. We will now descend to the Conclusion of the testimony.

Moderate in his Affections.
I Have in the former part of this discourse given some general rules for the
moderating of passions, and I will now cursorily touch some of them in
particular.

To lay before you the ugliness of wrath I need not, Anger.
you having the strongest habit of Patience, that I think any man of your
years ever yet acquired. The surest help against that furious passion, is
slowly to apprehend all occasions that may incite it, and, being once
apprehended, to endeavor the removing them out of the imagination: for it is
the Choleric humor that having first vitiated the Fancy, stirs up this
passion, which being once kindled, by a kind of sympathy enflames more the
material humor, and that being once thoroughly fired, strengthens, and
increases the passion. Let not your Anger precede your judgment, nor afford
it leisure; for it quickly becomes master of the Place. In the beginning it is
soon pacified, as green wounds are easily cured. But if unfortunately you
fall into an act of choler, repair it again with one of sweetness toward
the party offended.

Your Lordships nature is so little addicted to Mirth, that it were a sin to
prescribe limits to your joy. Notwithstanding, if you have a desire to be
merry within compass, it is but going into Spain, where you may buy Rules to
laugh by.

I rather fear your erring in the sad extreme, to which I can not devise what
should move you. You have as loving a mother as ever man had, in whom are all
the virtues required in a Woman, and with these the rational abilities of a
man. To double this blessing you have a sister, in whom who should have the
greatest interest a man would think Nature, and Virtue should be at strife,
both of them having equally and infinitely obliged her, in whose due praises
even they agree who in all things else are opposite. But you will say; Fortune
may take all these from me. It is most true, she may; but the memory of their
virtues she can not deprive you of. It were more then folly in you to envy
Death his due Triumph over Creatures, of whose life 70. is the ordinary
period, and 120. the utmost, who know the Worlds fairest body, the lovely Frame
of Heaven in it self incorruptible, and in his course observed so many
thousand years immutable, to be subject to destruction, and that all his
glorious tapours shall loose that light with which they now glad the Movers in
this inferior Globe. This Fatal Law is not new, being almost as ancient as
the World; the penalty whereof only two have escaped of all that ever yet
breathed this air. You will yet object, that God may deny you Children, the
rejoicing fruits of Matrimony. Suppose it to be so; Will you therefore be
displeased with his good pleasure? It may be he does this for your good,
foreseeing that they would prove so many corroding Cankers in your heart. For
ought you know, he may detain from you, not the comforts of your life, but so
many hasteners of your Death. Perhaps he withholds from you a Traitor, a
Murderer, a Whore, a Blasphemer. All this is but to arm you against the want
of these reputed blessings (they being such, indeed, to the greater part of
men) for I trust in God he will bestow on you many children, and such as shall
be so many Cordials to your heart, so many honors to their Nation, and so many
ornaments to the Age they live in. I should in vain arm your generous mind,
against the deprivation of the senseless things you possess, as Jewels, Gold,
Silver, and the rest. The Aristotelians (disdaining that one, and the same word
should express their love to Men, and Riches) styled their affection to the
former, Amor, to the latter, Amatio. The reason urging them thereunto was, that
they were possessed with an opinion, a Man did basely, and foolishly to doat
on that which could not reaffect him. An Italian Author therefore very properly
gives Gold the Epithet of Amato non riamando; Beloved not reaffecting.

Your course of Life.
I Have much, and long importuned your Lordship with the opinions of a weak
judgment; I will therefore only touch three points which are very material.
The first is your Course of Life; The second, your Discourse; The third, your
Studies. The first is of great consequence if you well consider it. Your
Lordship knows I have heretofore over-vehemently persuaded you to affect the
life of a statist, by which course you might advance your Estate, and attain
to a higher degree of Honor. I now most submissively, and earnestly beseech
you to commit this proposition to your riper consideration, and except you
find yourselfe impregnable against the hazards that attend it, resolve not on
it, but fetter even your very thoughts from the Court, so many inconveniences
being incident to that Calling. If you be not advanced to places of Eminency,
and that you see men in all things short of you preferred before you, from hence
will spring a repining and a disturbance of your souls peace. Grave est a
deterioribus honor anteiri! It is odious to a free spirit to be outstripped in
Honor by one less deserving then himself. Are you not satisfied with your
present possessions? Beware in seeking for more, you consume not what you have,
or that you loose it not by falling under the Plot of some Potent Enemy.
Inimicitiae potentum graves sunt, says Seneca, The Enmities of great men are
vehement, he makes no mention of their love. You can not there live without
entering into some Faction or other, which is an adventure for a younger brother,
not for a man of your certainty, and Possibilities. But admit you raise your
self to the degree of Honor, and proportion of Fortune you aim at. Think
you the Maw of Ravenous ambition will be filled with that? He that is led by
her, nothing can stay his adventures. Heaven it self could not give her
contentment, from whence she was thrown down. Excellently singular, Seneca,
Cum omnia quae excesserunt modum noceant, periculosissima foelicitatis
intemperantia. Since all things exceeding measure hurt, the intemperancy of
Felicity, must needs be most dangerous. Hannibal argued Marius Attillius of
weakness, in that he was not able to set a gage to his prosperity. But make
a supposition you have your hearts desire, (it being a thing possible though
difficult) and that you have hold of the highest round save one in Fortunes
Escalade, You are never sure of holding fast, and ever in danger of a shameful
fall. Now imagine you were secured from falling, yet would Pride, and Disdain,
two stirring humors, so puff you up, that you would forget from whence you
came, and whither you are going. Seeing al things waiting your will, the
thought of what to enjoy first would afflict you, as what first to wear, what
first to taste, what Music first to hear, what conversation first to make
choice of, which Mistress first to dally with, and other delights, which
prosperity envites to. You would not be much unlike to those souls Bellarmine
makes mention of in his tract of Purgatory, which wander up, and down in a
fair, spacious, sweet sented Meadow, and are with a dilation of Beatitude, and
an overfilling joy tormented. Are you ambitious of your Princes favor? Do him
acceptable service in your country, and you shall surely obtain it. But you
will answer, I would have from him a superlative Grace above all other men, and
be made the cabinet of his most secret thoughts. This were, indeed, the most
ready way to procure the envy of your fellow Peers, and to incur the
suspicion of your Prince. For the love of Heaven banish all such thoughts out
of your bosom. Let it be your Meditation, how to attain to the perfection of
a devout life; So shall you become the favorite of a Deity. Being once in Gods
favor, you can not (except you will) fall from it, he being yesterday, today,
and the same for ever. You know how to please him, he having revealed his will
in his Word. The dispositions of Princes (as it is fit) remain undiscovered,
and their intentions incommunicable. Of all Kingdoms I esteem this Island
wherein we live, most happy, which since she endured the file, never bad
above two or three Princes justly liable to the detested brand of Tyranny. But
if you needs will follow the Court, square your self by this Rule. What ever
you do well, and laudably, ascribe some way to the wisdom of your Sovereign;
for they are gods on Earth, and (in Emulation of the Heavenly God) will have
us acknowledge the best of our actions to have their ground from them, leaving
the worser to our own Patronage. Our imperfections are bastards, which they
will force us to father, but what ever is in us legitimate, and good, they
themselves own, as derived from their transcendent Virtue. Tacitus says of
Antony, that he was, Nimius commemorandis quae meruisset; Vain in repeating
his own Deeds. Germanicus did not so, who being Lord of a great Victory in
Germany, erected in the fortunate place of his so good success, a Mountain
composed of Arms, in manner of a Tropheie, which he Dedicated to Mars, Jove,
and Augustus, in the inscription attributing the Conquest to the Care, and
Army of Tiberius, not making the least mention of himself. Metu invidiae, an
ratus conscientiam facti satis esse. Whether he did this as fearingenvy, or
that he esteemed the testimony of his own conscience glory enough I know
not, says the same Author. On the contrary Silius, having for seven years
together governed a mighty Army in Germany, vanted that he alone had so many
years maintained, and kept his Army in obedience, and order; whereas if
Tiberius had himself come to his Legions, he would by seeking to introduce
innovation of Discipline, have destroyed, and disbanded the whole Army:
Destrui Fortunam suam Caesar, imparemque tanto merito rebatur: By this Caesar
thought, says Tacitus, his Fortune to receave an Eclipse, and that his vallue
was not deemed answerable to so great a merit. Forthwith therefore he suborned
false witnesses against Silius, and welcomed all such as would accuse him,
which Silius perceiving laid violent hands on himself, choosing rather to fall
under his own Cruelty, then stand to the Mercy of a Tyrant. Out of these
examples you may gather this instruction. That it is as safe to transfer your
own deserts upon your Prince, as it is hazardous to detract from him, or
vain-gloriously to assume the praise of things well done to your self.

This I warn you, in case your Destiny, not your Reason hurries you to the
Court. But (according to my former humble solicitatio^) I would wish you to
settle your self to a country life. Being there look as well to the husbanding
of your Time, as your Living. Recreate, but weary not yourselfe with Games, and
Sports, making of Pastime a Labor. Above all beware Hunting bewitch you not.
The Medes, the Persians, the Macedonians, the Parthians, and other Barbarous
Nations were besotted with it, but we never read the renowned Romans (of all
Civil virtues the true patterns) ever had it in esteem. Salust debaseth it
so far as to number it amongst the servile occupations, and Tiberius noted
with infamy the commander of a Legion, for that he had sent forth a few
Soldiers to the chase. Pompey I can not deny when he was in Africa, followed
this sport for some few days, and therefore Plutarch pleasantly says, that the
very beasts of Africa, felt the felicity, and power of the Romans. But I will
make it good, that neither any of the Nobility before that people became
subject to one head, nor (after the loss of the Roman Liberty) any of the
Emperors delighted in it. Only we find that the wisest of them, Augustus,
used now and then to fish with an Angle, a sport which no way hinders the
operations of man's Nobler part. And (like a Fool quickly to shoot my own
bolt) I do not conceive how Wisdom can descend so low as to prate all day to
a Dog. Yet we will allow you this pleasure, if you will follow it as Pliny
the second did, who in one of his Epistles affirms that he never went to the
Chase, Sine pugillaribus, without his Table-Bookes. But my scope is not utterly
to avert your mind from Hunting, I only persuading a moderation, not a
relinquishment. Your double Study of Men, and Books will take up some time.

Your Application, and Discourse.
THe Former is most requisite, and yet most difficult, as being not every man's
study. Spare no travail to search thoroughly the Dispositions of those to whom
your business Commands your often repair; else you will be a year in
effecting that which two days this way bestowed might have finished. What will
not the Application of a man, and the participation of his purse bring to
pass? The most Politic, and reserved of all your Nightcaps, has commonly
some one humor remarqueable above the rest, by which you may take him at your
pleasure. One is deaffe to all motions that his wife makes not. Another makes
a Factor of his Secretary, a third of his Dore-keeper, etc. I have known a
great, and competently wiseman, who would much respect any man that was good to
his Fool. The most curious pates of us all have imperfections which lay us
open to be practiced on by far weaker wits. Insinuate your self with a
winning carriage into the good affections of all men. Humillity in your
gesture, and speech will gain you friends, which confirm yours with such
courtesies as occasion permits you to perform. In the choice of your friends
be not only curious but painful; for deserving Spirits are not obvious, but
retired, and therefore require your diligent search, of which they are most
worthy. There are some Conversations good for nothing but Recreation, others
are decent, as to visit our acquaintance, others profitable, as that of
Merchants; others truly happy and delightful, as to frequent the company of
Scholars, and virtuous men. This is the Vine planted amongst the Olives.
Abhor Pride, other wise all men will loathe you. Out upon those Imperia
Manliana, odious alike to God and M^n. That of Zeno, to his proud Disciple, is
most true, and appositive. Not, says he, if you be great, therefore you shall
be good, but if you be good, great. If your neglect, or indiscretion procure
you an Enemy, and that he be in himself worthy, seek by all honorable means
to reco^cile him: but (if he be without Lure) having one foe, foresee
diligently that you have not two.

Your Discourse.
YOur Discourse, says one, should rather delight to judge it self, then show
it self. In matters of Dispute, apparel your Arguments in modesty; for so,
finding your self in an error, you may make an honorable retreat. Bold, and
peremptory positions, being true, offend the opposer, and being false, shame
the propunder. Wrangle not; Sic prob^ is a troublesome, importunate fellow,
spued out of all societies that understand the World. When you cite an Author,
be not too precise in quoting the Chapter, or Page, neither importunatly urge
another to it; for in so doing, you shall rob others of their own, it being
Proprium quarto modo, to the Canvasers in Schools, who will take it very
hainously that you should usurp their Profession. There was not long since a
disputation between a meare Scholar, and a knowing Gentleman, who
strengthened his Argument with the authority of Plato* The Scholar demanded in
what Book of Plato he had read it, and in what page; to which the other
replied, that he could not well call to mind either the one, or the other,
alleging the length of time for an excuse. Whereupon the Scholar with a
gaping laugh, and a great Oath, concluded, it was not at al in the Philosopher,
daring the other to produce Plato, and to show him the passage. To this the
Gentleman thus answered; Verily I have left both that, and all my other Books
at home for want of such an Ass as you to carry them after me. In jesting, and
witty talk bear a part but remember that the Lattines call them Sales quasi
Condimenta, implying that we should use them as Salt, and Spices to season our
discourse, not to make them the subject of it. The Moralists affirm we may
be Facetosi, non acetosi, witty, but not biting, or injurious to the Company.
However, if you mix not your mirth with theirs, yet mar not the Harmony with
your severe censuring of it in word, or look. Bethincke your self that the
latter days are come upon us, which, should they not be shortened, would damn
all flesh. In the Prophets time, the most righteous sinned seven times a day;
and it is well if many of us can escape with fourteen. Man, as says Scaliger,
was created Animal sociale, A sociable creature, and therefore ought to conform
himself to the Perfections of his Neighbor, and yield to his infirmities.
Fools, and Flat-witted fellows you have reason to bear with, because their
Company is profitable, and will save you the entertainment of a Iester. Be
not too Austere, there being a Christian liberty which you may safely share in.
Marry as all rules suffer an exception, so does this. If any man's speech shall
at the remotest distance point at Blasphemy, let your face presently put on a
dislike, and if a second time he burns your ears with that unholy fire,
avoid his Company. Now a days our wits think themselves straightened, and
cooped up, if their Talk be barred Blasphemy, and Bawdery. A Gentleman of
this Land (in all other things not only deserserving applause, but admiration)
escaped not altogether this Pestilent contagion. Being earnestly rebuked by an
intimate friend for his slighting, and vain exposition of the Scriptures, he
acknowledged the fault, promising to leave it by degrees, and therefore vowed
he would henceforth only make bold with the Apocrypha, and the singing
Psalms. Laertius says that Pythagoras descended to Hell, and saw there the
soul of Homer hanging on a tree, Vipers, and Snakes twinning about it, as a
due chastizement for his blasphemy against the Gods. How careful therefore
should we Christians be, least we trespass this way, who have to do with a
Serpent that stings the Conscience, and spits a fire everlasting? Next to this
crime in detestation is obscene language, so hot, and foul, that I wonder it
furs or fires not the mouths that utter it. And the Audience trebles the
offense, when it is spoken before younglings; for of all Creatures, Man is most
prone to imitation, and amongst all man's Ages, Childhood. Never so good a wit
unhallowed, has a double sting; it offends God, and scandalizeth Man. At your
meat never so much as name Death, Coffins, or other such mortifying stuff;
for you may chance to have such mortal Guests, that the fear you strike into
their souls may quite take away their stomakes. In truth sad Stories are
neither for the bed, nor the board. Of all things be wary that publicly you
busy not your self with Mysteries of State, for though Guicciardine justly
maintains that the actions of Princes are subject to the opinions of men,
their state, and majesty not impaired; yet it is a dangerous Theme for such
men to handle, whose Fortunes are examined more then their faults.

Your Studies.
TOuching your Studies; allot them three or four hours in a day; and not
more, and content your self to read multum, non multa. A few excelling Authors
well digested, are able to compose an able judgment, and a virtuous mind.
Reguard not the number of Books but their estimation. Give your self chiefly
to History, in which you shall find Morality here, and there inserted and
interlaced like a curious work of Ennamell in Gold. In the commendations of
this Study, I will only cite the words of incomparable Livy, to whom Rome owes
more for her Fame, then to Aeneas, or Romulus for her Original. For this is
that so good, and profitable in History, says he, when a man may see, and
behold as in a Conspicuous Monument, and light some memorial, the lively
examples of all sorts set up in open view for his instruction, whereout he may
choose for himself, and his Country what to follow, as also learn how to
eschew a foul enterprise, and avoid a shameful end. Begin with the Story of
your own Country before you go to foreign, that in case you travail, you
may make a happy exchange of Historical observations. But dwell not there,
that being too confined a knowledge. The Roman will deservedly claim your
next view, wherein you shall meet with deeds fathered upon men, which the
Gods they worshipped, might without disparagement have owned. The order you must
observe in reading it I will as briefly as I can set down.

The Order to be observed in reading the Roman Story.
TItus Livius, the greatest of all Roman Historians, begins at the foundation
of Rome, and continues it to Augustus Caesar; but half Livy is lost, and
therefore where he is wanting, others may be read. Where he is full he is
enough; unless you would see Dyonisius Halycarnassaeus, in the first times of
Rome to compare him with Livy. His History ends about the dissension between
the Senate, and the People in Appius Claudius his time. There are also the five
Books of Polybius from the first Punick war to the descent of Hannibal into
Italy. But that also is in Livy, and a great part of it transcribed out of the
excellent Polybius. But there where Livy is wanting (as namly in those times
which are most necessary to know) as the actions of Silla, Lucullus and Pompey
in the Mithridaticke war, thogether with the Civil war of Marius, and Sylla,
read Appianus who is in Greek, and Latin in a thin folio. He excepted, I
could never read any History that did fully relate the bloody passages of
Sylla; his Dictatorshippe, his Resignation; his Death and Funeral. Plutarch I
confess lightly touches them in the life of Sylla. This brings you to the
time of Catilines Conspiracy, for which you need no other then Salust. After
that Caesar's Commentaries will clearly show you the Growth of Caesar, in the
North, and the whole dissension between him, and Pompey the great. Then Dion
Cassius does at large relate the rest of Caesar's Honors, his Death, and what
followed in that troublesome time of the Triumviri. This is the most complete,
and largest History of those times. Then (besides Tacitus, and Suetonius) you
may read Xiphilinus a little book, an abreviation of Dion of Nice, which is
lost. He speaks of two and twenty Emperors as low as to the reign of
Alexander Severus, under whom he lived. Then Herodian, a short, but pithy
Historian goes to the time of Gordianus Caesar, speaking of twelve Emperors,
and he begins at the death of Marcus Aurelius. Then Ammianus Marcellinus
speaks at large of five Emperors, of which Julian the Apostate is one,
though his History does not immediately follow. So that for the Series of the
Story, I advise you (omitting Dionisius Halicarnassaeus, Polybius, Suetonius,
Plutarch, and Tacitus) to read Livy, Appianus, Salust, Caesar's Commentaries,
Dion Cassius, Xiphilinus, Herodian, and Ammianus Marcellinus. To these you may
add the perusal of the two famous modern Histories Guicciardine, and
Commines, equal even to the best of the Ancients. The deeds of Scanderbeg, of
the Turks, and Barbarians I hold fitter to be sung then Storied. Here I would
also give you my judgment of the Greek Story, but that it would be
fruitless for me to insist longer upon this subject, by reason that I shall
shortly write you a peculiar. Tract of History, and Dedicate that to your
Lordships Name, as I have already my self to your service. I am once more
returned to my first Mistress, my Book, to whom my future Constancy shall
make satisfaction for my passed disloyalty. The Night, which I formerly
consumed in Riot, I now divide betwixt Sleep, and Cogitation; nor do I shut
my Books out of Bed, my most inward Friends. I make fast my Door upon the
Vulgar, and encompassed with so many Learned, and Blessed Souls, it seems to
me I sit in the lap of Eternity. I exclude Lust, Ambition, and others like,
of whom Sloth is the Parent, and unexperience the Nurse. Images and Grandies I
behold in their proper places, a far off, and pity those Great ones that
know not this great Happiness.

It now only rests that in all submission and reverence I beg your
Lordships Pardon for withholding you from better employing your time with
these feeble, but affectionate Lines, to the writing whereof, two Motives have
won me. The first is my Zeal to your Good, I having a strong Desire that
you should be of your truly Great House (though not in Fortune, or Fame) in
Virtue the greatest, and in the Celestial Kingdom, have a Seat above them.
And give me leave to tell you, Dearest Sir, that this is no hard thing for you
to Compass, it being only the adding of Endeavor to your Disposition, which
of it self leads to goodness. In this you have no small advantage of other
great ones, it being (if the Authority of Seneca will serve) a maine requisite
of Nobility. Quis nobilis? a Natura ad virtutem been compositus: Who is Noble?
He whose Nature invites him to Virtue. My second, and less principal Motive
is a fear, not of Death, but that paradventure I might unfortunatly die,
without leaving you a Testimony of my Gratitude for all those Graces, and
Favors which it has been your Lordships good pleasure to deigne me your
unworthy servant. My own indisposition of body, and the daily sight of these
Turve fires, minister occasion to me of Contemplating the howrely consuming of
the Earth, whereof I am made. Quaelibet res dum in sua resolvitur Principia,
tunc apparet qualis revera sit, and quidnam sub illa specie latebat: Every
thing being resolved into his first Principles, does then appear what, indeed,
it is, and discovers what lurked under that shape. It is no otherwise: I
every day burn as good earth as mine own, and, if here I die, it is likely
that this, or the next Generation will make fires of me. But Civillity calls
upon me to make an end. I therefore once more humbly implore your Lordships
forgiveness for detaining you from your more serious affairs, with this long
Discourse, which has passed the bounds I first set it down. If I have
inserted any thing pleasing, or good, imagine I have done like an ugly Painter,
who has by chance made a Beautiful Piece. What ere it be, you are the Master
of it, to whom it stands, or falls, as does

Your Lordships most humble, loyal Servant Antony Stafford.

Errata.
PAge 30. line 5. read only but. p. 48. l. 9. fortake r. take. p. 59. l. 19.
r. blend with it. p. 97. l. 1. read Marcus. p. 125. l. 3. r* Twining.


