THE Burning Light. A SERMON PREACHED at a Visitation in CHRIST'S Church, London.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes for Daniel Friar. 1640.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE VISITATION IN CHRIST-CHVRCH, LONDON.
JOHN 5. 35. He was a burning and a shining Light, and ye were willing to
rejoice in his Light for a season.
THey say of the Nightingale, Introductio. 1. Apologia.
that when she is solitary in the Woods, she is careless of her note; but
composes her self more quaintly and elegantly, if she conceives there be any
Auditors, or if she be near houses: she can chirpe it in a corner and chant it
in a Quire more delicately. Though I had thought to have accommodated my self,
in some respect to the Auditory (for I know there is a great difference to
which due respect may be had; Modus orationis est auditor) Yet as the Martyr
said, I shall cosen many this day, meaning the worms, whom (says he) I shall
deceive of this fat carcass (which they would have made a feast on) it being
likely to be offered in Sacrifice to God with fire. If there be any here that
bring a worm of Curiosity in their ear, expecting quaint and elegant
strains, I shall deceive them, I make no provision for them; I must confess
as Nazianzen said of himself, he never affected in his life the glory or Pomp
of the world, or riches and great estate; but (says he) learning and eloquence
I must confess I have affected, but I set no other price upon that, but only
this, that I have something of worth to esteem as nothing for Christ, I have
laid all these low at the feet of Christ to advance his Kingdom, though in a
plain and homely manner. I list not to speak in a vie; as the two Artificers
who contended for the mastery in their Art and faculty; the first drawing
Grapes so lively that he cozened the birds; the other a Veil so exquisitely
that he cozened the Artificer himself. But if I may have so much Eloquence and
learning, as to draw the attentions of the godly, I shall not be sollicitous
nor ambitious, to attain to such a pitch, as to exceed the expectation of the
learned. So much by way of Apology.

To come toward of the Text, 2. Technologia capitis.
not to stay in the entrance; but to give a little touch of the coherence of
the Chapter. The whole Chapter consists of an Historical narration, 1.
Historica.
and an Apologeticall Sermon of our Saviors. 2. Apologetica.
There is a Narration of a glorious miracle done on a poor Cripple 38. years
lame; and our Savior is feign to make an Apology for this gracious work of
his; and so in the latter part of the Chapter, he justifies his Authority and
power, by which he took upon him that Office in the execution of which he did
this Miracle.

This speech of our Savior his Sermon, is partly Didascalicall Doctrinall,
(...):
, partly Elenchticall reproving their fault and their sin?

In the Doctrinall part you have a plain and vehement assertion of his power
and authority in the 19. verse and so following, 1. Assertio Potestatis.
where he affirms a greater power than yet they have seen him exercise.

Secondly we have a Confirmation from two sorts of Testimonies.

First of John, John bare witness of me, from 31. verse, of which the words of
the Text are a part: and partly of his Works, his Works bear a greater, and
more clear Testimony and evidence, Iohannis. Operum.
The works I do they bear witness of me.

And secondly a Testimony more remote, yet more pregnant, 2. Remolo potenti.
Patris. Scripturae.
the The Testimony of his Father; The Father he bears witness of me: the 37.
and 38. v. and the testimony of Scripture, in the 39. v. Search the Scriptures
for they bear witness of me too: 2. (...).
All these evidences and seals he brings to justify his Commission: and
therefore in the latter part he falls to Reprehension, 1. Culphr. 2 Causa
triplex.
he reprehends their fault, pointing at the Cause, 1. Malignitas.
likewise the fault was, they did not believe to eternal life: the causes,
partly because they wanted the love of God, they had a kind of malignity
against his heavenly Father, and being leavened with an ill humor, and ill
disposition toward him; they did not receive nor entertain him; 2. Superbia.
and partly by reason of their pride and selfe-seeking, in the 42 verse. You
seek the glory of men, and can you believe then; you seek glory one from
another: and ambition stopped their cares, closed up and hedged up the way from
giving entertainment to Christ. 3. Infidelitas.


And lastly the root and ground of all, was Infidelity, You believe not Moses
and the Prophets, and therefore no wonder you believe not me, and my works: If
you believed them, 2. Tractatio.
they would give witness of me, as in the close of the Chapter.

These words contain a Noble Elogie which our Savior does most heartily give
to John, He was a burning and a shining light, etc.

I purpose briefly to run through the words, there be many things will
offer themselves, but I will not insist nor pitch upon any in particular, but
take the generality, and so draw to an Application.

There be two maine things observable in the words.

First, 1. Ministri.
the Office of the Ministry (for I will take it rather in the generality, than
fall into any thing personally on John) And secondly the entertainment which
they must look for.

The Office of the Ministry, represents both their Qualities, how they must be
qualified: 1. Qualitas.
and their Dignity, how they are to be dignified; all in the same words a
little varied in their consideration. The Qualities and Endowments which a
minister ought to have, are represented here in this Picture of John; wherein
our Savior describes the Character of a Minister. Like as it is in the
heavenly bodies, There be three things, Light, and Heat, and Influence; We
have proportionable here, three Endowments of the Ministers.

1. They must have the Light of Knowledge.

2. They must have the Heat of Zeal.

3. They must have the Influence of Virtue both in life and Doctrine.

They must be Lights.

They must be burning Lights. First,

They must be endued with Knowledge, 2 Lux scientiae eruditio.
and Understanding, furnished with Abilities for the discharge of that Office;
their Office being to guide and to lead men in their way, in their path.

The light that furnishes, 1. Modus. 1. Pulchritudo, Savitas.
and endues them for that knowledge, which for the manner of it (for I do but
touch things) requires

First that there be a beauty and soundness of the light, that there be
Orthodoxe knowledge, not tainted, and leavened with corruption in Doctrine.

And there must be a plenitude and sufficiency of knowledge, 2 Plenitudo,
Sufficientia.
that it euqnires too, enough to enlighten themselves, and to enable and
enlighten others, and to guide and direct others.

And for the degrees of that sufficiency, 2. Gradus. 1. Proportionatus.
it must be proportionable to the excellency of their Office, to the
propriety of their place; Proportionable likewise to the rice and growth of
time. 1. Muneri.
Iter caeeos Rex luscus est. Amongst blind men, 2. Tempori.
he that is pur-blinde is a King, he may serve for a guide; But where the
light is grown to a higher improvement and generality, there must be a
proportionable improvement, a proportionable degree of sufficiency is required
in the Minister: the lesser light will serve to rule the night, the greater
light God has made to rule the day. In the night of ignorance a little spark
may shine, a little Candle, a little star may do some service, but there
must be a Sun, in the sunshine of the Gospel, when all men are grown to
ripeness, and maturity of Knowledge, Ministers must still keep their distance.

Secondly as it is proportionable so it is very variable, 2. Variegatus.
a man cannot set one Homer to be a standard and measure of all men, that all
must needs attain the same pitch and perfection: There is one glory of the
Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; although they
be all heavenly and glorious lights, yet they have different degrees and
measures, so it is with Ministers; All stars are not of the primae
magnitudinis, there be diverse Magnitudes of stars; and there may be in the
Ministers diverse degrees of glory, and all in the compass of that
sufficiency, that may be proportionable to their Office, and the time and
place wherein they are employed, so they keep within those bounds, wherein
that Latitude, there may be a great deal of difference, there must not be such
a strictness and rigor here to stretch men as Procrustes the thief did, all
he took he stretched upon his bed, if they were too long, he cut them shorter,
and if they were too short, he put them upon the Rackes and drew them to his
own stature and measure: but there may be a fair, and a decent, and severe
stretching according to Paul's Canon, as the Father speaks.

That all Ministers should be able to Teach and to Instruct, and to Convince
errors, to be stretched according to Paul's Canon, is no Tyranny.

In the second place, 2. Calor Zeli.
light of Knowledge, and sufficiency is not sufficient to qualify a Minister
enough, that light must be animated with the heat of zeal.

The Philosophers dispute (and if I mistake not, I rather think they be in an
error) and conceive that those Celestial bodies, the Sun and the Moon,
are not Actu Calidi only they have a virtue, and by way of Eminency as it
were, they do produce heat below, and are not hot themselves. I rather think
that to contain any thing by way of Eminency, is a property of God, God
contains all things Eminenter: these faculties which he has not actually,
habitually, and subjectively in himself as faculties, yet he contains them
eminently, as being able to produce all; but no creature can produce any thing
but by some virtue put into it, which is enabled: but these lights, howsoever
these heavenly lights must be Actu Calidi, they must have a heat in
themselves, viz. Heat of Zeal: let it be the style of the False Church to be
Filii Carbonis, sons of the Coal, as Job calls the sparkles, so hot, as they
be all for burning, all for Inquisitions, and blood and Martyrdom; let it be
the Commendation of the true Church, and true profession, that they be Filij
Lucis, Children of Light, rather inlightners than consumers, by way of burning:
though that spirit you know suites not the state of the Gospel, that calls for
fire from heaven: though there be difference between calling for fire from
heaven, and fetching fire from hell to consume States and Parlements. There is
a difference between being touched with a Coal from the Altar, and being
kindled with a match from the vault to set on fire. There must be a Heat, but
a regular and true Heat,; 1. Pro.
A heat of zeal carried with Pro and Con, as the form and difference, as
they also call, is both Constitutive and Divisive, or Distinctive. So then they
that are informed (or inflamed rather) with this heavenly heat have a double
property, 1. Gloria Dei.
positive and oppositive. A zeal for Gods glory, not for a man's own ends: a
zeal for the Salvation of the people, 2. Salute hominum.
to have a tender, and compassionate affection to their souls: and not to
ascend this hill, this Pulpit without such a Meditation as Zerxes had, who when
he beheld his Army from an hill, wept that so many should dye within the
Compass of so few years? So they must have a tender thought that any poor
soul should perish that's under their view, under their Charge: and as for
these there must be a Zeal Positive, 2. Contr.
so a Zeal against all Error and Corruption in Doctrine. 1. Errors.
It is the Commendation of a Christians heart, to be impatient in the point of
heresy: 2. Mores.
and a Zeal against Corrupt manners: not to be able Ostridge-like to digest
Iron, to digest oaths, to digest all filthiness and profaneness, but to
have the spirit burn within them as Paul's was at Athens, against all sin,
and against all superstition, and Idolatry. And yet this is not all, as there
must be Light of Knowledge, 3. Influentia virtutis.
and Heat of Zeal to animate and quicken, so these two must have an Influence
of Virtue: The world, the vulgar know no great matter of use, that the stars
and these glorious lights have, and therefore will hardly be induced to believe
that they are of that Magnitude that Philosophers and Mathematickes teach,
diverse of them to be as big or bigger than the whole Earth, they think that
such great bodies should be made only for show, for that's all the use they can
see of them, to beautify and bespangle the firmament, to be an ornament to the
world and to give light, but it is not credible there should be so mean a use
of such great and glorious bodies; for besides that, they have an Influence on
the earth, those stars of light, the flowers that we see here below, are
begotten by those flowers of lights, the stars which are above in the
Firmament, they are the means and the Instruments for the helping forward of
the generation, and production of all these lower things here, by having an
Influence on them. And so the heavenly lights (as we are now speaking of) The
Ministers, their Light of Knowledge, and their Heat of Zeal, must have an
Influence upon the people that be committed too them, both in Integrity of
life, and Diligence of Doctrine and Instruction; 1. Assiduitate Doctrinae.
they must be Trees of Knowledge, and Trees of Life to in Gods garden, to build
up to both, and with both. Our Savior that was the highest in his own Church,
in his own house, made that the highest of his Offices, to employ himself
diligently in his Fathers work. We read of nothing, nor hear of nothing, but
Preaching and doing good, nothing but of his Influence continually. And Paul
(as the Father speaks) like some winged Triptolemus that went about in his
Chariot to teach men the Art of sowing Corn throughout the world; he went
about spreading, and sowing, and planting the Gospel every where he came, with
infinite diligence, and pains: there must be holiness and integrity of Life
added to it. (I will not enlarge my self in an Argument so common, 2.
Integritate vitae.
and which would afford so many and so full discourses, of wit and illustration
as all know) Ministers must not be like the drugge that the Physician says (or
at least the world takes it so ordinarily) is hot in the mouth, and cold in the
operation; hot in the Pulpit, and zealous there, and frequent there, but
careless and unconscionable in their lives: Origin coming to Jerusalem, and
being desired to Preach; after he had denied the truth, and his ungodly
offering Sacrifice to an Idol; (though he was constrained, and constrained on
hard terms) the book happens to open upon that place of the Psalmist, What
have thou to do to take my word into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed? The remembrance of his own fault reflected upon his Conscience, and
made him close the book, and sit down and weep: so these that are not
content to join holiness of life, to their diligence of Preaching, the best
way for them is to repent of their Preaching; and so to Preach Repentance to
the people.

But to come to the second; besides the Qualities of the Minister in these
three properties expressed. There is the dignity of a Minister, secretly
coutched, and the true degrees and distances of that dignity: A Minister is
(...), 2. Dignitas. 1. Gradus sub Deo.
a Light, but an inferior light.

Not the Sun, the Fons caloris, the fountain of life and heat, the Minister
must know his distances, he is but under God, Viri radiis chorus can^^
mulier^s: as the Lawier says, the Minister shines as the Moon, with borrowed
beams from the Sun; all his light is kindled at Gods fire, it is derived
from him.

Secondly, 2. Ort^^ a Deo.
there is an Inferior light, but yet set up by God (...), kindled and tinded
by God, God sets it up. It is his Ordinance, his Institution, and his hand
holds these Lights.

And in the last place he is (...), 3. Actus ad Deum.
a Light burning and kindled by God, and a shining light. This is the same, the
Aspect of all the Ministerial dignities: as they are under God and from God,
so they are guides to God, shining and leading us in the way to happiness and
eternity, this is the dignity of the Ministry. There is another thing which I
will run over briefly, 2. Hospitium in mundo apud.
besides the office: The Hospituim, the Entertainment of the Ministry in the
world.

If we look upon the people we have that expressly set down, 1. Populum.
besides the degrees of extremity which are past over and omitted here,
sometimes they meet with better entertainment than our Savior expresses here,
1. Meliuscule. 2. Duriuscule.
so that their Doctrine is embraced faithfully, and men bring forth fruit with
patience, having not only a flashing Joy in the light of it, but fruitfulness
with patience; so sometimes they meet with better entertainment, and sometimes
they meet with worse entertainment, men do not always gather about the
light, and dance about it, as boys about the Bone-fire, making glee, and being
jolly at it, glad of it; but go about to quench the light, to extinguish it,
to persecute it, and to labor to oppress and overwhelme it; sometimes they
meet with such. But these extremities are not here expressed in the Text.

A middle kind of entertainment is here noted, 2. Mediocre propositum.
I will instance but in three particulars, which comprize all that is here
expressed with an intimation of defense.

First of all, 1. Actu.
the first thing is in the Act of that entertainment given, (...): It signifies
in the Original, as it were to dance a Galliard, you are willing to dance a
Galliard, as I observed in the Emblem before which notes some defect, some
external and formal Joy, and jollity rather. As learned Calvin does sweetly
express it, Externe potius
from the place; As servants that have a Candle allowed them by their Master,
to work by at night; they spend the Candle not in doing their Masters work,
but in dancing about it, and making good cheer, and revelling and sporting,
and so wear and tear out the light that way; Quam Iuteru.
rather I say such a jolly rejoicing at the light, a vain sinful thing, than
any inward solid sincere joy seems to be noted.

Secondly, 2, Ortu.
I do observe the rice of this joyful entertainment, in which also there may
seem something defective, (...) (...), In his light you rejoiced: Many
rejoiced in the light, Luce potius q0uam calore.
in an innocent and harmless light, that will not bite, that has no teeth,
that cannot burn, that is plausible, men rejoice in it. But it was his light
that they rejoiced in rather than his heat, yea John's light rather than
Christ's: Iohannis quam Christi.
so a man may reverence such a man's strain, rather than the Word of God, to
receive it as the Word of God; whereas they should pass by, and over-looke
men, and submit to it, yield to it as the Word of God, 2. Exitio.
man being but the Instrument.

In the last place do but mark the issue, or the degree of duration, and
stability in this joyful entertainment, and there is something defective
likewise there (...). It was but a fit, and unsettled, unconstant, ungrounded
joy: Fast and loose, backward and forward, as men do at dancing, one step
forward and two backward: as the Grasshopper, that jumpes, and falls again to
the ground, leapes a little up, and then dies and goes out again, (...), for
an hour. Many men are content for an hour to bestow it, Horam non ultra
but if the hour be out, if the glass be out, then they be quickly a weary of
John: (...) signifies the season and the flower of a thing. Florem non facem.
Many Ministers have their prime, and have their flowers, and many are willing
to flock about him, till they have got a little taste of their gifts, for
curiosity and novelty; to know what is in him: And then the prime is quickly
gone; nothing fades sooner than a Ministers reputation, and respect in his
case, it is too frequent in the world. As they say of another thing, of
inferior nature, gold in the morning, and silver at noone, and lead at night:
men decline and fall, much a do, much exalting and much joy about the light,
when it is first set up, but it quickly wears it self out, men be quickly
tired like horses, that be metled at first, but at length grow tired and give
out.

The last branch of the Text, which is not directly in the words, 2. Hospitium
apud Christum.
yet couched in them too, besides the entertainment, Ministers are like to
find in the world with the people; here is an express intimation what
acceptance they shall find with Christ. Christ gives a Noble and royal
Testimony of John. Now if you will consider Christ in a threefold relation, and
threefold respect, it may suggest good Items, and occasious to us, (I will but
touch things.)

1. Christ in some respect is a Fellow servant wi^h his Ministers, 1. Consorium.
a joint Commissioner, he the Minister of the New Testament, though he be the
Prince: And he had no envy at the flowrishing of John, at the flocking about
his light, but envy was banished: And he gives a liberal and a canded
testimony, He was a burning and a shining light. Will you know Christ's
Testimony of him, he will not take him down and make him lower, to raise on
his body a greater reputation, to raise a greatness on the ruins of others,
but gives him an honorable Testimony. He was a burning and a shining Light.

Take him more than an ordinary Minister, 2. Praelatum.
he was likewise the Prince of Pastors, The Archbishop of our Souls: the
great Shepherd that had power, directive and corrective, and the Censurer of
the Ministers. John came under his censure and jurisdiction, but he does not
bite and snib, and curb and trample upon John; but gives him fair Quarter and
fair respect, a due Testimony, He was a burning and a shining light.

Consider him as the Lord, 3. Dominum.
the Supreme Lord and Judge of all, though the world does not acknowledge
them, nor those that should have Jurisdiction do not acknowledge them, yet
Christ will acknowledge and own his faithful Ministers and Servants at that
great Day, we shall be sure to have him keep to his word: as he does freely
here, so he will freely there, he will give an Absolution and discharge; He was
a burning and a shining light. I have run over many things and shall now
desire to come to some application of the point, I will only fasten upon a few.

First the consideration of this what Ministers are and ought to be; Applicatio.
and what entertainment they may look for with Christ, and in the World

May serve for Instruction; 1 Instructio.
we may learn what is the glorious state of the Church when it is in the
prime and highest pitch of beauty. 1. Ecclesiae gloria.
Not when it is adorned with Purple and Scarlet, and Jewels and Gold: as the
woman in the 17. Revel. That's an Argument of a true spouse of Christ, of a
beautiful and glorious Church, these outward earthly ornaments. As he said of
a Painter that made the Picture of a woman, he aimed to have made her
beautiful, but not reaching that, he made her gawdie, he dawbed her with
laces, and with rich apparel. Non potuit pulchram, pinxit divitem. The whorish
Church could not attain to the pure beauty of the Spouse Christ: and therefore
they have dawbed it over in Gallantry and bravery. But will you have the Church
represented in her beauty, you have it in Revel. 12. There is the true Spouse
of Christ with no earthly Ornaments about her indeed, but all heavenly a
Crown of 12. stars on her head, the Doctrine of the 12. Apostles; Clothed
with the Sun; the Sun of Christ's Righteousness, the doctrine of
Justification by faith, as some have interpreted it, and the Moon, all these
mutable and earthly things under her feet; it is her Crown to have the^ her
footstool; when the Church is beautified with burning and shining lights,
that's the greatest glory and beauty of the Church.

And concerning the Ministers we understand here the Nobleness, 2. Ministri.
and necessity of the Ministry. 1. Nobilitas.
Herod promised Herodias (on her dancing) John Baptists head, and would not
refuse (for he had bound it with an oath) for his oaths sake, though he was
sorry for it afterward: but as the Father notes he need not to have held his
bargain, for he promised but half his Kingdom; but John Baptists head was
more worth, a faithful Minister is worth a Kingdom: Satius Solemn non lucere
quam Chrysostomum non docere: as they said sometimes at Constantinople, better
the Sun should be taken out of the firmament, than Chrysostom our worthy and
faithful Minister should be taken out of the Pulpit, better to lose the Lights
of heaven, than these lights that guide to heaven: there is a great deal of
Nobleness and excellency in them, they be heavenly Lights. The saying is, if
God should take a shape to represent himself visibly to men, the outward part
of it, as it were the Garment, should be light animated and quickened with
truth for our souls. They that have the light of divine Knowledge, in the
purity of Divine Truth, these Messengers and Ambassadors, Types and
representations of God, they have a great deal of glory in them, 2. Necescilas.


And there is a great necessity of it, for Ministers, burning and shining
Lights are as Necessary as lights in a dark place, in a dark room, upon which
the Soul and the safety, the walk and the Journey, and the good issue of all
Christians does depend; as he makes the sum of his story, (...). The Lamps
went out, and Leander was drowned: for want of provision the people perish.

We may note here the condition of the world, the malignity of it, 2. Mundi.
the true rice of this malignity. What Is the reason that men rise up in Arms
against the Ministers of Gods Word, 1. Malignitus unde.
as it is too frequent, they are Lights, and these love the works of
darkness: the thief cares not to come at the light: they say when Hercules
drew up Cerberus from hell, he led him in a chain, and he went quietly till he
came to the Horizon, and saw the peeping of the light; but then he pulled so
strongly that he had like to have pulled the Conqueror and all back again.
Cerberous his hellish brood cannot endure heavenly light; they stumble at that
light it is offensive: though the sweetest and gratefullest thing in the world,
to the eyes that be sound and whole, yet to the eyes that be not sound, light
is troublesome; or if a man have a mind to sleep on securely in courses of
darkness and sin, light is offensive, and that is the Reason of this
malignitie. The world has thought (though experience has confuted it) that
the Torrid Zone is uninhabitable, it is so hot that there is no inhabitation
there. Men think a burning light is too hot, it is not habitable, not able to
be dwelt in and endured, the burning is so offensive: and therefore as they
that dwell under the line (they say) curse the rising of the Sun, they are
glad when it sets and riddes them of their burning, and when it rises fall a
cursing, fretting, and chasing; men are angry at the light* when it begins to
scorch and burn, to come near and close to sin, when it meets with their
corruptions; the true Reason why there is such a repugnancie is we see it in
the light, and we feel it in the heat. And would you see their foul
deformity, what they do that oppose the Light, what a foul sin it is: It is
as if they should go about to deprive us of the light of the Sun, 2.
Caecitas and Deformitas quarta.
that we may live in perpetual darkness, and what would we think of such
persons: None but such as are kin to darkness can count the light
grievous, be weary of light, and complain of too much light: not to endure
burning and shining lights, it is an Argument they be very near a kin to
darkness that hate it so: the light must needs be gracious and acceptable to
the children of the light only: they were wont to Father it on the Christians,
that in their meetings they meet by night; as they were feign to do in
persecution, and so used Candles: at last toward the close of all, they put
out the Candles and fell to promiscuous mixtures, and commixtures: No it
concerns them that be Children of darkness to put out the light, then
Crescite and multiplicamini, then they breed and multiply in the dark, but the
Children of God multiply and grow in the light, and increase and flourish there.

Secondly, Commiseratio.
this may serve for gratulation, (for the other branch of it for co^miseration
to stir up a tender compassion toward those many people in the world, under
Heathenisme or Superstition and Popery, or Mahumetanisme, or against our selves
that have not these burning and shining lights I shall pass by) and for
reproof and reprehension, I will not take so much upon me to meddle with
reprooving of such as are not lights. I know the snuffers of the Temple should
be of pure gold. I am not of mettle good enough to take on me to do that. But
I hope you will all join with me in gratulation, Gratulatio.
to bless and magnify God that he has raised up, and kindled and set up
amongst us, so many bright and so many shining lights, though not in every
point of heaven (as it is not in the cleerest night when the most stars
appear, every point has not a star in it) but in every quarter there be
stars. Though every Candlestick, every place has not such a burning and
shining light, yet so many burning and shining lights are in every quarter of
the Kingdom as the world affords not the like. 2. Exhortatio.


In the last place this may serve for exhortation (I know not how I may
incroach upon the occasion, and therefore I do but touch things briefly)

First to the people, 1. Populumtales honorant*
are Ministers burning and shining lights, then honor the Ministers, give them
double honor; it is worth the while to afford maintenance to them: he that
makes use of the light to work by it, 2 Alant.
it is hard if he cannot get so much by his work, as will pay for his light.

And especially honor them in walking according to the light, and according to
their direction, 2. Audiunt^.
and in yielding and submitting to them when they come in Gods name, and convey
Gods light to convince us. When Gods heat warmes us let us not resist and
oppose but submit: as a Father speaks of fire and light, the light is most
sweet and gracious, but the burning most terrible; so if we misuse the
Gospel, and misuse the light, only to play with the light and please our
selves with light, and will not be set on fire, will not be enflamed, it will
scorch in the end, it will bring burning, Judgments, and calamities, to
contemn and trample upon Gods Word and Ministers.

In the second place Magistrates and those in Authority, 2. Ad Magistratum
tales.
are Ministers burning and shining Lights; 1. Tueantur Intueantur.
then those that are such it becomes Magistrates very well to advance, to
protect; to set a burning and shining light upon a Golden Candlestick, and to
make a Castle, a Castle at least of horne-worke, to defend and protect them,
that these lights may be according to that in the story; the lamp that never
went out: that they may not easily be puffed or blown out, by those that do
malign and oppose them; and those that have power in this kind of
Jurisdiction, influence and oversight, should remember they may be snuffers to
make the light burn more clear; they must not be extinguishers to extinguish
and to quench the light, they themselves should be lights, lamps; take heed,
take order that such persons be not dampes to put out the light. The Fly
whether busily or enviously, clings about the light, but singes his own wings
with it, and they that think to extinguish the light will but burn their own
wings.

And to add one word to the particular occasion, that which Parisiensis said
sometimes concerning excommunicating of men for trifles, it is (says he) as if
a man should see a fly or flea on a man's forehead, and for that should
presently take a bettle and knock him in the head to kill the fly: It must not
be for toys and trifles; and so likewise not for every small failing and
exorbitancie or defect in the light, presently to extinguish and put out the
light, but rather to recover and to help it.

And for such as are not such, 2. Non tales amoveant.
not burning and shining lights. The Canon law, as it is reported out of that
and it is very pertinent to make this order and constitution (according to the
Popish fashion) if the Host be consumed (say they) in a nights visitation, the
Priest shall be bound to put out the Candle, lest the people should worship an
empty Pix so if there be any that have consumed integrity, and holiness of
life, if the host be gone, it is fit that the Candle should be put out, that
men do not worship an empty Caske, which has no worth answerable.

In the last place (I see I must of necessity be forced to contract things, but
I had rather break off abruptly, than incroach too much on the time, 3. Ad
Clerum.
and other occasions) the last concerns the Ministers and the Clergy: I
should have prescribed something both concerning their duty; 1. Officia.
a little to have pressed home the things that are contained in the application
of their duty: 1. Splendour vitae.
For holiness of life for diligence of Doctrine: to be painful and
industrious in Preaching, joined with a holy life, 2. Fulgor Doctrinae.
for otherwise, as it is said of a ghost, a lean meager ghost, with a Torch in
the hand, it makes it look more ghastly; so to have a Minister that has light
in his Doctrine, and yet an ugly and filthy life, there is not a more gast and
ugly sight in the world: and for another thing too: 3. Candor Animi.
to have commended that Candidnesse, and that ingenuity of brethren toward
their brethren, which we see our Savior affords to John, that not to
backebite, or detract, or draw down the price and excellency of our fellow
Ministers, suppose they do as they may outstrip us, but heartily an
ingenuously to give them their due; He is a burning and a shining light, and to
agree unanimously, and lovingly, and Christianly; there is nothing of more
consequence, nor more use than for Ministers to cohere, and so to stregthen and
fortify themselves. The scales of the Leviathan (as Luther makes the
comparison) stick close together, wickedmen in their projects and their
designs, stick close like the scales of the Leviathan, representing the
Devil as most interpreters express it. And the stones of the Temple (they
say) were so close, so simented together, as if there were but one stone, there
was no pieecing appeared or was seen by any, though they looked narrowly. The
stones of the Temple, they that would help to build up Gods Temple, should
stand close together, and remove bones of contentions, and difference, and
rivality, and emulation. It was a Noble speech of but a Heathen man: a
Lacedemonian, when he happened not to be chosen (where the City expected it
should be so) into the number of the 30. to be one of the principal officers
of the City, when all the rest of his friends were discontent and angry to
see that he the most noble and worthy of all the rest (as they thought) was
past over, he himself took it well; I am glad says he that the City has
so many men of more worth than my self. It should be the honor and ingenuity
of every one to rejoice that there be those that do excel them, not to
desire the priority, or precedencie themselves, but to be content to put it
where God has given it.

And in the last place principally for zeal, to have pressed that, 4. Ardor.
Zeli.
all light, and all diligence, and all holiness, and all unanimity, except
there be some edge of zeal put upon it, is nothing worth: and I thought to
add some directions: 2. Incentivum. 1. Tempus erigit. Peccantes Gigantes.
and in the last place some Incentives that might stir and kindle all to the
exercise of this heavenly grace; the time requires it, sin is Gyant-like,
Popery grows bold, witness the late fire (I thought to have added something
more concerning it.) If they be bold to claim kin of us, and to bear the
world in hand, that our own Articles maintain a secret correspondence with
Popery, it is time for our zeal to break out to quit the Church, this Noble
and honorable Church, from such a dishonorable imputation: The Act it self
of zeal is very opportune and seasonable: Nunc si unquam, 2. Actus. 1.
Oportunus.
nisi nunc quando? as the saying is: if not now when shall we show our selves
zealous; when Popery grows so bold and so high, shall we expect greater
matters, and is it not time to make an opposition against them, and now if ever.

They that write the story of the Travailes of the Apostles report that Simon
Zelotes, preached here in England; if ever there needed some Zelotes to come
again it is now, such as Epiphanius speaks of Eliah, that he sucked fire out
of his Mothers breast, that have been molded to a holy heat and fire: nothing
else can defend and preserve the chastity and integrity of the Church. A cold
modesty betrays a woman invites, and provokes an impudent soliciter, a coy
magnanimous countenance must vindicate her assaulted Chastity. An angry
countenance drives away fleerers, and fawners, and flatterers, it hinders so
much as the attempt, whereas coldness gives way, and hope and possibilite.

Again, 2. Fructu osus.
as the time requires it, and the act very seasonable, I will add this too;
Our timely and seasonable zeal may be more effectual than perhaps we may
imagine. The least beam of light is able to break through the thickest
darkness, to shine in the darkest place. The least spark of fire is enough
(if well husbanded and improved) to kindle the whole world. And as at the day
of Conflagration, that purgatory fire that shall purge and refine all the
elements, is conceived it shall be out of a contribution and commixion of
stars. That of all the burning and shining lights, there shall be made that
great heat that shall consume all the burning and shining lights of Satan's
Kingdom, if they would contribute and make a shot together of their zeal, to
make an opposition of sin and superstition.

And in the last place, 3. Munus.
our duty and office does require it, it is as proper for to have zeal in the
Ministry, 1. Necessarium in nos incumbit.
as to have fire in the Altar. We are the keepers (as it were) of the fire, to
see that the fire goes not out; as those of Athens in the Games in which they
run with, 1. Cura.
Lamps in their hands, One ran as far as he could and there delivered it
to another, to carry farther, and to a third, and so the succession was
continued. We have received the Lamp of Gods Word and truth from our
Predecessors, who have delivered it us: let us run on cheerfully and
courageously, to deliver it to our successors, and so to all posterity. Though
fire in the house may be dangerous, there is no man but desires to have fire on
the hearth that is useful: though among inferior and ignorant people, heat
with light may be dangerous, yet among the Clergy, among the Judicious and
able Clergy, if their light were quickened to heat, there would be no danger
but excellent use of it.

And the world expects so much of us, 2. Culpa:
and will be ready to lay all the blame on us; that which Luther said sometimes
Nunquam periclitatur Religio nisi inter Reverendissimos: The vulgar are ready
enough to take this up as a Maxim, as an Oracle. It is observed when Christ
was Crucified, Pilate the civil Magistrate absolved him, Caiphas the high
Priest condemned him, Judas his Disciple he betrayed him to the People: the
Laity are willing to wash their hands as Pilate did, and think they have done
all well enough, if they can lay the blame at the door of the Clergy: all the
blame will lie on the unfaithful Ministers that should be burning and shining
lights if sin grow to a height, if superstition increase all will lie there, it
concerns therefore and God expects it, as having laid the charge upon us, I
will ad this one thing by way of conclusion, I have not yet spoken one strong
line, (as they say) affectedly* but give me leave to conclude with one strong
line drawn out of the Proverb of the Germans, the pavement of hell (say they)
is made of the bare sculs of the Priests, or shaved Priests, and the glorious
Crests of great gallants. The meaning is, the greater and more eminent any one
is in the Church, and does not employ his Eminency for the maintenance of Gods
truth, they shall lie lowest in hell, they will have the deepest condemnation:
and now the choice is betwixt these two, we must either burn in zeal or
hazard it to burn in hell: and therefore to conclude all, I know not whether
is more admirable, the resolute message that Mordecai sent to Hester, (Let not
the Queen think that she shall escape in the Kings house, more than the rest
of the Jews, for if thou hold thy peacnow, deliverance shall come from another
place but thou and thy house shall perish) or the Noble resolution of Hester
upon this message, ( If I perish, I perish, I will go to the King though
contrary to the Law, I will interceede and interpose the utmost grace that I
have with the King, casting away all care, and committing unto God in a holy,
pious, and zealous way) I know not whether is more admirable: but I will wind
up all; let us all learn to be burning and shining lights, so to consume and
chase away the darkness of Ignorance, the dregs of sin, and all the stubble of
Superstition; and then though the people should be inconstant and profidious,
though our fellow brethren should be malignant and censorious, though our
fathers should not be so benign norr opitious: yet who is such a Coward that
dares not venture all upon the expectation of a Christian and gracious
absolution from our Savior; though all fail, mis-judge, mm-report, and
mis-thinke, we shall be sure to have a free, a candid testimony from our
Savior at the great Day: He was a burning and a shining Light.

FINIS.

