GVIL. BARCLAII J. C.

OF THE AVTHORITIE OF THE POPE: WHETHER, AND HOW FAR FORTH, he has power and
authority over Temporal Kings and Princes, Liber posthumus.

AT LONDON Imprinted by ARNOLD HATFIELD, for William Aspley. 1611.

TO THE MOST HOLY FATHER AND LORD, CLEMENT the 8. Pope: W. Barclay wishes
health.
IF Rome, from Peter to this day, had seen such Bishops as your Holiness is
(most High Father and Prelate of Christians) there had been no place for this
Question at this time. Your Moderation and Gentleness, answerable to your
Name, either had not opened any gap to this Business, or had barred the same by
some grave Provision, that it should not be opened. I have here discussed the
Question, touching the Temporal authority of your See over Kings and Princes;
which having been canuassed with so great Troubles, and so much Blood, has as
often afflicted the Church, as the Princes themselves: I have also dedicated the
same to you, lest I might seem either to have shunned your Judgment, or to
have managed rather the Cause of the Kings, then of the Church. If I have not
pleased every man's taste, I desire them to consider, That no Medicine brings
Health without bitterness. It is peradventure an odious argument to such as be
scrupulous, or malicious, to pervert my sense and meaning: which not
withstanding, most Holy Father, I have undertaken, partly out of the love of
the Truth, partly also, for that, I have been of opinion, that this Authoritic
is the fountain of all those tempests, wherewith Heresy tosseth your ship at
this day.

Pope Julius the 2. being alienated with a sudden unkindness, did not only
thunder against Jews the 12. King of France, but also deprived John King of
Navarre of his kingdom, because he assisted the French. And out of question
Jews his good fortune put by that Thunderbolt from France: but the Nauarrois
hearing the Spaniard of one side, and being excluded on the other side by the
Mountains of Pyrene from the help of France, was not able to make his part
good against the fury of Rome, and the ambition of Spain. Being spoiled of
the greater part of his kingdom, he retired into France, where he had a large
and ancient Patrimony. In the neck of this came the fire which Luther kindled,
and the Heirs of John, King of Navarre, inflamed with their private hatred,
did very soon pass to that side, which bandied against the Sea of Rome.
Therefore came Heresy first to be seattered through France, by the partiality
of those Princes, which through the fiaming fire, and after through wars,
has continued to this day. As for Henry the 8, King of England, who doubts,
that he departed not so much from the Religion as from the Pope, out of his
Hatred against the very same Authority? Clemens the 7. had denounced Henry
deprived of the Right and Interest of his Kingdoms: and he again conceived an
anger, which peradventure was not unjust of his part, but blind and
intemperate. He opened England to Heretics by the occasion of this schism,
who afterward growing strong under Edward the 6, destroyed the ancient
Religion. Again, Scotland affected with the Neighborhood and Communion of
England, having held out under James the 5, at length was attainted in the
beginning of Mary's reign, and presently after infected, when the poison had
gathered further strength.

So what Heresy or Heretics soever are in France and Britannie at this day
(which is their only strong hold) was conceived and hatched by this lamentable
warmth of the Temporal Authothoritie, as a pestilent egg. Behold, most holy
Father, how little good it does the Church to challenge this Command, which
like Scianus his Horse has ever cast his Masters to the ground. Therefore have
I undertaken this work, out of my affection to Religion and Truth, not to the
Princes, and of a sincere and humble mind have presented the same to you the
Chief Pastor, to whom it appertains to judge of leper and leper.

If there be any thing in these writings, which you shall think good and
profitable, I shall comfort my Old age with the most sweet remembrance of so
great a Witness. But if allowing my affection, yet you shall not allow my
Judgment, it shall be to posterity an argument of your Moderation, that under
you the simple liberty of Disputation has not been prejudicial to any. Let
this be an argument of your Moderation, but never of my Obstinacy. For
whatsoever is in this business I leave it to your Censure, that in this book
I may seem not so much to have delivered, what I think, as to have enquired
of your Holiness, what I ought to think.

Fare you well.
The contents of the several chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. THe Author professes his Catholic disposition to the Sea of Rome,
and his sincerity in the handling of this question. The opinion of the Divines
and Canonists touching the Popes authority in temporal matters, and
particularly touching Bozius a Canonist. Chap. 2. Of the different natures of
the Ecclesiastical and Temporal powers, and a taxation of Bozius his
sophistry touching the same. Chap. 3. That the Apostles practiced no temporal
jurisdiction, but rather enjoined Obedience to be given even to Heathen
Princes; and a comparison between the ambition and usurpation of the later
Popes, and humility of the ancient. Chap. 4. That the later Popes served
themselves of two advantages to draw to themselves this vast authority
Temporal over Princes: viz. partly through the great reverence which was borne
to the Sea of Rome, partly through the terror of the Thunder bolt of
Excommunication. Chap. 5. That it cannot be proved by any authority, either
Divine or Humane, that the Pope either directly or indirectly has any
Temporal authority over any Christian Princes. Chap. 6. That no instance can
be given of any Popes of higher times, that any such authority was usurped and
practiced by them: and a vehement deploration of the miserable condition of
these later times, in regard of the modesty and piety of the former. Chap. 7.
An answer made to an excuse pretended by Bellarmine, that the ancient Church
could not without much hurt to the people, coerce and chastise the old
Emperors and Kings, and therefore forbear them more, then now she need to do.
Chap. 8. That the ancient Church wanted neither skill nor courage, to execute
any lawful power upon evil Princes, but she forbear to do it, in regard she
knew not any such power over them. Chap. 9. That it is a false ground laid by
Bellarmine, that Henry the 4. Emperor, and other Christian Princes, upon whom
the Popes have practiced their pretended temporal authority, might be dealt
withal more securely then the former Princes. Chap. 10. The censure of the
worthy Bishop Frisingens. upon the course which Gregory the 7. took against
Henry the 4. Emperor, and the issue thereof how lamentable to the Church, and
unfortunate to the Pope himself. Chap. 11. A reason supposed for the
tolerancie and conniuencie of the ancient Popes, and the vanity thereof
discovered. Chap. 12. That the Pope has no authority, not so much as
indirectly over Christian Princes in temporal matters, proved both by the
special prerogatives of an absolute Prince, and also by the grounds of the
Catholics, and the inconueniencies ensuing of the admittance thereof. Chap.
13. He undertakes Bellarmine his proofs, propounds his first maine reason,
with the Media, whereby Bellarmine inforceth the same. Chap. 14. He takes away
the ground which Bellarmine laid for the strengthening of his first
Proposition, and lays open the lightness and vanity thereof. Chap. 15. He
amplifieth the answer to the last ground laid by Bellarmine, and explaneth in
what terms of Relation or Subordination the Powers both Civil and
Ecclesiastical do stand. Secondly, he shows that Clergy persons, are as
well and fully to be reputed the subjects of Temporal Princes, as Lay men are.
Thirdly, that the Clergy first received their Privileges from the favor of
Princes, and that the Pope himself, as successor of Peter, must necessarily
be subject to a Temporal Prince, but that he is a Temporal Prince in Italy
himself, which State also he received at the first by the Bounty of Temporal
Princes. Chap. 16. He detecteth a plain fallacy in a reason of Bellarmines,
which in Schools is called (...), addictum (...); and shows at large, that
Temporal Princes have submitted themselves to the Popes as their Spiritual
Fathers, but not so absolutely, but that they ever reserved their Civil
authority firm, and untouched to themselves. Chap. 17. He answers
Bellarmines second reason, and proves, that this unlimited power of disposing
the Temporalties of Princes is neither belonging, nor necessary for the
Church, and that the Church flourished more the first three hundred years
without the same authority, then it has done since certain later Popes
usurped the same. Chap. 18. He discusseth more at large the sense of Bellarmine
his latter argument to prove the Popes sovereignty over Kings in Temporalties,
and bewraies the inconsequence and vanity thereof. Chap. 19. He discusseth a
passage in S. Bernard, touching the Material sword, and the words of Christ,
Ecce duo gl^dij: and concludes that the Temporal sword, is neither proper to
the Pope, nor subject to the Spiritual. Chap. 20. He encountreth Bellarmine
his third reason, and the pro^^es of the same. Wherein he excepts especially
against this Proposition of Bellarmine, that it is as dangerous to choose a
Heathen Prince, as not to depose him that is not a Christian: but the Elench or
fallacy of the whole argument he plainly discovers. Chap. 21. He insisteth
further on the point, Whether Christians ought to suffer over them a King that
is not a Christian. The text of the 1. Cor. 6. is discussed, Of going to law
under infidel Princes, or Judges: and Bellarmine his fraud and captiousnes
discovered in abusing that place to serve his turn. Secondly, a place of
Thomas Aquinas examined touching the point of taking from Heathen Princes their
Right. Thirdly, that it was not want of strength, but mere Religion and
Conscience that kept the Primitive Church in obedience, by Bellarmines own
grounds. Chap. 22. He answers Bellarmines second maine Reason; taxes the
same both for matter in truth, and form in Logic, and gives a right supply
to the deficiencie of the same, by which the force of the same reason is taken
away. Chap. 23. He takes in hand Bellarmines third argument, which is drawn
from a comparison of the bond of Marriage, with the bond of the Obedience due
from the subject to the Prince; and both shows how weak it is in it self and
how strong against him that brings it. Chap. 24. He examineth a fourth Reason
of Bellarmines, taken from the form of an Oath, which Princes are supposed to
take when they were received into the Church, and shows that nothing can be
made thereof, to prove Bellarmines assertion for the Popes temporal authority
over Christian Princes. Chap. 25. He examineth the last reason of Bellarmine,
grounded on the words of Christ to Peter, Pasce oues meas: the which reason
from these words, if it have any edge at all, he turns the same back upon
Bellarmine himself. Chap. 26. He proves that Bellarmine is deceived, or does
deceive of purpose in his reason drawn from the comparison of the Pope as a
shepherd, and an heretic Prince as a wolf. 2. What is the duty of the
shepherd, in case the Prince do of a sheep become a wolf. Chap. 27. He
debateth the power of the Pope to dispense: what is the nature of those laws,
wherewith the Pope may dispense. But that he has no color to dispense with
the obedience of a subject to his Prince. The madness of the Canonists that
give too vast a fulness of power to the Pope. Chap. 28. The Examination of a
Rescript of Pope Innocent the third, which has these words: Not man but God
does separate, whom the Bishop of Rome does separate. Which words many have
labored to reconcile, but have missed. Chap. 29. But the Author gives the
resolution, excusing the Popes meaning, and blaming the words, to answer the
Canonists. Chap. 30. That the Pope, although he might dispense with the oath of
a Subject, yet can he not dispense with his Obedience to his Prince, to which
he is bound by the law of God and Nature, which are greater then his Oath. 2.
The dangerous consequence to all Christian Princes by this power of the Pope,
called Indirect, if he should have it. 3. What the People ought to answer the
Pope or his Ministers, in case they should be by them solicited against their
lawful Prince. Chap. 31. The error of the later Popes in taking this high and
headlong course to depose Princes: what ill blood it has bred in the Church:
proved by miserable experience in Germany, France, England, and has brought
the Sea of Rome, both into hatred and contempt with all Christian Princes.
Chap. 32. That if the Prince play the wild Ram, the Pope may correct him,
but as a spiritual Pastor, only by spiritual means. 2. That neither the
Prince can avoid or decline the Popes judgment in cases Spiritual, nor any
Clergy person the Kings in cases Temporal. 3. That the Clergy received those
Exemptions and Immunities, which at this day they enjoy through all
Christendom, not from the Pope, nor from Canons of Councels, but by the
bounty and indulgencie of secular Princes. 4. The explanation of the Canons of
certain famous Councels, which the adversaries allege in their behalf, and
yet upon the matter make rather against them. 5. The notorious corruption
practiced by Gratianus in perverting the words of two several Canons, flat
against the Original, which corruption also Bellarmine very strangely
follows, because it seems to make to his purpose. Chap. 33. He propounds
and proves a paradoxe of his own; That all the Clergy men in the world, of
what degree or rank soever, are subject to the Temporal authority of secular
Princes, in those several Countries, wherein they live, and are punishable by
the said Princes, as well as other lay subjects, in all cases that are not
meerclie Spiritual. Chap. 34. He returns to the particular answer of
Bellarmine his argument, and shows, that Excommunication works only so
far, as to exclude from the company of the faithful, but not to deprive
Princes of any temporal estate. Chap. 35. He propounds certain reasons of
Nicholas Sanders, which had been omitted by Bellarmine, for the establishing of
the Popes temporal authority over Princes. Chap. 36. He answers the said
reasons of Sanders touching Samuel, and Saul. 2. Touching Ahias the Shilonite.
3. Touching Elias. 4. Touching Elizeus his sword, as reasons forged either of
malice against the Prince then, with whom he was angry, or of affection to the
then Pope, or some other fume of brain; they have so small color to prove his
purpose. Chap. 37. He discusseth other examples, alleged by Bellarmine; and
first that of Ozias the King of Judah; and herein he taxes Bellarmine his
slight dealing to transcribe out of other men's collections such matters as they
have either negligently or maliciously wrested against the direct and pregnant
story of the Scriptures, as appears in this example. Chap. 38. He discusseth
another example touching Athalia and Ioiadas the high Priest, which he shows
to be (...), and nothing attailing to conclude his purpose. Chap. 39. He
discusseth a third example from Ambrose Bishop of Millane, and Theodosius the
Emperor, and makes it plain how little it makes for the Popes authority
temporal, over Emperors and Kings. Chap. 40. He answers Bellarmines
examples of the latter Popes, first by way of (...), or prevention out of
Sotus, That the act of Popes makes not an Article of the faith. Secondly, by
the testimony of Platina he conuinceth the whole story related by Bellarmine,
touching Pope Gregory the 2, and Leo the 3 Emperor, of untruth. Chap. 41. He
answers another instance of Bellarmine touching Pope Zachary, and
Chilperique King of France; the very explication of which whole business, is
refutation sufficient, to frustrate Bellarmine his purpose in alleging the
same, to win any temporal authority to Popes over Christian Princes.
GVIL. BARCLAII. I. C. Of the Authority of the Pope; whether, and how far
forth, he has power and authority over Temporal Kings and Princes, Liber
Posthumus.
MAny men have written of this Argument, especially in our time, diversely and
for diverse respects: but none more learnedly and clearly, then the most
worthy Cardinal and most learned Divine Rob. Bellarmine, in those books,
which he has written of the chief or Roman Bishop. Who as he has notably
proved the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power of the Bishop of Rome; so if
he could have confirmed with more sound weight of authorities and reasons, that
temporal power, which he affirms out of the opinion of certain Divines,
that he has, there were nothing in that Treatise which might justly be
reprehended, or required by any man. If therefore many both Divines and
Ciuilians, one after another, have employed themselves in the discussing of
this question, and the judgment of the former writers thereof has been no
prejudice to the opinion of them which followed; why should not I also (since I
have spent my time in this study) challenge after a sort by a peculiar
interest some place in the searching of the truth it self.

But before I begin to show what I think of this matter, there must some
care and diligence be used by me, by way of Provision, Least either any weak:
ones should conceive any scandal, who esteem the Pope to be a God, who has
all power in heaven and earth (that I may use (...).
Gerson^ words) or any aid seem to come to the calumnies of the Nouators,
wherewith they prosecute the Apostolic sea, that they might deprive the chief
Pastor of souls of all his authority. Therefore the Reader must understand
thus much that I do bear to that Sea all reverence and good will, neither do
go about either here or any where else, to diminish any thing of the power and
dignity due to the Vicar of Christ, and the successor of the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, by whose patronage I do piously and plainly persuade my self
that I am daily assisted: but that I have this purpose only to search without
all guile and deceit, without love and hatred, what and how great that power
is, which all Christians ought to acknowledge in the Bishop of Rome, that is,
in the chief Bishop and Pope as they call him: and without those assertions,
which wrest men's minds to one side or other, that I only have God before mine
eyes, least at the return of the Lord, I be challenged either for the
unprofitable emploiment, or the hiding of my talent.

Therefore I desire them, who have written before me, of a good mind as I
suppose, that they take it not in scorn or anger, if I depart from their
opinion. (...) 111. ad (...) Deo re^ertur did 9. can 10.
For (as I may say with S. Augustine) we ought not to esteem every man's
disputation, although they be Catholic and praise worthy, as if they were
Canonical Scriptures, as though it were not lawful for us, saving the
reverence which is due unto them, to mislike and refuse some things in their
writings, if perhaps we shall find, that they think otherwise then the truth
bears, being by the help of God understood by others or by our selves. As I
my self am in the writings of other men, so would I have the understanding
Readers to be in mine, that they would either courteously admit, or with
reason reprehend. But to the matter.

There is amongst Catholics, (for what others think I force not a whit) but
those too much addicted to the Pope, a twofold opinion touching this question:
one is of the Canonists, who affirm that All rights of heavenly and earthly
government are granted by God to the Pope, and that, whatsoever power is in
this world, whether Temporal and Civil, or Spiritual and Ecclesiastical is
conferred by Christ upon Peter and his successors: to which principle they do
easily draw any thing, so often as any disputation arises, touching the
absolute power, or, as they use to speak, touching the fullness of the power
of the Pope. The other is the opinion of certain Divines, who do justly
dislike this ground of the Canonists, because it is not clearly proved either
by authority of Scripture, nor tradition of Apostles, nor practice of the
ancient Church, nor by the doctrine and testimonies of the ancient Fathers.
Therefore these do by most sound reasons convince their opinion, I mean of
the Canonists: but yet in such manner, as that by the loss of that, the Pope
looseeth never a whit the more of his temporal interest and power, but they
see that safely bestowed, and do preserve it safe and sound for him. For they
hold thus. That the Pope as Pope has not directly any temporal power, but
only Spiritual: but that by reason of the Spiritual he has at least
indirectly a certain power, and that very great, to dispose of the
Temporalities of all Christians. And so look what they do allow the Pope, by
a direct course, the same do these men give him, by an oblique and indirect
means, so as the means only is diverse, but the effect is the same.

For my part, when I consider of this question, I find, that neither of their
opinions as touching the temporal power, has any certain ground: and yet if
they be compared together, that the Canonistes opinion may more easily be
maintained then the Divines: especially seeing it is not contrary to the order
of nature, according to which a man by his right exercises authority granted
unto him over others, and therefore, it contains nothing impossible. But the
opinion of the Divines, as it is propounded by their own side, ouerturnes the
natural course of things, which wills, that no man use any power or
authority over others, which is neither by name granted to him, nor is any
whit necessary to the effecting of those things which are committed to his
trust. Therefore these Divines do indeed very well refute the opinion of the
Canonists, but for all that, with their leave, they think not a whit the
better themselves: whereby a man may see, how much more easy it is to find an
untruth in other men's writings, then to defend a truth in his own.

There is also even amongst themselves a contention touching this point. For
many of them have joined themselves with the Canonists, either for that they
are deceived with a show of truth: or that bearing too much, and that a very
blind affection to Peter's Sea, (which indeed is worthy all honor) they would
also grace it with this title of Power and Dignity: or being obliged by some
speciciall favors of the Popes, have by this endeavor of thankfulness desired to
draw their good opinions close to themselves, I will not say, to gain them
through this unreasonable flattery of theirs. And amongst these is one, who
being lately sprung out of the Congregation of the Oratrie, has stepped forth
as a The. Bozim.
sharp Abettour for the Canonists above other men. Whom therefore a learned man
and a famous preacher, as any is amongst the Iesu^tes, when I asked him what he
thought of this opinion of Bozius; he called him a Popes parasite. For in his
books he does earnestly maintain, That all Kingly power and authority, and
Lordship of al things which are in earth, are given to the Bishop of Rome, by
the Law of God, and that what power soever whersoeuer in the world temporal
Kings and Princes, as well believing, as unbelieving have, does wholly depend of
the Pope; and so far as concerns temporal execution is derived from him to
them: So that he as the Lord of the whole world, may give and take kingdoms
and principalities to whom and where he will, although no man knows why he
does so. And therefore (says he) he might adiudge and bequeath the West Indies
of Castile, and the East Indies of Portingall, although all men understand not
the coherence of the reason, whereby they were disposed as we said before.

And therefore being emboldned with a confidence of maintaining this opinion,
he does grievously accuse many excellent Divines, amongst whom is that worthy
man Bellarmine, who can never woorthily be commended, and Lib. 2. cap. 1^.
calls them new Divines, and affirms, Lib. 5. cap. vlt.
That they teach matters, that be notoriously false, and contrary to all
truth: because they say, that Christ as man was not a temporal king, neither
had any temporal dominion in earth, nor exercised any kingly power, (for by
these assertions the principal foundations of Bozius his dotages are
overthrown:) when as these great Divines affirm that they are most true and
confirmed by the own testimony of our Savior: The Foxes (says he) have
Matthew. 8. Luke 9.
holes, and the birds of heaven nests, but the Son of man has no where to
lay his head. Where then is his kingdom? where is his Temporal dominion? who
can conceive and imagine that there is a king or a Lord, who has neither
kingdom nor Lordship in the universal world. We know that Christ as he is the
Son of God, is King of glory, the King of Kings, the Lord of heaven and
earth, and of all things reigning everlastingly together with the Father and
the holy Spirit. But what is this to a Temporal kingdom? What is this to a
crown and scepter of a temporal Majesty? Certainly I have perused all that
Bozius has delivered to this purpose: but I have not found any sound reason
for the confirming of his purpose, nothing that was not corrupted with the
mixture of fallaries, and sophistication, nothing grounded upon ancient and
approved authorities, nothing but depraved with a gloss of a devised
interpretation. Before this time Henricus Segutianus, Cardinal of Hostia, was
entangled with the same error, whose new and strange opinion at that time, is
thought within a while after to have inflamed beyond all measure, as it were
with new firebrands of ambition Boniface the 8. a man exceeding desirous of
glory. But the case is at this time very well altered, because that opinion of
Hostiensis, (which afterward the Canonists followed, and Bozius now embraces)
is upon very grounded reason condemned by certain Divines, And also for that
the Church of God has at this day such a chief Bishop, I mean Clement the
eight, who shows himself to the world so excellent and admirable, not only
in piety and learning, but also in humility, justice, charity, and other
virtues, worthy so great a Pastor: that we need not fear least such a Bishop
should be so stirred and infected with a vain opinion, which is underpropped
only with fooleries, and snares of words, that he should challenge to
himself any thing, which of due belonged not unto him. Neither had Bozius
offered so rash assertions to so great a Bishop, but that impudency dare do
anything. It were time ill spent to touch severally upon all his errors and
fopperies. Only least I should seem for mine own pleasure only to have
found fault with the man, I will lay before you one instance of his foolish and
quirking dealing, that the Reader may judge of the beast by his Loose.

CHAP. II.
FIrst of all we must understand, that those two powers, whereby the world is
kept in order, I mean, the Ecclesiastical and the Civil, are so by the law
of God distinguished and separated, (that although they be both Romans 13.
of God) each of them being included in his bounds, can not by any right enter
upon the borders of the other, and neither have power over the other, as Can.
duo sunt can. cum ad verum 96. did. cap. nouit. de iudic. cap. per ve.
nerabilem, qui filij sunt legit.
S. Bernard truly and sweetly teaches in his first book, de Consider. ad
Eugenium: Cap. 6.
and amongst the later Divines, John Driedo. Lib. 2. de liber Christ. cap. 2.
And the worthy Hosius Bishop of Corduba, writing to the Emperor Constantine,
an Arrian, does evidently declare the same difference of these two powers:
whose opinion is set down in this manner, in a letter of S. Athanasius, written
to them which lead a solitary life: God has committed a government to you: to
us he has entrusted the matters which belong to the Church: and as he who
with envious eyes maligneth your government, does resist the divine ordinance,
so take you heed least by drawing to your self those things which belong to
the Church, you prove guilty of a great fault: It is written, Give to Caesar,
those things which be Caesar's, and to God, which are Gods Matthew. 22. Mark. 12.
. Therefore neither is it lawful for us to exercise an earthly empire, nor you
being Emperor, have any power over our sacrifices and holy things. From hence
it is, I mean from this distinction of powers, that Innocentius and
Panormitanus do conclude, that In c^p inquisitions de sent. excom.
Laymen are not bound to obey the Pope in those things which are not
Spiritual, or which concern not the soul, as they speak: unless they live
in those territories, which be subject to the temporal Jurisdiction of the
Pope. And so ought that oath of the Profession of faith in the Bull of Pius the
fourth to be restrained, where it is said, To the Bishop of Rome, etc. I
promise and swear true obedience, when he is of the Laity that swears.

Bozius notwithstanding denies this distinction of these powers: and affirms
full indiscreetly, that the temporal is contained under the Ecclesiastical,
and is directly subject to it. But he perceived that which was pressed with
the evident confession of the holy Bishop, Nicolas 1. who in a letter to
Michael the Emperor, teaches, that although in times past Dict. can. cum ad
verum 96. did.
Heathen Emperors were called the chief Bishops, yet when it came to the true
King and Bishop, neither did the Emperor draw to himself the interest of the
Bishop, nor she Bishop usurped the name of the Emperor: because the same
Mediator of God and men. the man Christ Jesus, did so by their proper
functions, and several privileges distinguish the duties of both the powers,
willing that his proper offices should be advanced by a wholesome humility,
not by humane pride be again drowned into hell, that both Christian Emperors
might stands in need of Bishops for eternal life, and Bishops might use
imperial laws for the course of temporal things only, etc.

Therefore when as he saw by the testimony of a chief Bishop, that both the
Powers were so disioined and severed by their proper acts, dignities, and
duties, that neither the temporal power might without injury usurp the
rights of the Spiritual power, nor contrary: this fine witted gentleman, that
he might unwind himself out of this brake, he slips me into a blind turning
of an interpretation, which was never heard of before: wherein he shows
himself very ridiculous, nor so cunning in inuenting, as unadvised in
delivering the same. But we must mark, says he, in these words of Nicclaus:
first, that he does not affirm, that the Lay power is severed from the
Spiritual, that an Ecclesiastical power may not have it, but that a Secular
man may not have an Ecclesiastical power: therefore he says that these powers
are distinguished, not all together, as though one were not subordinate and
subject to the other, but he affirms that they are distinguished by their
Offices, Actions and dignity: and with all when he had said, neither did the
Emperor draw to himself the Priueledges of the Bishopric, he said not
again, the Bishop drew not to himself the priueledges of the Emperor. He
says not, the Priueledges, or Rights, as Nauarra, in Cap. Nouit. has reported
falsely, nor as I think, marking what he said: but says Nomen, the name.

What should a man do with such a myching bird-catcher of words: who a man
would think studied to make Pope Nicolas, not a Pastor, but an impostor, and
that he should seem not to instruct, but to mock the Emperor, for what I
pray you? was this conference between the Pope and the Emperor, of words,
and not of things: of the name, and not of the right and power? or did the
Bishop write these letters that by the obscure doubtfulnesse, or change of a
word, he might entrap the Emperor, and not rather, that he might instruct him
by a plain discourse of truth? It is a speech of a good conceit, 1 L. 2. C.
cov. de legate.
that laws are imposed by deeds, and not by words: and this letter, is in a
manner, as an Ecclesiastical law. What then Nicolaus says: Neither did the
Bishop usurp the name of the Emperor, it is as much as if he had said, he
usurped not the Right, or the Rights of the Emperor, which Nauarrus the most
learned both Canonist and Divine, observing, and others of all ages, that were
exercised in those knowledges, have taken Nomen and Iura for the the same in
that Epistle; which notwithstanding either of ignorance or malice are wrested
quite from the meaning by this hunter of words this way and that way, as please
him. L. S^re leges. D. de legib.
This is not to know the laws, to understand their words, and not their force
and meaning.

But this interpretation of Bozius is refelled by this, that the Pope by these
words as the Pagan Emperors were also called the chief Bishops, that is,
(named) did not mean an empty and a bare name, as though Emperors, were only
named Bishops, but the right, and office, because together with the names they
retained all the rights, and offices, and dignities that were incident to each
power, which seeing it is most true and Bozius dare not deny it: it follows
certainly that either no contrary comparison, nor perfect difference between
the Popes and Emperors of these and those times, is in that place designed by
Nicolaus, or by the name of the Emperor, that he understands all the Imperial
right: that as after Christ acknowledged and received, the Emperors assumed
not to themselves any more the rights of the Bishopric, so neither Bishops
the rights of Emperors. To conclude, if the Pope had in this place signified,
that he refused only the name of the Emperor, but retained the right and
power: might not the Emperor justly reply, that he stands not so much upon the
Name, as upon the Right? what should he do with the Name, if another carry
away his Right and Power? he had certainly said it, neither would he have put
up so foul an indignity, if he had believed that any such thing might be
gathered, out of Pope Nicolas his words.

But says Bozius, he said not their powers were (wholly) distinguished. I
confess, and that not without special care, lest he should give to the Popes
flatterers, or any other busy Companions an easy occasion of Cavil and
Exception. For Bozius would interpret that word, (call together) as far as
belonged to Execution: therefore he spoke more and more plainly, to wit, that
those powers are severed and parted, in their proper Actions, Offices and
Dignities, that he might manifestly show, that by no mean they are joined
together, and that one is not subject to the other, although both of them may
concur in the same person. For the same person may be both a temporal
Prince and a Bishop: but neither as a Pope can he challenge to himself, the
actions, offices, dignities and other rights of Temporal things, nor as a
Prince of Spiritual. If therefore these powers be joined together, neither in
dignities, offices, nor actions, let Bozius tell us wherein they are joined? If
he say, in that because one is subordinate and subject to the other: that is
it, which we deny, and which if it were true, it would follow necessarily, that
those powers are distinguished neither in dignities, nor offices, but only in
actions, and so this opinion of Pope Nicolaus should be false, for dignity
and office, which is in the Person subordinated, cannot but be in the Person,
which does subordinate, seeing it is derived from him into the Person
subordinated. Hence it is, that the Prince takes himself to be wronged, while
his Ministers are hindered in the execution of their offices? and the Pope
thinks himself and his Sea Apostolic to be contemned, if any Contempt be
offered to the authority of his Legate, sent by him. But all things, and
Persons are proclaimed to be free, and not subject, unless the contrary be
proved. And if these things be so, it is very ridiculous, and a mere fancy
of Bozius his brain, that he says, how it appears by the former speeches of
Pope Nicolaus. That he does not affirm, the Lay power to be disioyned from
the Spiritual so as a Person Ecclesiastical may not have it: but that a
temporal Person may not have an Ecclesiastical. For where can this appear?
seeing in that letter, there is not one word to be seen, whereby that may be
gathered in any probability. And hitherto have I said enough of this Bozius
his error. And I am persuaded that no man is so mad, that in the
determination of this business, touching the distinction of these powers, will
not give credit rather to Hosius, then to Bozius.

CHAP. III.
I Would here annex other examples of Bozius his error, but that I know that
this opinion which he endeavors to revive being now laid asleep, and almost
extinguished, seems in these days to the learned so absurd, and that it is
refuted and overthrown, with so many and so clear reasons, that now a man
need not fear least any be inueigled and overtaken therewith. For first it is
certain, that neither Bozius nor al his abetors, although they wear and wrest
the sacred writings, and works of the fathers never so much, shall ever be able
to produce any certain testimony, whereby that same temporal jurisdiction and
power of the Pope, which they dream on, over Princes and people of the whole
world may be plainly confirmed.

Nay but not so much as any token or print of any such temporal power
delivered by hand from the Apostles and their successors can be found, from the
passion of Christ, for seven hundred, nay I may say for a thousand years. For
which cause, the most learned Bellarmine in the refutation of this opinion does
very wittily and shortly use this strange reason: If it were so says he (that
Lib. 5. de Rom Pont. cap. 3.
the Pope be temporal Lord of the whole world,) that should Lib. 5. de Romans
(...). ^ap 3.
plainly appear by the Scriptures, or surely out of the tradition of the
Apostles. Out of the Scriptures we have nothing but that the keys of the
kingdom of heaven were given to the Pope, of the keys of the kingdom of the
earth, there is no mention, and the adversaries bring forth no tradition of the
Apostles. The which matters, and with all, the great division about this matter
between the Divines and the Canonists, and of each of them one with another,
makes that this question of the temporal power of the Pope, seems very
doubtful and uncertain, and wholly to consist without any ground, in the
opinion and conceit of men: and therefore, that the truth thereof is to be
searched and sisted out by the light of reason, and sharpness of arguments:
and that it is no matter of faith, as they speak, to think of it either one
way or other: for that, those things which are matters of faith, are to be held
of all men after one manner.

But for mine own part, although I do with heart, and mouth profess, that
the chief Bishop, and prelate of the city of Rome, (as being the Sea the
admonition to the reader.
Vicar of Christ, and the lawful successor of S. Peter, yea the universal and
supreme pastor of the Church) is endued with spiritual power over all
christian Kings, and Monarchs, and that he has, and may exercise over them the
power to bind, and loose, which the Scripture does witness that it was given
to the Apostle Peter over all souls: yet notwithstanding I am not therefore
persuaded that I should alike believe, that he comprehends secular Kings and
Princes with in his temporal jurisdiction, or when they do offend against God
or Men, or otherwise abuse their office, that he may in any sort abrogate their
government, and take their Scepters away, and bestow them on others: or indeed
in a word, that he has any right or jurisdiction temporal over any
lay-persons, of what condition or order, and rank so ever they be: unless he
shall purchase the same by Civil and lawful means: For as much as I have
observed that the opinion which affirms the same, has been assaied indeed
and attempted by diverse, but hitherto could never be proved of any sufficient
and strong reason, and for the contrary opinion much more weighty and more
certain reasons may be brought. For my part in regard of the zeal I bear to
the Sea Apostolic, I could wish with all my heart, that it might be proved by
certain and undoubted arguments that this right belongs unto it, being very
ready to incline to that part, to which the weightier reason, and authority of
truth do swaie. But now let us come nearer to the disputation it self.

That it is evidently false, that the Pope has authority and rule over Kings
and Princes, it is certain, even by this; that it were an absurd thing, and
unjust to say that heathen Princes are received by the Church, in harder and
worser terms, then other particular men of the commons whosoever: or that the
Pope has at this day greater power civil over christian Princes, then in
times past S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles, had over every private man,
that was a child of the Church: but they in those times had never any right or
power temporal over christian lay-persons, therefore neither has the Pope now
a days any temporal power over secular Princes. The assumption is prooned by
this: because it is most certain that in the time of the Apostles, the
Ecclesiastical power was wholly severed from the civil, (I do not hereweigh
Bozius fooleries), and that this civil power was wholly in the hands of
heathen Princes out of the Church. In so much as the Apostles themselves, were
within the temporal jurisdiction of the heathen, and that both Albert Pighius
and Job. 5. ca. 7. Hierar. Eccl. l. b. 1. de pon. Romans cap. 29.
Robert Bellarmine and ^ other notable Divines do ingenuously confess. For
Christ came not to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it: Nor to destroy the
laws of nature and nations, or to exclude any person out of the temporal
government of his estate. Therefore as before his coming. Kings ruled their
subjects by a civil power, so also after that he was come, and gone again
from us into heaven, they retained still the self same power, confirmed also,
neither then any whit diminished by the doctrine of the Apostles. If therefore
Peter and the other Apostles, before they followed Christ, were subject to the
authority and jurisdiction of heathen Princes, (which can not be denied,) and
the Lord has no where expressly and by name need them from the obligation of
the law of nature and of nations, it does follow necessarily, that even after
the Apostleship, they continued under the same yoke, seeing it could no way
hinder the preaching, and propagation of the Gospel. For although, they had
been freed by our Savior his warrant, what I pray you, had this exemption
auailed them to the sowing of the Gospel? or what could those few and poor
men have done more, being in conscience loosed from the band of temporal
jurisdiction, then if they were left in their first estate of obedience? seeing
that that privilege of liberty, (if they had obtained any such thing,) had
been hindered and frustrated by the servile and unjust courses of unbelieving
Princes and people. But it appears both by their doctrine and practice, that
they themselves were subject to Princes, like other citizens: for that can not
be laid in their dish, whereof Christ challenges the Scribes and the
Pharisees, that they did one thing and taught an other. Now they taught
christians that the subjection and obedience, whereof we speak, is to be given
to Kings and Princes At Romans 13.
: for which cause Paul himself appealed to Caesar, and willed all christians
to be subject to the temporal power of the heathen, not only because of wrath,
but also for conscience sake. Now for that some say, that in that place, S.
Paul does not speak of the temporal power of secular Princes, but of power in
general, that every one should be subject to his superior, the civil person,
to the civil, the ecclesiastical to the ecclesiastical, it is a mere cavil,
and an answer unworthy of learned men and Divines. Seeing in that time there was
commonly no other jurisdiction acknowledged amongst men then the civil and
temporal: and the Apostle inspired with the spirit of God, so penned his
Epistles, as that he did not only instruct them, that were converted to the
Faith, and admonish them of their duty, least they should think that they
were so redeemed by Christ his blood, as that they were not bound any longer to
yield obedience to any Civil power, (which conceit was now wrongfully settled
in the minds of certain persons, relying upon the honor, and privilege of
the name of a Christian) but also that he might give the Heathen and Infidels
to understand, that Christian religion does take no man's interest from him,
neither is it in any manner contrary to the temporal authority and power of
Kings and Emperors. Therefore it is clear, that in that place the Apostle
ought to be understood, of the Temporal power only, because at that time, as
has been said, there was no other authority acknowledged: and in that sense
have the ancient Fathers ever interpreted the Apostle in this place: whereupon
S. Austine in the exposition of that place, confesses that himself and by
consequent in his person all the Prelates of the Church are subject to the
Temporal power: whose words, because they bring great light to this
disputation, I will set down entier as they lie. Now for that he says, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power, but of
God: he does admonish very rightly, lest any because he is called by his Lord
into liberty, being made a Christian, should be lifted up into pride, and not
think that in the course of this life that he is to keep his rank, neither
suppose that he is not to submit himself, to the higher powers, to whom the
government is committed for the time in Temporal affairs, for seeing we
consist of mind and body, as long as we are in this temporal life, and use
temporal things for the helping of this life, it behooves for that part,
which belongs to this life to be subject to powers, that is, to men, who in
place and honor do manage worldly matters. But of that part whereby we
believe in God, and are called into his kingdom, we ought not to be subject
to any man, that desires to overthrow the same in us, which God has vouchsafed
to give us to eternal life. Therefore if any man think, because he is a
Christian, that he ought not to pay custom or tribute, or that he need not to
yield honor due to those powers, who have the charge of these things, he is in
a great error. Again, if any man think that he is to be subject so far, as
that he supposes, that he who excels in authority for temporal Government,
has power over his Faith, he falls into a greater error. But a mean must be
observed, which the Lord himself prescribes, that we give to Caesar, those
things that are Caesar's, and to God, which are Gods.

Here Austine comprehends many things in few words which support diverse of our
assertions, which are here and there set down in this Book. For both first he
teaches, that which we have said, that the profession of Christian Religion
exempteth none from the subjection of Temporal power: whereof two things
necessarily follow; whereof the one is, that the Apostles and all other
Christians were subject to the authority of Heathen Princes and Magistrates,
and therefore that neither S. Peter, nor any other Apostle, was endued with any
Temporal power over Christians, for that it was wholly in the hands of the
Heathen, as we have showed in this Chapter. The other, that it was not lawful
for those first Christians to fall from the obedience of Heathen Princes, and
to appoint other Princes and Kings over themselves, although they had strength
to effect it, (as Bellarmine untruly thinks) I^b 5. de Romans Pont. C. 7.
because they were not delivered from the yoke of Temporal power, to which
they were subject, before they received the Faith of Christ, which we will
declare hereafter Chap. 21. in a large discourse. Thirdly, seeing he speaks
generally of that subjection, and uses such a speech, wherein he includes
himself, and excepts none, he does plainly enough declare, that Clergymen as
well as Laymen are in this life subject to Temporal power: Lastly, he
delivers us a notable doctrine, of a twofold duty of Subjects, both toward
God and toward the King, or the Temporal power, in what manner both of them
ought to serve, and yield that which is right and due, which learning we have
followed in this Book, and in the Books De Regno. Therefore let us lay this
down as a maine ground, that the place of S. Paul, which we spoke of before,
is meant by him only of the Temporal jurisdiction. And yet we confess, that
that opinion of performing obedience may very truly be applied to Spiritual
jurisdiction also, by reason of the general similitude, and as they say, of
the identitie of reason, which holds so justly between them L. illud D. ad
leg. Aquil.
.

If then the Apostles in those times had no Temporal jurisdiction over private
men, that were regenerate and made the children of the Church, how can it be,
that the successors of the Apostles should obtain that jurisdiction over
Princes, who come to the Church? Seeing it is repugnant of the Successors part,
that they should have more interest over their spiritual Children, by virtue
of the power Ecclesiastical, then the Apostles had, whom they succeed. But on
the Princes part, what can be spoken with more indignity and injustice, then
that they professing the faith of Christ, should be pressed with a harder
yoke, then any private man among the Multitude. But private men when they
entered into the spiritual power of the Church; lost no inheritance nor any
temporal interest, excepting those things, which they offered of their own
accord, and conferred to the common use, as appears in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 5.
where Ananias his lie cost him his life, being taxed by S. Peter, in these
words, whilst it remained, did it not appertain to thee? and after it was
sold, was it not in thine own power? Likewise therefore the Princes also
after they gave their name to Christ, retained entirely and untouched all their
temporal interest, I mean their Civil government and authority. Neither
does it a whit help the Adversaries cause, to say that the Apostles therefore
had no Temporal power over the Princes of their age, because they were not as
yet made Christians, according to that 1. Cor. 5.
for what have I to do, to judge those, which are without? But that the Pope
now has that power, because they are made Christians and sons of the Church,
because he is the supreme Prince and head in the earth, and the Father of all
Christians and that the right order of Nature and Reason does require, that the
Son should be subject to the Father, not the Father to the Son. This
reason is so trifling and merely nothing, that it is a wonder, that any place
has been given to it by learned men, for that spiritual subjection, whereby
Princes are made sons of the Pope, is wholly distinguished and separated from
Temporal subjection so as one follows not the other, But as a President or
Consul in the time while he is in office, may give himself in adoption to
another, and so pass into the family of an adoptiue father, and into a
fatherly power: whereas notwithstanding by that lawful act, he transferreth
not upon the Adopter, either his Consular authority, nor any thing else
appertaining to him by the right of that office; so Kings and Princes, and
generally all Men, when they enter into the bosom of the Church, and yield
themselves to be adopted by the chief Bishop, as their Father, do still
reserve to themselves whatsoever temporal Jurisdiction or Patrimony they have
any where, free, entier and untouched by the same right, which they had before,
and so the Pope acquires no more temporal power by that spiritual Adoption,
then he had before, which shall be proved at large hereafter. Cap 14.


To this I may add, that when the Christian Commonweal did exceedingly
flourish, both with multitude of Believers, and sanctimonie of Bishops, and
with learning and examples of great Clerks, and in the mean time was vexed
and tossed by evil Princes, even such as by Baptism were made sons of the
Church, there was not any I will not say express and manifest declaration, but
not so much as any light mention made amongst the Clergy of this
Principality, and temporal jurisdiction of the Pope over secular Princes,
which notwithstanding if it had been bestowed by the Lord upon Peter's person,
or in any sort had belonged to his successors, although in truth or in deed as
they speak, they had not exercised it, it had never been passed over in so
deep silence and so long, of so many and so worthy men for holiness and
wisdom, and such as for the cause of God and the Church feared nothing in
this world. Who will believe that all the Bishops of those times, burning with
zeal and affection to govern the Church, would so neglect this part of this
Pastoral duty, if so be they had thought it to be a part, (wherein certain
of their successors have placed the greatest defense and protection of the
Faith) that upon so many and so great occasions they would never use it against
heretical Emperors? And yet there was never any amongst them, who ever so
much as signified by writing or by word, that by the law of God he was
superior to the Emperor in temporal matters. Nay rather every one of them as
he excelled most in learning and holiness, so he with much submission observed
the Emperor, and sticked not to profess himself to be his vassal and
servant. S. Gregory the Great, may stand for many instances, who in a certain
Epistle to Mauricius the Emperor. Lib. 2. Epist. 61. indict. 11.
And I the unworthy servant of your Piety, says he, and a little after, For
therefore, is power given from heaven to the Piety of my Lords, over all men,
(he said Lords, that he might comprehend both the Emperor and Augusta, by whom
Mauricius had the Empire in dowry.) Mark how this holy Bishop, witnesses
that power is given from heaven to the Emperor over the Pope; above all men,
says he, therefore above the Pope, if the Pope be a man. Now it matters not
much for the mind and sense of the Author whether he writ this as a Bishop and
a Pope, or as a private person, seeing it is to be believed, that in both cases
he both thought and writ it, for our purpose it is enough to know how the
Bishops of that age did carry themselves toward the Emperor, for I fear not,
lest any learned man allege, that Gregory in that Epistle did so in his
humility exalt the Emperor, and submit himself to him, by a subjection,
which was not due to him. Because if any silly fellow do thus object, I will
give him this answer only, that he offers so holy a Bishop great injury, to
say that for humility sake the lies, and that he lies to the great prejudice
of the Church and dignity of the Pope, so as now it is no officious, but a
very pernicious lie. Let him hear S. Austine. Sermon 29 le (...). tom. 10.
When thou lie for humilities sake, if thou did not sin before thou
did lie, by lying thou have committed that, which thou did shun. Now that
Gregory spoke not faignedly, and Court-like, but from his heart, those words
do testify, which he writes more expressly about the end of that Epistle of
his necessary subjection and obedience toward the Emperor. Mauricius had made
a law, which, though it were unjust and prejudicial to the liberty of the
Church, yet Gregory, receiving a Commandment from the Emperor to publish it,
did send it accordingly into diverse countries to be proclaimed. Therefore thus
he concludes that Epistle: I being subject to the Commandment, have caused the
same law to be sent abroad into diverse parts of the world: and because the
same law is no whit pleasing to Almighty God, behold I have signified so much
to my honorable Lords by this letter of my suggestion. Therefore in both
respects I have discharged my duty, in that I have both performed my Obedience
to the Emperor; and have not concealed that which I thought on Gods behalf.

O divine Prelate, and speech, to be continually remembered to all succeeding
Bishops of all ages. But o God! whether is that gentle and humble confession
banished out of our world? to which this threatening and insolent speech against
Kings and Emperors has by little and little succeeded: We being placed in the
supreme throne of justice, possessing the supreme power over all Kings, and
Princes of the universal earth, over all Peoples, Countries, Nations, which is
committed to us not by humane but by divine ordinance, do declare, will,
command Ex. (...). 5. (...) Regin. Aug. and (...) 5. contra Reg. Franc.
: etc. which word it is plain even by this, that they are false and vain,
because the Pope has neither spiritual nor temporal power over unbelieving
Princes and People, as Bellarmine with very good reason shows in his books
of the Bishop of Rome Lib. 5. cap 2.
:

These, and such like fashions as these, who will they not drive into amazement
and wonder at so great a change of the Popes state and government? or do they
not give to all men just cause to enquire, wherefore the former Popes in the
most flowrishing age of the Church, acknowledged themselves to be the servants,
subjects, and vassals of Princes, and obeyed their authority in temporal
matters, when as they notwithstanding were over them in spiritual: and our
later Popes profess themselves to be Lords of all Kings, Princes, Countries,
and Nations? In very truth, this matter does give no small occasion to many
learned men and good Catholics, to doubt of the justness of this change: yea
indeed to believe that a temporal government so great and so absolute had his
beginning in the persons of Popes, not from God omnipotent, but from the
impotent ambition of certain men: and that it was not in the beginning
conferred from heaven upon Peter, by the Lord Christ, but was usurped by
certain successors of Peter, many ages after, according to the fashion of the
world: that is, certain Popes, having a massed huge store of wealth and
riches, and fostering their blind ambition and sury, by little and little
challenged that greatness to themselves, whereby they labored and strove,
that it might be lawful for them to take away and bestow, what soever
Kingdoms and Principalities are in the world. Sure they were men, and as other
men are, sometimes too greedy of vanity: as was he, who only for the malice he
bare against Philip the Fair, King of France, set forth a decretall
constitution Cap. ^ler de immunit. ec. l. in 6.
which brought forth so many scandalls, so many dangers, that it deserved
forthwith to be abrogated by Boniface his successor Clem. de imunit. eccl. vbi
glos. ^d nota^.
Now the admirable and miserable assentation of certain flatterers, gave
increase and nourishment to that vice in them, who by their fond and foolish
assertions, such as now these Bozian fancies are, affirmed that all things were
lawful for the Pope, and that by Gods law all things were subject to him.
Whereby we may marvel the less, if many of them did so far forget their
Bishoplike and Apostolic modesty, that through a desire to enlarge their
power, they encroched upon other men's borders. Of whom Gaguinus a learned man
and religious taxing by the way, an authority so far spread, and usurped, as he
calls it. Lib 1 hist (...).
Therefore so great says he, is their height and state, that making small
reckoning of Kings, they glory that they may do all things. Neither has any
in my time come to the Popedom, who, having once got the place, has not
forthwith advanced his nephews to great wealth and honor. And long before
Gaguinus S. Bernard: Lib 3. de cons. ad eugenium.
Does not in these dates ambition, more then devotion wear the thresholds of
the Apostles? Lib 3. de cons. ad eugenium.
upon this occasion Platina. In vita Bonif. (...).
In this manner dies that Boniface, who endeavored to strike terror rather
then religion into Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations Peoples: who also labored
to give Kingdoms and to take them away, to famish men and to reduce them at
his own pleasure. And the same Gaguinus in another place: Lib ^ hist. in vita
Philip. Pull.
Such an end of his life had Boniface the disdainer of all men, who little
remembering the precepts of Christ, endeavored to take away, and to bestow
Kingdoms at his pleasure: when as he knew well enough, that he stood in his
place here in earth, whose kingdom was not of this world, nor of earthly
matters, but of heavenly, who also had procured the Popedom, by subtelty and
wicked practice, and kept Caelestinus in prison, while he lived, (a most holy
man) of whom he received honor.

CHAP. IV.
NOw I do chiefly find two things, which seem to have given unto the Popes the
opportunity to arrogate so great power to themselves. The one is, the very
great honor, which (as indeed there was reason,) was given to the chief Pastor
of souls, by Princes and christian people, and yet ought to be given to him:
and the forestalled and settled opinion of the sanctity of that sea of the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, which is conspicuous and excels amongst all
men in all spiritual honor and authority: and in that respect has been beyond
all other most increased and honored with wealth and riches. By these means
all men, were very easily persuaded to believe, that neither the Pope in regard
of his holiness would challenge to himself any authority, which did not
appertain unto him: and also, that it was not lawful for a christian man in
any manner to disobey the Popes commandments. Whereby it came to pass, that
sundry Popes, whose minds were too much addicted to ambition and vain glory,
embouldned and hartned through the confidence of this so great reverence and
affection of men toward them, drew to themselves this power over Kings, which
was utterly unknown to the first successors of Peter. The which also passed
the more current by reason of the preoccupate and now engrafted conceit of the
people and ignorant folk, who being possessed of this opinion of holiness,
did verily believe that the Pope could not err, either in word or deed: and
also, by the writings of certain clergy men catholics, and Canonists, who
either erring through ignorance of the truth, or wholly resolved into flattery
of their Prince the Pope, of whom they did depend, did heap and lay upon his
only person, all the power, which is in the universal world, with these
allurements and inuitations the Popes, who of their own accord ran with speed
enough toward honor and greatness, were now much more enflamed as it were with
certain new firebrands of ambition and aspiring thoughts. For all, how many
soever held that sea lawfully, governed the Church with an authority See the
admonition to the reader.
equal to Peter: but not all of them burning with the zeal of Peter, governed
it with equal disposition to him. Nay I can not write it without grief of
heart it is certain, that many crept into that place by violence and villainy,
others did break into it, and defiled the most holy Chair with the
filthiness of their lives and behavior: others also; who were advanced to the
height of that dignity, burned with an ambitious desire of ruling, and out of
their emulation and envy against secular Kings and Princes, endeavored by all
devise and cunning to enlarge the bounds of their government, which in the
beginning was merely spiritual, with the increase of temporal Jurisdiction
and authority. Which affectation, although at the first diverse supposed to be
a grace and ornament to that great dignity, which the Vicar of Christ in
earth, and the successor of blessed Peter does hold, yet when some of them grew
to that insolency, that they supposed it lawful for them not only to throw
down Kings from their Thrones, but also to give away great and goodly
kingdoms, for reward, nay for a pray, and to grant them to any that would
seize upon them, then surely there was no reasonable man, but he greatly
misliked that unreasonable pride of mind, and either shed tears, or conceived
great anger at the same. Who was there at that time that did not either mourn
inwardly, or gnash his teeth in his head, when that most proud Pope whom we
mentioned before, presumed so arrogantly to deprive that most mighty Monarch
Philip the Fair of his kingdom, and to bestow it together with the Empire
upon Albert Duke of Austria? And that for no other reason in the world, but
because the King had laid his Legate by the heels, for threatening him in so
saucie manner as he did, as though by that Act, the King of France, (whom a
little before Innocent the 3 had ingeniously confessed Cap. per venerabilem.
qui fill. sunt legit.
that he had no superior in temporal matters) he had resigned his kingdom to
the Pope as Client and Feudaire to him, for so he denou^ceth to the King by the
Archdeacon of Narbona, that the kingdom of Fraence, was escheted to the Church
of Rome for his Contumacie, and violating of the law of Nations, which speech
of his, what does it else imply, but that this kingdom, in all men's judgment
the most free and flourishing kingdom of the world, and by example and
precedent thereof, all other Christian kingdoms, are as Benefices and Feudes
of the Church of Rome, and even of the Pope himself? seeing they could not
otherwise escheate to that Church for Contumacie and felony, (as they term
it,) unless the direct temporal Dominion and fee of those kingdoms were in
the same Church.

The other occasion of affecting so great a temporal Jurisdiction was
presented by the sword of Excommunication, the principal bulwark of the
spiritual government; which was so great terror to the world, that the people,
durst neither neglect nor contemn the Popes curses; being armed and fortified
howsoever by right or by wrong, with the thunderbolt of Excommunication: and
this voice did usually sound out of Pulpits, That every Excommunication,
although it were unjust was to be feared, and that it belonged only to the Pope
to judge whether it were just or unjust. Besides that also, that a man ought
neither to eat, nor to have any Commerce with Excommunicate persons Can. ficut
Can. excommunicatos. xi. q. 3.
. With which warnings and threatenings the Subjects of Princes excommunicate
being for the most part terrified, did fall from their Obedience: and that
which in Evils of this Nature was the worst of all, the Pope partly by
threatening of the like Curses partly by persuasions and gifts, raised other
Princes against a Prince that had been excommunicate by him. For this cause
those Princes upon whom this malice of the Popes did sit so hard, being wrapped
in so many dangers on every side, and exposed to such a hazard of their estate,
made choice rather to pacific an angry Pope with the submission of their Crown
and Scepter, (and to redeem their vexations) then for their own particular to
embroyle all the world, and to set all a fire with sedition and arms. This
short and compendious way had Popes, to exanimate and daunt Kings and Princes
with fear, and almost to obtain a victory without striking stroke.
Notwithstanding many Princes of good resolution withstood such attempts and
proffers of Popes, and that so stiffely, that the mischief which followed
thereon turned rather to the Popes hinderance then the Prince. But in this
place the Reader may please to be advertised, that this Opinion which was so
rife in every man's mouth, That every Excommunication is to be feared, ought to
be understood with this exception, without that it manifestly appear, that it
is unjust, for then it is neither to be regarded, nor feared, so as the party
excommunicate be free from contempt and presumption, for then it works
backwards, and hurts not him against whom it is cast, but him, from whom it is
cast. Of which sort that Excommunication seems to be, which is charged upon
Subjects because they obey their King or Prince being excommunicate in those
things which belong to temporal Jurisdiction, and do not repugne the
Commandments of God, as shall hereafter be declared in a more convenient
place. Cap. 21.
Besides neither is that always true, That we ought not to have commerce or
eat meat with Excommunicate persons, for in this case it is not true, where
the danger is apparent, least by such a separation some great mischief arise
in the Church as usually it does, when a Prince is excommunicate, if his
Subjects forbear to communicate with him, for there is never any Prince so
much forlorn, who cannot find friends and clients, by whose aid and arms
he may maintain his cause, although it be never so unjust, with great hurt
both to Church and commonweal, whereof both in the memory of our Forefathers
and in our own age, there have been lamentable examples in Christian
countries: where I say any such thing is feared, a separation of bodies is not
necessary, But it is enough to be severed from such in heart, to be
distinguished by life and manners, for the preservation of Peace and Unity,
which is to be preserved for the health of those, which are weak: as S.
Austine excellently teaches, Lib. 3 contra Epist. Parm. c. 2.
whereby it seems to follow, that the Pope does very unadvisedly, who forbids
the Subjects communion and society with their Prince so often as no small both
division and confusion hangs over Church and Commonwealth, yea that in such
a Case the Subjects are not bound, to obey the Pope commanding the separation
of their bodies. But of this matter more in his place. By these and the like,
it appears, as I said, that the Popes in the East times of the Church usurped
to themselves this temporal power over Princes which none of all their
Ancesters did ever acknowledge neither in the first nor in the middle times.
And indeed Gregory the 7. being exasperated partly with the public offense of
Henry the 4. the Emperor, and partly with a private injury, did first of all
challenge to himself, that right and power to give and take away kingdoms,
affirming that Christ did give to Peter and his successors, all the kingdoms
of the world: in this verse, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho.

But Gregory raised nothing of that action but bloody and raging Tragedies:
and was hindered by force and arms that he could not effect his unhappy
designs. Now that the Church in her first times had no such power, nay did not
so much as suppose that she had any such power, it is clearly proved out of
that Epistle of Hosius, which we alleged to Constantius infected with the
Arrian heresy: and also vexing Liberius Bishop of Rome and other Orthodoxall
Bishops with banishments and sundry other miseries, for in that place, that
worthy man speaks, not in the person of a Christian man, nor of a simple
Bishop, but in the name of the whole Ecclesiasticke order, and even of the Pope
himself: and he says either true or false: If true, it is evident, that the
Church at that time conceived, that they had no temporal Jurisdiction over
Kings and Christian Princes, no not for heresy, which is the most grievous and
pestilent crime that is. If false, wherefore? that he might flatter the
Emperor? very like: how then could he thus say, Loquebar de testimonijs tuis
in conspectu Regum and non confundebar Psalm. 118.
. Or because he knew not the truth of the matter, and the doctrine of the
Church? Surely I think no man will ascribe that to such a man, who did not
only match the most of his age in learning and eloquence, but also by reason
of his years exceeded them all in experience, who having often been present at
Councels and Assemblies of the holy Fathers, and heard their judgment: of the
power and authority of the Church; could not be ignorant what was there
determined touching (...) Princes, and the power of the Church over them. I
add also that, which passes all the rest that this judgment of this most
noble Confessort to Constantius is commended by S. Athanasius, but never
misliked by any of the holy Fathers either of that time, or of the ages
following, that we should justly conceive any preiudicate opinion of this
judgment.

CHAP. V.
I Have already sufficiently discoursed of the folly of Bozius. and the
Canonists who affirm that the dominion and Empire of the whole world is given
to the Pope by the law of God. For I need not spend much pains in resuting the
same, since it is long ago hissed out by the common consent of the Divines.
Now let us pass over to the other opinion, which the Divines, misliking that
of the Canonists have substituted in the place of this rejected fancy, and let
us see whether it agree with the truth. Now he has propounded it thus in the
first Chap. That the Pope has temporal power indirectly, and after a certain
manner, that is, in respect of his spiritual monarchy: has I say, the chief
power even temporal, to dispose of the temporal estates of all Christians.
Which opinion if it be true, whatsoever is drawn from the Bishops by the
denial of direct power, the same is largely restored to him by this oblique and
indirect way of ruling. But I am afraid it is not true, and that it is
assaultable with the same engine wherewith that opinion of the Canonists was
battered to the ground. For the Divines, and above the rest Bellarmine
learnedly does for this reason reprove the Canonists opinion, which gives to
the pope the dominion of the whole world, and to Kings and secular Princes the
execution only, and that committed to them by the Pope, because the Popes
themselves do freely confess (as is expressed in diverse of their letters)
that temporal Empires and Kingdoms are given to princes of God: and
whatsoever either power or execution Kings and Emperors have, that they have
it of Christ. From whence the same Bellarmine concludes that argument very
finely against the Canonists in a dilemma, or perplexed manner of reasoning. Lib
5. de Romans Pont. cap. 3.
Therefore I ask (quoth he,) either the Pope can take from Kings and Emperors
this execution, as being himself the supreme King and Emperor, or he cannot:
if he can, therefore he is greater than Christ, if he can not, therefore he
has not truly this Kingly power.

And why may not we as well use an argument of the same kind against this
other opinion of the Divines? Kingdoms and Empires are given by God, as many
holy Popes do witness: for which cause S. Gregory in a certain Epistle to
Mauricius the Emperor Lib. 1. de indict. 13. epist. 31.
, begins in these words: Our most sacred Lord, and appointed of God: and in
another to Constantia Augusta: Therefore your piety, (says he) whom with our
Sovereign Lord, Almighty God has ordained to govern the world, let her by
favoring of Justice return her service to him, of whom she received the right
of so great authority. What should I use many words? The Scripture it self
witnesses, that Kings and Emperors receive power from God, whose Vicegerents
they are therein, as says Lyranus upon that of Wisdom, 6. Power is given to
you from the Lord, and virtue from the Highest, who will inquire into your
works. Why then should not a man use a dilemma out of Bellarmine against
Bellarmine. The Pope can one way or other, that is, directly, or indirectly,
take away kingdoms and empires, from Kings and Emperors, and give them to
others, or he can not: if he can, he is in some manner greater than God,
because he takes away that, which God has given: For one that is less or
equal, cannot take away that, which is granted by his greater or his equal:
Nay nor the Deputy or Vicar of him who granted, without the express
commandment of the Lord: least any man should lay in our way, that the Pope as
Christ's Vicar does it. Whereas it can be no where found, that he has received
any warrant touching that matter, either expressly, or by implication, as by
those things which follow will easily appear. If he can not, then it is false
which they say, that he has supreme power indirectly, to dispose of all the
Temporalties of Christians, and to depose Kings and Emperors from their
thrones, and to suffect others in their places. I would they would consider how
their own argument does wringe them, and not this only, but also another of
greater force, which we reported above out of the same book and Chapter of
Bellarmine; the which also in this place we will and that by good right fit to
our purpose in this manner.

If it be true that the Pope has temporal power indirectly to dispose of the
temporalties of all Christians, he has the same either by the law of God or of
man. If by the law of God, That should appear by the Scriptures, or surely by
the tradition of the Apostles. Out of the Scriptures we have nothing but that
the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given to the Pope, of the keys of the
kingdom of earth there is no mention: as for tradition of Apostles, the
adversaries produce none, neither Canonists nor Divines. If by man's law, let
them bring forth their law, that we may be all of the same opinion with them.
But if they shall say, that they need neither express word of God, nor
tradition of Apostles for the confirmation of this power, since it appertameth
to the Pope only indirectly and by a kind of consequence, as a certain and
inseparable accession, and appurtenance of that Spiritual power, wherewith the
supreme Pastor of souls is endued over all the sheep of the Christian flock:
We also will require of them some testimony of this accession and conjunction,
either out of Scriptures or traditions of Apostles: We do require I say, that
they teach us either out of Scriptures or tradition of Apostles, that this is
an accession and consequence necessary and inseparable to that Spiritual
power which the Pope has, and that it belongs to the Popes office in some
manner: that is indirectly, as they speak, to dispose of all temporal matters
of Christians: seeing it is very unlikely, if that belongs to his office, that
so great an extent of power, and which there is nothing higher amongst men has
been omitted in so deep silence in the Church so many ages, both by Christ
our Savior, and also by the Apostles, and their successors: for if each power
may be severed from other, the Spiritual from the Temporal, and contiarily,
there will be some place for that opinion, which determines that that which is
not permitted to be done directly, cannot be done indirectly: for so have wise
men defined, as often as any thing is forbidden to be done directly, that the
same can neither be done indirectly or by consequence: unless that which is
forbidden do follow necessarily to another thing lawfully permitted, so as the
thing permitted cannot proceed without the thing prohibited, and unless (as I
may speak with the Ciuilians) The cause of both be so commixed, that it cannot
be severed I. 5 generaliter. D. de don. inter vir. and vxor.
. Whereby it is concluded that he who is alone cannot alien any thing, cannot
yield to a suit moved upon the same thing Panor. in cap. ludum 54. de elect.
and cap. (...) pridem. (...) pact.
, for that by this mean he should obliquely and indirectly alien. Therefore if
the Pope as he is Pope has no temporal power directly over Christians which
they do grant, it seems to be proved by the former sentence of the law, that
he can have none not so much as indirectly. Therefore that they may persuade
men to their opinion, they ought to bring testimony out of Scriptures or
traditions of Apostles, or at least make plain that this temporal power
whereof they speak, is so joined with the Spiritual, that by no means it can
be pulled and divided from it, I mean that the Spiritual cannot consist
without it. Which because they could not perform, they have followed nothing
but uncertain opinions, and such reasons as seem not sufficiently to
conclude, that which they assume, which we will examine in their order and
place.

CHAP. VI.
THe former opinion of the temporal power, which they say the Pope has
indirectly, is vehemently shaken even by this that neither practice nor
example, nor any mention of such a papal power has been heard of the space of
a thousand years in the Church, when as in those times many christian Princes
did abuse their Kingdoms and Governments impiously, cruelly, peruersly, and to
the great prejudice and mischief of the Church: whereof one of the two must
needs follow, that either the Bishops of those times were wanting to their
duties, or that the Bishops of the times ensuing did and at this day do
govern the Church with greater power and command, because these later have
openly challenged to themselves this temporal power, and have endeavored to
pull the same in and at their pleasure over Kings and Princes: but the former
have not at any time acknowledged that any such right belongs to them: I am
not ignorant, what answers have been made by diverse to excuse those first
Pastors: but I know that they are such, that if they be diligently examined
they can not be allowed by the opinion of any indifferent judge.

There came forth a book printed at Rome the year of our Lord 1588.
published under a fained name of Franciscus Romulus, with this title: An answer
to certain heads of an Apology which is falsely entitled Catholic, for the
succession of Henry of Nauar into the Kingdom of France. The author of which
book, whom Bellarmine knows and loves very well, labors to take away this
most important objection, by the change of the state of the Church, and by the
diverse reason and condition of times and persons which oftentime brings in
diversity of law cap. 18.
. For thus he says. And now where as the adversary obiecteth in the fourth
place, touching the custom of our ancestors, who endured many heretical
Princes, as Constantius and Valens, Arius, Anastasius an Eutychian, Heraclius a
Monothelite, and others besides, it makes nothing to the matter. For the Church
ought not rashly and inconsideratly to abuse her power. Moreover it falls out
not very seldom, that the power of certain Kings is so great, being also
joined with wickedness and cruelty, that the Ecclesiastical censure neither
profits any thing to restrain them, and does very much hurt to Catholic
people, upon whom these Princes provoked do rage the more. For I pray you, what
had it auailed the Church in times past if she had assaied to excommunicate and
to depose either the Ostrogoth Kings in Italy, or the Visegothes in Spain, or
the Vandales in Afrik, although she might have done it very justly? and the
very same ought to be understood of Constantius and Valens, and others above
named, and indeed then the times were such, as that the Bishops ought rather to
have been ready to suffer Martyrdom, then to punish Princes. But when the
Church perceived, that now some place was opened to her power, either with the
spiritual profit of the Princes themselves, or at least without the mischief
and hurt of the people, she was not wanting to her self, as the examples
alleged before do prove. For thus the Church judged that Leo Isaurus was to
be deprived of half his Empire, and Henry the fourth of the whole, and
Childerike of the Kingdom of France, and indeed afterward both Leo wanted part
of his Empire, and Henry the whole, and Childerike his kingdom of France.
Therefore the Church did not therefore tolerate those ancient Emperors
Constantius and Valens and the rest, (as the adversary dreameth,) because they
succeeded lawfully into the Empire, for otherwise she had also borne with Leo
also and Henry, and Childerike, who succeeded no less lawfully, but because
she could not punish them without the hurt of the people, these she might. Thus
he, in which words he yields a double reason of the diversity, wherefore the
Church endured Constantius, Iulianus; Valens, Valentinianus the younger,
Anastasius Heraclius, and other heretical Princes, but did not forbear Leo
Isaurus, Henry IV. Childerike, and the dangerous Princes of the ages ensuing:
One forsooth, because then the times were such as the Bishops ought to have
been ready rather to suffer Martyrdom, then to punish Princes. The other
because the Church or the Pope, could not without the hurt of the people punish
Constantius. Iulianus, Valens, and the rest of that sort above mentioned, but
as for Leo, Henry, Childerike and the others she could; therefore them she
endured, these she endured not. But let us see if both the reasons of this
diversity be not false, and grounded upon mere and strange falsehoods, and yet
none has assigned any better, nor as I think can assign any, save only that,
which does utterly overthrow the cause of the adversaries, which is that the
Church did tolerate those former Emperors, and Princes, because as yet that
blind ambition was not crept into her, by which the succeeding Popes carried
away with greediness of glory, usurped that temporal jurisdiction whereof we
speak. Therefore that the Bishops of that time being contented with their
spiritual jurisdiction, which they exercised with indifferency upon all
persons, did wholly forbear the temporal power, which they did know that it
belonged not unto them: so recommending the cause of the Church to the
judgment of God, did with humility and patience expect the conversion or
confusion of wicked Princes. But I return to the reasons given by this Author,
that we may see, how faulty they are.

And indeed to deal plainly, his former reason or cause of diversity seems
to me very unworthy and unfit to be alleged by any Catholic, much less by a
Divine, which I even for this cause have much a do to read without tears. For
what? are we fallen into those times where in Bishops ought rather to be
soldiers, then Martyrs: or to defend the law of God and the Church rather by
swords then by sermons? But he says not so, may some say. What then? either he
says nothing, or all together some such thing. For his meaning is, that the
difference of these and those former times, as touching the coertion of
Princes, consists in this, that then the Bishops ought rather to have been
fit to undergo Martyrdom, then to reduce Princes into order. Which being so,
who can not easily perceive by his proper judgment, and natural logike that
either this reason stands not upon dissimilia, that is terms of unlikeness,
or that is to be placed in the other part, which we have set down. And yet, I
dare boldly affirm, that there never time fell out since Constantine the great
more opportune and more necessary for Bishops to offer themselves to
Martyrdom. The lion every where gapeth for his pray, the wolf stands watching
at the sheepfolds; most mighty Kings and Princes, many Nations and people,
buckle themselves and arm against the flock of Christ, and does this man
think, that the time does not require, that the Bishops should not expose
themselves to Martyrdom, and lay down their lives for the sheep? what when
the Church flourished, and was spread, thorough the whole world, the Bishops
ought to hope and look for nothing but Martyrdom: and now, when matters are
come to this pass, that the Church is grievously tossed and tumbled, and as it
were crowded into a corner of Europe, may the Bishops bend their minds without
all fear of danger to punish Princes and not rather to suffer Martyrdom?
what, because in these days, they maintain great trains and retinues, and
troops of horse and foot, to defend themselves, their lives, and Persons, and
by force and arms to deliver the Church from the injury of so many Princes
and people that spoil her? Or rather because now adays, very few undertake
the Bishoprics with that mind and condition that they should be encombred
and vexed with those troubles either of mind or body, which good Pastors
ought to suffer * in Persecutions and Confession of the Faith: but that they
may pass their life with case and pleasure: and that they may advance and
magnify their own house and blood by the goods of the poor and Patrimony of
Christ? Or lastly, because that being hirelings and mercenarie Pastors, they
do believe that it is very lawful for them, when the Wolf comes and tears
the Flock, to take their heels, and to avoid Martyrdom? I do not bring
forth these things to cast injury or envy upon the Ecclesiastical order,
which I ever reverenced and honored from a child. Neither do I doubt but
there are many who do keep most carefully and watchfully the flock committed
to them, being ready upon all occasions even with their bodies to defend the
sheep committed to their keeping, and with their blood to seal the confession
of Christ. But I speak all this in reproof of the former answer, and with
all to their shame, who now in every place affect the dignities of the Church,
without any purpose of life fit for the Church, but that they themselves may
live bravely and gallantly, and that they may consume that wealth, which the
purity of an Ecclesiastical life does well deserve, upon uses either
unlawful, or surely not necessary, very dishonestly and to the great scandal
of the Church. O the times! O the manners of men! The greatest part of the
Christian common weal, within these hundred years, or there abouts, is
utterly perished. Even by this very mean that many Bishops and Priests, being
more forward to arms then to Martyrdom, have unadvisedly followed the meaning
of the former answer: supposing forsooth that which was not so, that Heresy
might easily be oppressed by arms, while themselves in the mean time held
their own course of life, that is, cherished their own former pleasure and
slothfulness. Therefore they saw the Wolf coming and fled away and many of
them fled to the Wolves themselves. I speak no secrets now, Scotland and
England are my witnesses, and other Countries which are slipped into* heresy,
wherein although many resisted manfully, yet the Sea the admonition to the
Reader.
greatest part of the Churchmen did not endure so much as the first assault,
but presently in shameful manner put in practice their treason and defection,
partly that they might enjoy the favor to live freely which was both promised
and permitted unto them by the Nouators, partly, least that, they being
deprived of all their present means, should fall to beggerie: whereas, if like
those first Fathers in times past, they had bent themselves to Martyrdom, they
had in the very infancy destroyed that most horrible Monster. It may be, that
the Author of that book, wrote such things of a good mind, and without any
fraud: but surely it cannot be, that as the state of the Church affairs does
now stand, they should be thought to be of any weight or moment. For when as
all the world almost, was bound to the catholic Church, velut nexu Man^ipioque
as the Ciuilians say, that is, by the straitest bands of service and duty,
even then says he were those times such, as wherein the Bishops ought to have
been more ready to have suffered Martyrdom, then to have enforced Princes to
order: and now, when partly Infidels, partly Heretics have spread over all
Asia, Afrike, Europe, one or two kingdoms only excepted, and that the Church
is reduced almost to so great straites as ever it was, he is not of the mind
that the Bishops are required by the same necessity to perform this duty.
But surely this is too much either negligence in searching, or indulgence in
judging and aduising; neither ought a learned man and a Divine as the Author
seems to be, to open to the Prelates of the Church, who are as it were by a
certain storm carried into the same license of living, I say to open them so
easy a way to forsake their duty, that they may suppose, that they ought not
to be so ready in these days to Martyrdom, as to raise war against evil
Princes, who it is certain that without wars, they can never be reduced into
order, and deprived of their kingdoms. How much righter were they (who whether
they were the first of the Jesuits, or of some other Order, for I have it
only by report) presented themselves to the Cardinals at Rome, and even as
they passed in state according to the manner, did very sharply reprove their
effeminatenesse, their riot, and their carelessness, because that the most
turbulent tempest of the Lutherane heresy being risen a little before, that
time taught the Prelates of the Church an other manner of life, and required
other fashions at their hands. Therefore by these it is plain, that the Author
of the answer is much deceived, in laying the reason of the difference in the
dissimilitude of those ancient and these times, as far as concerns the duty,
state and condition of the Bishops and Prelates of the Church.

CHAP. VII.
THe other reason which he brings in, is nothing better. That the Church
forsooth did not therefore bear with Constantius Valens and others, for that
they lawfully succeeded in the Empire, no more than they did with Leo, Henry,
and Childerike, which no less lawfully succeed, but because she could not
without hurt of the people correct them, these she could. For this is most
false, and I wonder that Bellarmine followed this reason elsewhere Lib 5 de
Romans Pont. ca. 7.
. I say, it is most false, that the Church could not coerce and chastise them
as easily as these, I will not say more easily, and without the hurt of the
people, whether she would have attempted the matter by arms, or use some
policy, and the mean of some devout person, for at this time the whole world
was Christian, under Constantius, (as is evident by a letter of Constantine the
Great, to the Church recorded by Eusebius and Nicephorus,) and the greatest
part of it orthodoxe: so as they wanted not strength to oppress the Emperor,
if they had held it lawful or godly to take up arms and contend against a
lawful Prince. And truly it is credible that God would honor with a victory
both easily and not very costly for blood, his own soldiers who should
undertake such a war, not of hatred or ambition, but of a mere zeal to
preserve the Church from ruin. Moreover there was a great multitude of monks
in Egypt and Lybia, and an innumerable company of other godly men of all sorts
swarmed all over Asia and Europe: amongst whom no doubt there were many of no
less zeal, then that wretch who murdered Henry the 3 king of France, but
furnished with more knowledge and grace, whereby they prescribed a mean to
inconsiderate, headlong and rash zeal. These men if it had been lawful,
might easily have dispatched the Emperor, without tumult of war, and noise
of arms, and if so be the Church had had any power over him, they might have
put the same in execution, without any harm to the people.

What should I speak of Iulianus the successor of Constantius? Could not the
Church think you chasten him without any harm at all to the people? when as
being a shameful Apostate, and such a one as never was found amongst
Christians, he had his whole army which he commanded consisting of Christians,
for even after his death, when Iouinianus being by general consent chosen
Emperor, had proclaimed that himself was a Christian, and therefore that he
would not command an army of Infidels Ruffin. lib. 2. hist eccles. ca. 1.
Socra. Schol. lib. 3. cap. 22. Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 1.
, the soldiers answered, and generally cried out, Never fear noble Emperor,
neither do you refuse our government, as unworthy: for you are like to be a
Commander of Christians, who are brought up in the discipline of piety, for we
are Christians: and those which be of the elder sort learned Constantinus his
instruction, and the younger sort of Constantius. Neither did he that died last
rule so long time, as could serve the turn to settle the poison in those few
that had been circumuented and abused by him. I could wish that both the author
of that book, and the Reader of this, would consider diligently. Whether the
Church seconded with so great power, had not been able with ease to take that
Emperor away, without any harm of the people: especially seeing the Emperors
were at that time created by the soldiers alone, who amongst those first times
of Religion, and hope of Martyrdom, esteemed nothing more honorable, then to
believe and obey their Prelates: delivering to them the law and will of God.
Now if they had learned in those Schools of the most holy Fathers, that it was
lawful for the Church to deprive a wicked Prince of his government, and that
it is lawful for such subjects to take away and murder such a Ruler, either by
open force, or secret practice, there was nothing more easy for them then to
deprive Julian of his empire, or take away his life, and without any tumult, or
danger, or public loss to suffect an other at their pleasure in his place.
For now the right of nominating the Emperor, was by long custom supposed to
belong to the army, as also in very deed, Iouinianus first, and after
Valentinianus, both confessors of Christ, after the death of of Iulianus, were
both advanced to the Empire by the same army. Nay what will you say, that
although the whole army would not have conspired against the enemy of Christ:
yet those soldiers alone whom we mentioned out of Nazianzen in our books De
Regno (...). 5.
, together with Iouinianus the Confessor, would with little a do have
destroyed Iulianus. Whom if you consider their valor and resolution, the use
and experience of arms: if opportunity, the easy access of soldiers to
their Commanders in those times, if disposition, the fervent heat of their
minds burning with desire of Martyrdom, and undertaking any thing for the
defense of the faith, would have made them much more ready and eager to deliver
the Church by some notorious action, from the treachery and tyranny of such a
villainous person, much more I say, then any precipitate rashness could set on
a brainsicke and furious monk. What may we think? that the Christians of that
time did hear the famous trumpets of the Gospel, Athanasius, Basilius, both
the Gregory's, Cyrillus, Epihanius, Hilarious, Hosius, and many other Bishops
excelling in virtue and learning, who by reason of their learning could not be
ignorant what interest the Church had over Princes, and if they had known and
understood the same, by reason of their great sanctity of life, and constancy
in adversity, would not have held their peace, and dissembled the same, in so
importunate a business to the Christian commonweal. What may we think that
those divine Prelates taught the people, that there was no remedy against that
Apostata, but in patience and tears? for so says Nazianzenus. Orat. 1. in
Julian.
These things (says he) did Iulianus intend, (he speaks of those things
which the Apostata meditated against the Church) as his minions and
witnesnesses of his counsels did publish, notwithstanding he was restrained by
the mercy of God, and the tears of the Christians, who were in great
abundance, and by many powered out, when as they had this only remedy against
the Persecutors. I beseech you Reader, that you would observe and consider
Nazianzenus well in this place. He affirms that the Christians, that is, the
Church had no remedy besides tears, against the persecution of Iulianus, when
as notwithstanding it is certain, that they had at their service the whole
army of Iulianus. Therefore surely this Pope, who for his singular
excellency, was called the Divine, did not think that the Church has any
power over a most ungodly Emperor; to raise the Christian army against him:
otherwise it were false, that Christians or the Church had no other remedy but
tears against a persecutor: for they had an army, which being commanded by
the Church, would easily for the cause of God have fallen away from Iulianus.

Now that which we said of Constantius and Iulianus, that without great
difficulty they might have been brought into order by the Church, and
deprived of Scepters and life, without any harm to the people: the same is
much more apparent in Valens and Valentinianus the yoonger. For the chief
Commanders and Captains of Valens his army were good Catholics, by whom he
managed all his wars, being himself an idle and slothful Prince: and those
were Terentius, Traianus, Arintheus, Uictor and others, who constantly
professed the Catholic faith, and boldly vpbraided the Emperor to his face
with his heresy, and impiety against God: but in so religious a liberty they
held their hands, neither did their heat and anger proceed beyond the bounds
of admonition: because they knew it was their duty only to tell the Prince
his faults, but not to punish the same. Therefore in all matters which
belonged to temporal government, they yielded obedience to this heretic, whom
they might easily have removed, and to the great good of the afflicted Church,
have reduced back again the whole Monarchy to Ualentinianus a Catholic
Prince, from whom it came. Could not these Commanders of his forces conclude a
league amongst themselves, against their Prince, being an heretic, if it had
been lawful for them so to do? Was it not more profitable for the Church
that an heretic Emperor should not govern Catholics? Or did the Church all
that time want learned and watchful Pastors, and by that means either
neglected or did not understand her temporal interest? for what, which only
remains to be said, no age did ever bear Christians more obedience and
dutiful to their Prelates, then that did: that if so be the Church had wanted
not the power to sway Princes in temporal matters, but the execution only of
that power, the people and army would not have been long before they had
delivered her from the tyranny of Constatius, Iulianus, and Valens. To which,
the worthy testimony of S. Augustine gives faith, registered among the Canons,
In Psalm. 124.
Iulianus (says he) was an Infidel Emperor: Was he not an Apostata, unjust,
an Idolater, Christian soldiers seruedan Infidel Emperor: when they came to
the cause of Christ, they acknowledged none but him that was in heaven: When he
would have them to worship Idols, to sacrifice, they preferred God before him.
But when he said, draw forth the Companies, get you against that country,
presently they obeyed. For they distinguished their eternal from the temporal
Lord: And yet for their eternal Lord his sake, they were subject even to a
temporal Lord.

Who does not see in this place, that it was the easiest matter in the world
for the Church every manner of way to chastise Iulianus, if the had had any
temporal power over him? For then the cause of Christ had come in question, in
which case the soldiers would prefer Christ before the Emperor, that is,
the eternal Lord, before the temporal Lord, for the Churches cause is the
cause of Christ. Therefore either the Bishops of Rome, or the Popes, and even
the whole Church, did then believe for certain that they had no temporal
jurisdiction in any sort over secular Princes, or surely they were wanting to
their office, nor did they so carefully provide for the flock committed to
their charge, as now after many ages our last Popes have done, who maintain
very earnestly that it belongs to a part of their Pastoral office, to
chastise all Princes and Monarchs, not only for heresy or schism, but also
for other causes, and that with temporal punishment, and even to spoil them
of their Empires and Kingdoms, if it shall please them. Whereas otherwise
neither they are to be compared with those first Bishops for holiness of life
and learning, and the Christian people in these times is not so obedient, as in
those first times they were. Wherefore if we love the truth, we must confess,
that no man can either accuse or excuse the Bishops of both times in this
point, without preuarication or calumniation, the praise of each will turn to
the dispraise of the other. But let us go forward.

CHAP. VIII.
VAlentinian the younger, of all who to this day governed not only an Empire,
but Kingdom or any Principality might most easily have been coerced and
bridled by the Church, for he might have been not only thrust out of his
Empire at the commandment of the chief Bishop, that is, the Bishop of Rome,
but even at the beck and pleasure of a poor Bishop of Millane, Ambrose, be
forsaken of his own soldiers and guard, and be reduced to the state of a
private man. Before day, says Ambrose Ad sororem suam Marcellinam. epist. 33.
11. 5.
, as soon as I set my foot out of doors, the Palace was beset round about
with soldiers: and it is reported that word was sent the Emperor by the
soldiers, that if he would come forth he should have leave, but yet that they
would be ready to attend him, if they saw that he did agree with the
Catholics: otherwise that they would pass over to the company that Ambrose
gathered. Not one of the Arrians durst come forth, because neither any of them
were Citizens, a few of them of the Princes house, and many of them Goths, who
as before they had a Carte for their house, so now a Carte is their Church. And
after in the same Epistle speaking of himself. I am called a Tyrant, quoth he,
yea and more then a Tyrant, for when his friends entreated the Emperor, that
he would come out to the Church, and told him withal, that they did it at the
request of his soldiers, he answered: If Ambrose command you I will deliver my
self to be bound. What say the Adversaries to this? is not this one place
enough to stop all men's mouths? I omit that Maximus comes marching into Italy
with a great army gathered out of the parts of Britain and France, to
provide, as he pretended, that Catholic religion should receive no further
harm: and that the Churches now corrupted by Ualentinianus might be restored
to their former estate; the which also he signified by letters to Ualentinianus
himself, which notwithstanding was not his only end: but (that which in our
age has been practiced by diverse) with this color of Piety he covered his
burning desire of reigning, for he was determined having now killed Gratianus
at Lions, to invade Ualentinianus his Empire. Therefore Ualentinianus terrified
with his coming fled out of Italy into Illyrium to Theodosius Emperor of the
East. A matter worth the noting; An Heretic being chased by a Catholic flies
for succor to a Catholic; of whom he is both rebuked for his heresy, and for
the reverence of his Majesty courteously received, and restored to his
kingdom. And because the Church did not commend rebellion for Religion sake
against a lawful Prince, Maximus was called neither Reformer of the Empire,
nor Restorer of the Church, but a Rebel and a Tyrant S^zomen. lib. 7 ca. 13.
Nicephor. li. 12 ca. 20.
. Seeing these things stand thus, I would now wish the Adversaries that they
would forbear to abuse us with their devise and invention, or at least to tell
us, whence they have it. Have they read any where in any good Author, that the
Christians did then so much distrust their strength and power, as that they
durst not so much as attempt that, which if they had resolutely undertaken,
they had easily effected? or that they made a proffer at the least, but when
they had tried the fortune of the war, and all other humane means, at last
yielded and lay down under these wicked Princes? Or were they so very
destitute of learned Preachers and Trumpets of the Gospel, that they did not
understand, what power the Bishop or People had over a perverse and heretical
Prince? What, did the heat of religion and the zeal of the house of God fail
them? Let the Adversaries unfold the memory of all Records, and turn over
and peruse as long as they will writings Ecclesiastical and profane, believe
me they shall never find that the Church in those times (wherein it was much
more powerful than now it is) did ever endeavor any thing to the mischief of
Princes, although they were wicked, or ever went about to disanull their
government, as has been plainly and plentifully proved by us in our books
De Regno lib 3 ca 5. and lib. 4. ca. 5.
.

But clean contrary by these things which we read in the writings of the holy
fathers, of the power of secular Princes, it is most certain that all in that
age did think that no temporal power did in any manner, nor for any cause
appertain either to the Bishop of Rome, or chief Bishop, or to the whole
Church, but that for temporal punishments, they were to be left to the
judgment of God alone. And this as it seems was the cause, why those fathers
did so seldom and that by the way make any mention of the liberty and impunity
of Princes: because indeed in those times there was no controversy about it,
but one judgment of all men, which even from the preaching of the Apostles
they received in a manner by hand: that a Prince in temporalities has God only
his judge, although in spiritual matters he be subject to the judgment of the
Church.

For the first witness in this case I produce Tertullian who speaking of
Emperors, (...).
They think, says he, that it is God alone, in whose only power they are,
from whom they are second after whom they are first, before all Gods, and above
all men, and (...).
in another place: we honor the Emperor so as is both lawful for us and
expedient for him, as a man, second from God and have obtained, what so ever he
is, from God, less then God only, this he desires himself: so is he greater
then all men, while he is less then the true God alone. Thus much he
professes not in his particular, but in the general person of all christians,
as the certain and undoubted doctrine of the whole Church. Neither let any
think to elude this argument, because the Emperors at that time were without
the Church, and therefore not subject to the Church. For the law of Christ
depriues no man of his right, (which the adversaries themselves confess,) and
therefore, as we showed before Kings and Emperors by coming to the Church
loose nothing of their temporal interest Cap. 3.
.

In the second place shall S. Ambrose come forth, who writing of David, that
heaped murder upon adultery (...).
, He was a King, says he, he was bound by no laws, because Kings are free
from the bands of offenses. For they are not called to punishment by any laws,
being exempte by the power of their government.

Thirdly B. Gregory of Towers, I^b 5 hist. (...) 7. Armen. lib. 3. cap. 26.
who speaks to Childerike King of France, vexing the Priests of God
opprobriously and handling them injuriously, in these words: If any of v^^^
King, would transgress the limits of justice, he may be punished by you, but
if you shall exceed who shall punish you? for we speak to you, but if you will
you hear, and if you will not, who shall condemn you but he, who has
pronounced that he is justice it self.

Fourthly S. Gregory the Great, who was almost of an age with Gregory of
Towers, who being Pope himself, confessed that he was the servant and subject
of the Emperor, and with great ciuility and humility acknowledged that all
power was given the Emperor from heaven over all men, as we showed a little
before Cap. 3.
.

Fifthly, the worthy Prelate Otto Bishop of Frisingen In Ep. ad I^ed. ^eno^arb.
: Only Kings, says he, as being set over the laws, are reserved to the
examination of God, they are not restrained by the laws of man. From whence
was that of his who was both King and Prophet, against thee only have I sinned
And afterward. For where as according to the Apostle, it is a fearful thing
for every man to fall into the hands of the living God: yet for Kings, who have
none above them besides him to fear, it will be so much the more fearful,
that they may offend more freely then others.

I can call in more, and that very many to testify the truth of this matter,
but what needs any more? In the mouth of two or three witnesses, let every word
stand Math. 18.
. If the assertors of the contrary opinion can bring forth so many testimonies
of ancient fathers, or indeed but any one, wherein it is expressly written, that
the Church or the supreme head thereof, the Bishop, has temporal power over
secular Kings and Princes, and that he may coerce and chastise them by
temporal punishments any way either directly or indirectly, or inflict any
penalty either to the whole Kingdom or any part of it: I shall be content,
that the whole controversy shall be judged on their side without any appeal
from thence. For indeed I desire nothing so much, as that a certain mean
might be found, by which the judgment of the contrary side might be clearly
confirmed. But while I expect that in vain, in the mean time the truth caries
me away with her, conquered and bound into the contrary part.

Therefore I demand this now of the adversaries: whether it be likely, that
those ancient and holy fathers, who have written of the great power and
immunity of Kings and Emperors, were so negligent, that of very carelessness
they did not put in mind the Princes of their time of this temporal power of
the Pope, or that they left not this remembrance, if they made any, consigned
under their hands in writing. To the end that Princes should fear not only the
secret judgments of God, but also the temporal jurisdiction of the Church and
Pope, by which they might be thrown down from their seats, so often as the
Church or the Pope, who is the head thereof shall think it fit in regard of
religion and the common weal? certainly to be silent, and to have concealed so
great a matter, if it was true, was to abuse Kings and Princes, whom they had
persuaded both by writings, and preachings, that they could be judged by God
only in temporal matters. Or shall we imagine, that they were so unskillful
and ignorant of the authority of the Church, that they knew not that it was
endued with such a power? Or in a word, that they were so fearful, and narrow
minded, that they durst not tell the Princes that which they knew? If none of
these things can be imputed and charged on those ancient fathers, why I pray
you should we now embrace any new power which is grounded upon no certain
either authority or reason, but in these last ages devised, and thrust upon the
people, by certain fellows, who are seru^ly and basely addicted to the Pope,
and so lay a new and strange yoke upon Princes?

CHAP. IX.
I Have already plainly showed that the last part of the second reason of the
Adversaries is most false: which is, That the Church therefore tolerated
Constantius, Iulianus, Ualens, and other heretic Princes, because she could
not chastise them without the hurt of the people. Now will I prove, that the
latter part is even as false, to wit, that Henry the IV. Emperor, and other
Princes over whom the later Popes have arrogated to themselves temporal power,
might be coerced and chastised by the Church without hurt of the people. Which
before that I take in hand, I do heartily request not only the friendly
Reader, but even the Adversaries themselves, that the question being discussed,
they would weigh with themselves, and judge truly and sincerely, whether it
were not more easy for the Church to punish those first Princes by the
aforesaid ways and means, then to reduce into order the said Henry the IV, by
Rodolphus the Sweuian? or Philip the Fair by Albert of Austria? Of whom the
one scorned and repressed the arrogancy of the Pope: the other, after diverse
battles fought with diverse success, at the length in the last battle defeated
his Competitor and Enemy whom the Pope had set upon him: and as for the Pope,
of whom (...). and alij.
he was excommunicate, he banished him out of Rome, and plagued him with
perpetual banishment.

With how great hurt and spoil to the people the Pope labored to execute that
temporal power upon Henry the XII. O^to Frisingen witnesses, (whom Bellarmine
worthily calls most Noble both for blood, and for learning and for integrity
of life^) who write, of the Excommunication (...) S. otu^ in Chronico. anno
(...).
and deposition of the said Henry done by Gregory the VII. in this manner
Lib. 1. cap ^. de tra^s^^t. Imp and li. 4 de Roman Pont. ca. 13.
. I read and read again the acts of the Roman Kings and Emperors, and find
no where, that before this man any of them was excommunicate or deprived of his
Kingdom by the Bishop of Rome: unless any man think it is to be accounted
for an Excommunication that Philip was for a small time placed amongst the
P^nitentiaries by the Bishop of Rome, and that Theodosius was ^equestredor
suspended from entering into the Church by blessed Ambrose for his bloody
murder. In which place it is to be observed, that Otto does plainly profess,
that he finds in former ages no example of privation of a Kingdom, although
he propounded these two instances touching Excommunication, if not true at
least having a show of true ones. And afterward within a few lines, he writes
thus Lib. 6. Cl^o. ca. 35.
: But what great mischiefs, how many wars, and hazardes of wars followed
thereof: how often miserable Rome was besieged, taken, spotled, because Pope was
set up again Pope, and King above King, it is a pain to remember. To be
short, the rage of this storm did so hurry and wrap within it so many
mischiefs, so many schisms, so many dangers both of souls and bodies, that
the same even of it self by reason both of the cruelty of the persecution,
and the continuance thereof were sufficient to prove the unhappiness of man's
misery. Upon which occasion that time is by an Ecclesiastical writer compared
to the thick darkness of Egypt. For the foresaid Bishop Gregory is banished
the cuie by the King, and Gibert Bishop of Rauenna is thrust into his place.
Further Gregory remaining at Salernum, the time of his death approaching, is
reported to have said: I have loved justice, and hate ^ iniquity: therefore I
die in banishment. Therefore because the kingdom being cut off by the Church,
was grievously (...) in her Prince, the Church also bereaved of so great a
Pastor, who exceeded all the Priests and Bishops of Roman zeal and authority,
conceived no small grief.

Call you this to chastise a Prince without hurt to the people: They that write
that the Bishop of Rome, whom they mean in the name of the Church did not
tolerate this Emperor, because he could chastise him without hurt to the
people, it must needs be that either they have not read this author, or that
they have no care of their credit, who ensnare themselves in so manifest an
untruth. If they knew not this before, let them learn now at the last out of
this grave writer, that that is false which they ignorantly give out for true:
and I wish them to consider, and judge impartially, if it had not been better
for that Gregory the Pope, should have suffered the wills and desperate manners
of Henry like to Constantius, Iulianus, Valens, and other Emperors who vexed
the Church, and with tears and prayers to intret the goodness of God either for
his recovery or destruction, rather than by one insolent and strange act, and
that very unnecessary to stir up so many schisms and murders, so many sackings
of people and Cities, so many disgraces shameful against the Sea Apostolic,
so many wars against the Popes, and other furious Tragedies with the
destruction of all the people, and to nourish and continue these being stirred
up, to the exceeding mischief of the Church. It may be that Gregory did it of
a good mind, (let God judge of the intention) but it cannot be that he did it
rightly, wisely, and according to duty, nor but that he erred very wide,
according to the manner and counsel of a man, when he assumed that to
himself, which in truth was not his: that is to say, the office of deposing an
Emperor, and the power to substitute an other in his place, as though the fee
of that humane kingdom had belonged to him, which that verse does sufficiently
declare, which is reported by Otto, and above is transcribed by us.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho. Now it is certain, that it is not
always well done and according to the will of God, which is done even of men,
otherwise very good, thorough heat of holiness, and a good zeal. Moses. while
he killed the Egiptian, with a zeal to defend the Hebrew, sinned. Oza thorough
a zeal to uphold the Ark of the Lord swerve, and lying a tone side, touched
it, and died. Peter of a zeal to defend his Lord and Master, cut of Malchus
his ear, and was rebuked for it. Hence S. Ambrose to Theodosius Lib. 5. epis.
29.
. I know that you are godly, merciful, gentle, and peaceable, loving faith and
the fear of the Lord: but for the most part something or other deceiues us,
some have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge Romans 10.
. Inconsiderate zeal often inciteth to mischief.

Therefore in my opinion, there was a great fault in Pope Gregory about this
business, because he did not observe, that it belonged to the duty of the
chief Pastor, rather to let pass one man's wickedness unpunished, then
thorough a desire to correct the same, to wrap the innocent and harmless
multitude in danger. And therefore he ought not to have excommunicate that
Emperor, whose wickedness so great a number of men had conspired to maintain,
that they could not be separated without a schism, a renting, nay not without
the dissolution of the whole Church. The great light of the Church S. Austine
advised the same many ages ago, both holily and wisely, and proved the same
clearly out of the writings of the (...).
Apostle Paul, whose judgment was so well liked by the Church, that she
recorded it amongst the Canons, and therefore worthy that I should transcribe
it into this place, and to be written not with ^ike, but with gold, nor in
paper, that will quickly wear, but in ^int and adamant, or if there be any
thing more durable and lasting then they. The chastisement, says he, of many
can not be whol^ome, but when he is chasti (...), that has not a multitude to
partake with him. But when the same a^ case has possessed many, there is
(...), but to gre^^e and mourn, that (...) from their destruction, (...)
re^caled to holy (...).
Ezech^e^^ Least when (...) they root up the wheat also: nor (...) the Lords
^orn^, but they themselves (...) amongst the (...). And-therefore the same
(...) out many who were corrupted (...) writing to the same (...) in his ^econd
(...), did not again prescribe, that they should not eat with such: for they
were many. Neither could it be did of them. (...).
If any brother be called a fornicator; (...) any such like that they (...)
much as eat with such, but he says (...).
least when I come again to you, God do humble me, and I lament many (...)
have sinned before, and have not repented, for the (...) and fornication, which
they have committed. By this mourning of his; threatening that they are rather
to begun (...) with (...) from God, then by that castigation that (...) may
forbear their company. And a little after, indeed if the contag^on of sinning
have taken hold of a multitude the (...) mercy of the divine discipline is
necessary (...)
, for (...) that ^^ of Excommunication) are both (...) they prove (...) more
trouble the weak ones, that be good th^^ (...) the st^ut ones, that be wicked.

Seeing these things stand thus, there is none as I suppose, by comparing S.
Austines rule, which also is the rule of the Church, with the practice of
Gregory against Henry, but will evidently see, that the Pope erred greatly,
that would excommunicate an Emperor, whose party a huge multitude both of the
Clergy and laity did follow, with manifest danger of a grecuous schism, and
much more, when as by an odious sentence he went about to deprive him of the
right of his Empire, (to which the Bishop himself had no title in the world:
that it is no marvel if as Sig^^ert w^^toth, the said Gregory a little before
his death repented him of all those things, which he had done against the
Emperor.

I am willing to set down the place of Sig^bert, because it contemeth not his
own opinion, which is suspected to the aduersaires, because he followed
Henricus his party, but the historical narration of an other author (...).
.

Pope (...), says he, who is also called Gregory the 7. dies in banishment
at Salernum. O^ him I find it thus (...): We would have you know who are
careful of the Ecclesiastical charge, that the Lord Apostolic (...), who
also is Gregory, lying now at the point of death, ca^ed to him one of twelve
Cardinals, whom he chiefly loved above the rest, and confessed, to God, and S.
Peter, and to the whole Church, that he had greatly offended in the pastroall
charge, which was committed to him to govern, and by the instigation of the
Devil, had raised anger and hatred against mankind. Then at last he sent the
foresaid confessor to the Emperor, and to the whole Church, to wish all grace
and indulgence to them, because he saw, his life was at an end, and instantly
he put on his (...) vesture and remitted and loosed the bands of all his curses
to the Emperor, and to all christian people, the living and the dead, the
spiritually and the la^^y, and willed his own (...) to depart out of (...) his
house, and the friends of the Emperor to a^cend into it.

CHAP. X.
NO^ (...) to the Bishop Frisingensis, a man most (...), as I said, and almost
an eye witness of these things. He both in the place produced by us, and also
in others, bewraieth plainly, that he allowed not that decree of the Pope,
touching the deposing of the Emperor, but that he holds it to be new,
insolent, and unjust. For first for the novelty, and insolency of that Act,
he writes thus; I read and read again the Acts of the Roman Kings and
Emperors, and do find no where, that any of them before this was
excommunicate, or deprived of his kingdom by the Bishop of Rome. And again in
the first book touching the gestes of Frederike. (...)
Gregory the VII. says he, who then held the Bishoprike of the City of Rome,
decrees, that the Emporour as one forsaken of his friends, should be shaken
with the sword of Excommunication. The novelty and strangeness of this action
did so much more vehemently affect the Empire already moved with indignation,
because before that time never any such sentence was known to have been
published against the Princes of the Romans. Now he declares the injustice and
iniquity of the fact, in diverse respects: First, because amongst those evils
and mischiefs which did spring out of that decree of the Pope, he reckons the
mutation and defection both of Pope and King: that Pope was set above Pope, as
King above King by which words he shows that both of them by a like right, or
ratherby a like wrong was made, that as Pope was set upon Pope by the Emperor
unjustly, so also was King unjustly set upon King by the Pope. Then, in that he
says, Because therefore the kingdom in his Prince, etc. what does that imply
other, then that by reason of the Empire violated in the Prince, the Church was
violated in the Bishop, or else, for the kingdom wounded in the Prince, the
Church was wounded in the Bishop. Between which seeing he makes no difference
of right or wrong, and both of them could not be done justly, it follows that
he thinks both of them was done unjustly.

Moreover he calls as well the defection of Rodolphus, whom the Pope had
created Emperor, as the insurrection of Henry his son of the Excommunicate
Father, I say he calls them both openly and simply plain Rebellion, which
surely he would never have done, if he had believed that Henry was lawfully
deprived of his Empire, for there can be no rebellion, but against a
Superior, and therefore it could not be against an Heretic, who if he were
justly deprived and deposed was no more a Superior. Therefore he thus writes
of Rodolphus Lab. 1. degest. Frideria. cap 6.
. And not long after the two foresaid Captains Guelfe and Rodolphus, rebelling
against their Prince, upon what occasion it is uncertain, are joined with the
Saxons. And a little after: But the Bishop of Rome Gregory, who at this time
as it has beer said, stirred up Princes against the Emperor, writ his
letters secretly, and openly to all, that they should create an other Emperor.
But here we must know by the way, that he says, upon what occasion it is
doubtful, that it is to be understood of a private occasion, as many are wont
to spring between a King and his Nobles: as in our age between Borbonius and
king Francis: the Guise and Henry; Orange and Philip, for each of them, both
Guelfo and Rodolphus pretended a public occasion, that is to say, the furious
behavior of Henricus, and also for that he was excommunicate and deposed from
his kingdom by the Pope, as writes Albert Schafnaburgensis Dereb German.
, and so they covered private hatred as Rebels use to do, with a public
pretense. But touching the Son our Bishop Frisingensis writes in this manner
I^b. 7 Ch^on. cap. 8.
. Afterward again in the year following, when the Emperor celebrated the
Nativity of the Lord at Moguntia, Henry his son enters into rebellion
against his Father in the parts of Noricum by the counsel of Theobald a
Marquis, and Berengarius an Earl, under the color of Religion, because his
Father was excommunicate by the Bishop of Rome: and having drawn to his party
certain great Personages out of the East part of France, Alemania, and
Baioaria, he enters into Saxony, a country and Nation easily to be animated
against their King. Here let the Reader observe two things. One that this
Author, a man notable for knowledge and piety, calls this insurrection of
Henry the son, against Henry the Father, a Rebellion: the other, that both
here and in other places, he ever calls Henry the Father, King and Emperor,
although he had been now about five and twenty years excommunicate and
deprived of his Kingdom by the Popes sentence: and first Rodolphus, and then
(...), were set into his place by the Pope and the Rebels, whereby he shows
sufficiently that he thinks that the Pope has no authority to depose Kings,
or to determine of their temporal government: and therefore that the Decree of
Gregory was neither just nor lawful; otherwise neither Henry could have been
called King, nor his aduersaties Rebels without injury to the Bishop of Rome.

There is also another place of the same Authors, wherein he (...) the same more
plainly, that is, that the Pope by that excommunication and abdication has
taken no right of his Kingdom from Henry, for after that he had related that
(...), who was son in law to Rodol^us, (whom as has been said, the Pope had
created King) having killed his Father in law, and usurped the Dukedom of
Sw^uia, as granted to him by his Father in law, and one the other side that
Henry, (who had been deposed by the Popes sentence had granted the same
Dukedom, to a certain Nobleman of Sweuia, (whose name was Frederike) who
forced Bertolphus to conditions of peace, and ad ex(...) Ducaius: he adds,
This Ber^ode although in this business he yields both to the Empire and to
Justice, yet he is reported to have been a re^olute and a valiant man. Behold
how he using no manner of Circuition affirms, that both Empire and Justice
stands on his part, against whom the Pope had long before passed the sentence
of D^position: but not with Rodolphus, being called to the Kingdom by the
authority of the Pope, with this Epigraphe, now twice related above.

Petra dedit Petro etc. Lastly seeing he seriously says and teaches, That
Kings have none above them but God whom they may fear: does he not even by
this conclusion teach us, that the Bishop of Rome has no temporal authority,
whereby he may dispose in any manner of their kingdoms and governments? And
surely although there were nothing else, for which that heinous action of Pope
Gregory might be misliked, surely so many lamentable and desastrous events, so
many fatal and woeful accidents, which springing out of that jurisdiction
which was then first usurped and practiced by the Pope against the Emperor,
afflicted the whole Empire full five and twenty years, and rent the Church
asunder with a continual schism, may be an argument to us, that that Decree
was not made by a divine inspiration, but by an humane passion: nor that it
proceeded from an ordinary Jurisdiction of the holy Sea Apostolic, but either
from an extraordinary ambition, or an ignorance of his power and inconsiderate
zeal of him that held the Sea. For it is not likely that God, who is the
Author of Justice and protector of the Church, and who has made the first
executions of the spiritual power of the Church exceeding fearful by present
miracles, and horrible effects, would not also in like manner second with some
singular miracle or extraordinary assistance that first execution of so great
and so high an authority and power of his Church: especially seeing he was
with so many prayers inuocated by the Bishop for his help, and the Sea the
admonition to the Reader.
Apostles themselves entreated with a solemn supplication, in these words:
Go too therefore you most holy Princes of the Apostles, and by your authority
interpo^ed confirm that which I have said, that all men may now at the last
understand if you can bind and loose in heaven, that you are also as well able
it earth to take away and give Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, and
whatsoever else mortal men may have. Let Kings now learn by this Kings
example, and all the Princes of the world, what you are able to do in heaven,
and how much you are in favor with God, and hereafter let them be afraid to
contemn the commandments of holy Church. But execute with speed upon Henry,
that all men may understand, that this Child of iniquity falls out of his
Kingdom, not by chance, but by your care. Yet this I would entreat at your
hands, that he being led by repentance, may at your request obtain favor of
the Lord in the day of judgment (...).
. These and such like prayers being powered out to God and the Princes of the
Apostles, and Curses and Imprecations in solemn manner cast upon Henry, who
would not think that God, who by his Apostles See the admonition to the Reader.
preserues his Church with a continual protection would not easily suffer
himself to be entreated, and would not presently hear this first supplication
of the Pope in the beginning of so great an authority of the Church to be made
manifest, if any such authority had belonged to the Church. Whereas
notwithstanding clean contrary, every thing fell out cross and unhappy
against the Pope, and against the authors and fautors of the Popes party,
whilst Henry in the mean time triumphed and held his Empire still, for that
which he suffered from his son at last after five and twenty years, (under
a show of religion as Frisingensis says,) that makes little or nothing to this
matter. This was a pretext only for a wicked son who was sick of the Father
before the time: but the true cause was ambition, and the burning desire of
rule, quae multos mortales fallos fieri subegit Salu^t.
. and has oftentimes armed with cruel and hellish hatred the Fathers against
the Children, and contrariwise, as we have showed at large other where lib. 6.
de reg ^^ cap. 4.
: One said excellently well, (...).
patris long^o^ vit a malo filio seruit us videtur.

CHAP. XI.
BY this, as I suppose, it is evident enough, that the Church in times past did
not tolerate Constantius, Iulianus, Ualens, and other wicked Princes, because
she then distrusted her might and strength; nor because she could not reduce
them to order without the great hurt of the people: for indeed she might with
more ease, and less hurt to the people, have chastised those ancient Princes.
Then not only Henry the fourth, from whose business so lasting a schism did
spring, but either Otho the fourth, or Frederick the second, or Philip Pulcher,
or Jews the eleventh, or John Navarre, or others, against whom the Bishops,
being puffed up with the success of their affairs, drew forth their
Sentences of Excommunication and deprivation of Kingdoms, not for heresy, nor
for the evil government of State, nor at the request of the subjects, but even
inflamed and maliciously carried with their proper affections, I mean their
private hatred. To conclude, not for that the state of the Church in that age
would have her Bishops more ready than in this time to suffer martyrdom: for
then the Church was in very safe estate, and as we say, sailed in the haven, as
having been now anciently founded upon the Apostolic constitutions, and
sufficiently established by the labor and blood of martyrs. Yea, such then was
the state of the Church, that there was much less need for Bishops to be
ready for martyrdom, than at this time: for that so great a multitude, then
being as it were sprinkled with the fresh blood of the martyrs, did in a manner
savor of nothing but martyrdom, that the Pastor was no less admonished of
his duty by the example of the flock, than the several persons of the people
by the example of the Pastor.

But now, o lamentable case! the case is quite otherwise: the Church is tossed
with most grievous tempests, and only not overwhelmed as yet with the fury of
heretics, many, even of those who desire to be called Catholics, being so
affected, that they are not willing to suffer any great troubles, much less
undergo death, for true religion: wherefore, that life and heat may be given
to that lukewarmnesse, and that men might be stirred up to the readiest way,
and as it were the shortest cut, for their health, who sees not that there is
need of Bishops, to show the way both by word and example? and both to compose
them themselves, and to exhort others rather to martyrdom, than to arms and
insurrections, to which we are prone by nature? Who would not judge, that the
fatherly piety of Clement the eight, joined with excellent wisdom, whereby he
endeavors to reduce to an^itie, and to keep in (...) Christian Kings and
Princes, is by infinite degrees (...) for the Church, than the martial furies
(...) (...) the eleventh, whereby he wickedly and cruelty sought to set Italy,
France, Germany, Spain, and all (...) together by the cares?

(...) be thus, surely we must needs conf^^^ (...) ancient fathers of the
Church (...) fault, in that they did not only suffer, (...) they might easily)
those guilty and (...) of the says, but also courtcously reverenced them, and
honored them with regal titles and dignities: or else we must needs think,
that they spared those manner of Princes for the reverence of Majesty, and the
power which in temporal matters is inferior to God alone: or surely we must
believe, that besides the reasons delivered by the adversaries, there is yet
some better behind, which none hitherto has brought forth, nor ever will, as
I suppose. For that which a certain seditious fellow has written in that
infamous work which he writ against Kings, (...).
to elude the ^orce of the former objection touching the tolleration of the
ancient Fathers. As though, says he, we are to think that there is the same
reason of the Church to be established and which is established already, and
that the Uine ought ^^t to be planted and watered before it be pruned: but that
then that power was given to the Church, when that of the Prophet was
fulfilled: Kings shall be thy Nur^es, and with a countenance cast to the earth
shall they worship thee, and shall lick^ the dust of (...) Esa^ 49.
. that surely is such a to^, as I do think not worth the answering, seeing I
suppose the Author himself scarce knows what he says. For that? were not the
rotten members of the Church wont to be cut off even from her infancy and
first beginning? does he not know, that that spiritual incision, which is
proper to the Church, began even with the Church her self? What say you to
Ananias, what to the Corinthian, were they not cut off by the church? If he
know not this, he is to be thought an ill Divine, and a worse Vinedresser,
seeing he even in the very first planting, shreds off whatsoever is super
fluous and unprofitable in the vine, and suffers not the rotten and faulty
branches to stick out of the ground: afterward when it is a little growenvp,
he lops and cuts it, lest it should be ouercharged with unprofitable and
unfruitful stems. But if he mean corporal incision, he ought to know that
the Church has no skill of blood, I mean, that she does not execute death
upon any, unless peradventure it falls out by miracle, as in the person of
Ananias and Saph^ra Act. 5.
. But what, does he think that the Church was not perfectly established in the
times of Ambrose, Hierome and Austine* Or that it was not sufficiently planted
and watered that at that time it might be conveniently shred? Tract. 17. in ^an.
Surely S. Austine in one place affirms, that very few in his time were found,
that thought evil of Christ. Why then did the Church tolerate Ualens,
Ualentinianus, Heraclitus, and others? for from Constantine the Great, that
Prophecy, which he alleges, was fulfilled. But it was not yet time to cut
the Lords vineyard. A worthy reason sure, and to be ranked amongst that
follows fooleries, which in another place Lib 5. ca. 6. de Regno.
we set down by themselves. Now let us go to the maintainers of the indirect
power.

CHAP. XII.
THese men's opinion I have set down above in the first and fifth chapters:
which is, That the Pope, by reason of his spiritual Monarchy, has temporal
power indirectly: and that sovereign, to dispose of the temporalties of all
christians, and that he may change kingdoms, and take them from one to give
them to another if it be necessary for the health Aduersariorum sententia (...)
antiquitati ec^lesiastic^ con-tradic^t.
of souls. Against which opinion there are so many things, that I hold it to
be utterly improbable, if not incredible. For first of all, what is more
contrary to it, then that the whole christian antiquity ever judged, that Kings
are less then God only, that they have God only for their judge, that they are
subject to no laws of man, and can be punished or coerced with no temporal
punishments (...).
, and therefore that which the authors of the law said, Princeps b (...).
(...) est that the Grecians chiefly understand, of penal laws (...). that
is; the Prince offending is not punished. None of these things can stand with
the opinion of the adversaries. For if it be true that the Pope may dispose of
kingdoms and states of secular Princes, and take from them their scepters, and
all manner of dignity, it follows necessarily, that the Pope is superior and
even Judge over Kings in temporal matters, and besides that all Kings may be
subject to temporal punishments: which is directly opposite, as may be to the
former opinion of the ancient Fathers. The necessity of the consequution is
plain by this, for that he who judges an other lawfully, must of necessity be
superior over him, whom he judges. (For an equal has not authority over an
equal 1. N^m magist atus D de recep qui (...).
, much less an inferior over a superior) and also because, the deprivation of
a Kingdom, even as the publication of goods, is to be reckned amongst
temporal punishments, and those very grievous too.

What I pray you, that the Bishops themselves confess that Kings have no
superior in temporalities. (...).
They have, and they have not, cannot be both true: Therefore it is false, that
Kings have no superior in temporalities, if an other may by law take their
temporalities from them and give them to an other. For if this be not an act of
superiority, as I may speak, I know not surely, what it is to be superior, or
if to condemn a King unheard, and to punish him as far as his regal dignity
comes to, be not to be the Judge of a King, we must confess that no motion
either of a judgment or of a Judge has been delivered and lest us by our
Elders. For in that they place the difference in the words, Direct and
indirecte, that belongs not to the power of iudgeing, and to the effect of the
judgment, but only to the manner and way, of acquiring so great a power. For
the Canonists do say, that the Pope has received directly of Christ the
temporal dominion of the whole world. But these men, I mean the Divines, deem
that he received such a dominion directly, as if you should say, by it self,
simply, and without consideration of another thing: but only indirectly, that
is, by consequence, in regard of that spiritual power, which he has received
directly from the Lord. Therefore this difference out of these words ought to
be referred to the beginning and mean of acquiring a temporal power but not
to the force and effect of the same. For whether you say, makes nothing for the
strength and power of the Popes judgment over Kings: unless peradventure some
may say, that the Pope if he be an ill man, may tyrannize over the Parsons and
Estates of Kings more freely indirectly, then directly.

But if the opinions of the adversaries should take place, Christian Kings and
Princes shall not only be Clients and Vassals to the Pope in temporalities, but
that which is more base, they shall hold their Kingdoms and Principalities as
it were at his courtesy. And this I do easily prove even out of the very
principles and grounds of the adversaries. The Pope may take from any man his
kingdom, and give it to another, if so be that it be necessary for the health
of souls: But to judge and determine, if it be necessary, belongs to the same
Pope, of whose judgment, whether it be right or wrong, none can judge, Can.
pat^t. can al^orum (...) q. 3.
therefore where he lists he may deprive every man of his kingdom and give
it to another.

The Proposition in this argument, is the very opinion of the adversaries: and
the Assumption is without controversy amongst all Catholics: for none but an
Heretic will deny that the charge of souls belonges to the successor of
Peter and Vicar of Christ. Lastly, the conclusion follows necessarily of the
premises because if the Pope will transfer any kingdom from one to another,
he may say that he judges it necessary for the health of souls, and none
(...) of has judgment as has been said. And (...) his pleasure whether he
will take from (...) but that all Kings (...) th^^ kingdoms, which (...) at
the (...) Behold in how (...) Christian Kings and Princes should stand, (...)
(...), that the Pope has power indirectly to (...) all temp^^aliti^s of
Christians, who shall mea^^ that (...) own pleasure and judgment, that (...)
for him, if he be displeased, then to (...) his indirect power, so o^t (...)
private (...), o^ the ambi^^ (...) forward, or even (...) and contemned, (...).
Where of ^^^face (...) have given (...) all of i^any, they (...) to (...)
mighty (...) of the po^tifi^^ (...) and (...) one after another, as (...) I
omit this reason taken (...) a^^^ought it (...) for that (...) that (...)
kingdoms but an execution (...) to them by the Pope, ^^t i^ it strange against
the (...) and all the ab^tto^, of the indirect power.

(...) all (...) all (...) and jurisdiction is (...) by the law of God o^ of
Man, and also he (...) o^ holds any thing, i^ he hold by nei^^^^ (...)
of these, holds wrongfull^, as Augustire reasons (...) against the
D^^atists. Therefore it cannot be that the Pope, should justly exercise any
temporal jurisdiction over secular Kings and Princes, unless it be certain
that the same is given him either by the law of God or of Man. But neither in
divine, nor humane laws is any such place found, which confers any such power
upon him, whereas on the contrary part, the domination and authority of kings
is openly commended and allowed by many testimonies of sacred Scriptures, as
when it is said: By me Kings reign. All power is given to you. The Kings of
the Nations rule over them. The heart of the King is in the hand of God. I will
give them a King in mine anger. My son, fear the Lord and the King. Fear
God honor the King: and every where the like speeches.

Lastly, seeing this temporal power and Jurisdiction of the Pope, whereof we
speak, is not found to be comprised neither in the express word of God in the
Scriptures, nor by the tradition of the Apostles received as it were by hand,
nor practiced by use and custom in the Church for these thousand years and
more, or exercised by any Pope: nor allowed and commended, nay not so much as
mentioned by the ancient Fathers in the Church, I pray you what necessity of
faith should force us to admit it? or with what authority can they persuade
the same unto us? Our opinion say they, is proved by reasons and examples: how
glad, say I would I be, that that were true. But we ought chiefly to know
this, that only those reasons are fit to prove this opinion of theirs,
whereof evident proofs and demonstrations are made, which none of them has
hitherto brought, nor as I think could bring. For as touching reasons only
probable, and likely, whereof Dialectike syllogismes do consist, their force
is not such, as can conclude and give away from Kings and Princes their
sovereign authority from them, seeing that even in daily brables about
trifling matters, nothing can be concluded, unless the Cause of the Suitor,
be proved by manifest and evident proofs and witnesses: and therefore the
Actor not proouing, he that is conuented, although himself perform nothing,
shall carry the business I q^^ accusar^ (...). l. (...) ^ de prob. cap. 1. de
probat.
. But the help is very weak and feeble in Examples, because they only show
what was done, not what ought to be done: those excepted which are commended or
dispraised by the testimony of the Scriptures, which seeing they are thus, let
us now see with what reasons the Adversaries continue their opinion.

CHAP. XIII.
THere is not one amongst them all, who are of the Popes party, as I said
before, who has either gathered more diligently, or propounded more sharply,
or concluded more briefly and (...), than the worthy Divine Bellarmine, whom I
mention for honors sake, who although he gave as much to the Popes authority
in temporalities as honestly he might, and more then he ought, yet could he
not satisfy the ambition of the most imperious man Sixius the fist: Who
affirmed that he had supreme power over all Kings and Princes of the whole
earth, and all Peoples, Countries and Nations, committed unto him not by humane
but by divine ordinance In P^l^a contra Hen 3 ^ra Rege^.
. And therefore he was very near, by his Pontificiall censure, to the great
hurt of the Church to have abolished all the writings of that Doctor, which do
oppugn heresy with great See the admonition to the Reader.
success at this day: as the Fathers of that order, whereof Bellarmine was
then, did seriously report to me. Which matter comforts me, if peradventure,
that which I would not, any Pope possessed with the like ambition shall for the
like cause forbid Catholics to read my books. Let him do what he will, but
he shall never bring to pass that I ever forsake the Catholic, Apostolic,
and Romish faith, wherein I have lived from a Child to this great age: or dye
in another profession of faith then which was prescribed by Pius the 4.

We will then bring their reasons hither out of Bellarmine for they are five in
number: leaving others, especially Bozius his fancies, which are unworthy that
a man of learning should trouble himself to refute.

The first reason is, which Bellarmine propounds in these words. The civil
power is subject to the spiritual power, when each of them is a part of the
Christian commonwealth: therefore a spiritual Prince may command over
temporal Princes and dispose of temporal matters in order to a spiritual
good, for every superior may command his inferior. And least any peradventure
elude this reason by denying the Proposition, with the next he labors to
strengthen the same, by three reasons, or Media, as they call them.

Now that civil power, not only as Christian, but also as Civil, is subject
to the Ecclesiastike, as it is such, first it is pr^^ued by the ends of them
both, for the temporal end is subordinate to the spiritual end, as it
appears: because temporal felicity is not absolutely the last end, and
therefore ought to be referred to the felicity eternal. Now it is plain out
of Aristotle, Lib. 1. Eth. cap. 1. that the faculties are so subordinate, as
the ends are subordinate.

Secondly, Kings and Bishops, Clergy and Laity, do not make two common
wealths, but one, that is one Church, for we are all one body. Romans 11. and 1 Corinthians. 12. But in every body the members are connexed and depending one of
another: but it is no right assertion, that spiritual things depend on
temporal; therefore temporal things depend of spiritual, and are subject to
them.

Thirdly, if a temporal administration hinder a spiritual good, in all men's
judgment the temporal Prince is bound to change that manner of government,
yea even with the loss of a temporal good: therefore it is a sign that the
temporal power is subject to the spiritual. Thus he.

Which that I may satisfy in order, I answer: that it is very false, which in
this first reason is thrust upon us, for a true, certain, and sound
foundation, false, I say, that the Civil power is subject to the Spiritual,
since both of them is a part of the Christian common weal: unless they
understand it thus, that it is subject in spirituals, and again that this
ought to be subject to that in temporals, since these two powers are so parts
of the Christian commonweal, as neither has authority over other; as which
when they were free and of themselves absolute, out of a mutual love closed
together. Therefore each of them acknowledges and reuerenceth the other in his
order and office, and each does exercise her function at her pleasure: only
there is between them a certain consent and fellowship conspiring in the
conservation and maintenance of the Christian commonweal: for by both the
powers, or (to use Gene^rardes In Psalm. 2.
words) by both the Magistra^tes, Ecclesiastike and (...) the Church is
maintained, defended, and flourishes: which that she might be protected and
preserved tyght and upright. (...) ^.


-- alterius sic (...) po^t.

Altera p^^^it opemres, and coniurat ami^^.
that as long as they keep this society, the Christian common weal is like
to flourish and abound with innumerable commodities of concord and peace: But
when they dissolve this combination thus contracted, certainly the spiritual
power, though it excel with a divine virtue, yet being now weakened in the ere
of the world, and deprived of his corporal helps, for the most part is
contemned: and the temporal although it be mighty and strong, hastneth
thorough all villainy and surie to her own destruction, being destitute of
heavenly grace which she enjoyed by the society of the spiritual power.
Notwithstanding neither can the power Ecclesiastike redress her wrongs the
more by her self, but by spiritual weapons, nor the temporal power work
upon the Ecclesiastike, but by visible and corporal arms, whereof I would to
God, that both the monuments of former times, and also our own age and memory
did not put us in mind thorough so many lamentable examples. And this surely
is no other thing then that which I said before, Hosius said to Constantius the
Arrian. (...) lawful for us, to hold any Empire on earth, neither have you
power oner sacrifices and holy things, being an Emperor and which S. Bernard
to Eugenius the Pope, These law and earthly businesses, have Judges, Kings, and
(...)
Princes of the earth. Why do you invade an others borders? why reach you your
sith into another man's harvest? Therefore these two powers Ecclesiastike and
Politic are not so parts of the Christian commonweal, that one should be
Master over the other: but so are parts, as which when they were single, and
divided one from the other, with a singular concord and union joined together
at the last, that each of them might afford help and succor to the other, and
by mutual and enterchanged courtesies and offices might oblige and demerit one
another. Neither is it to be granted because the power Ecclesiastike is holier,
and worthier then the Politic, therefore that this is subject to her: but
only (as it often comes to pass in a civil society) that she being the
worthier and the richer applied herself to this, which is neither so noble nor
so wealthy, for the benefit of them both: so as both of them remain free in
that society, and neither depend any way of other. Therefore excellently writes
Dried^ to this purpose ^^b. 2. de libe^. Ecclesia^. ^ap. 2.
. Christ (says he) severed the duties of these two powers: that the one might
govern divine and spiritual matters and persons, the other prefane and
worldly: and after, Behold thou plainly sees that Christ has severed the
duties of both the powers: Therefore the distinction of the Ecclesiastical
power Papal, from the secular and Imperial power is made by the law of God.
And after in the same chapter: From whence the Pope and the Emperor are in the
Church, not as two chief Rulers divided between themselves, whereof neither
knows other, or reuerenceeth as his superior, (for this ought to acknowledge
and reverence him inspirituall cases, and he this in temporal, and according to
the old Gloss, in Ca^. Hadrian, 63. as he is father to this in spirituals, so
is this to him in temporals) because a kingdom divided against itself, will
come to ruin. Nor again are they as two Judges subordinate, so as the one
receives his jurisdiction from the other. But they are as two rulers, who are
the Ministers of one God ^esigned (...) diverse offices, so as the Emperor
^ouerns (...) persons, for a peaceable Society in this world, and the Pope
rules spiritual to the advancement of Christian faith and charity.

But Bellarmine also himself. Mark, quoth he, that the Sun and the^ Moon
is not the same Star, and as the Sun did not constitute the Moon, but God;
so also, that the Pontificate and (...) is not the same, nor one absolutely
depend on the other Surely the Sun and the Moon are two great lights, when
Pope Innocent (...) interprets by an allegory, Two dignities which are the
Pontifical authority, and regal power: and compares that to the Sun, this
to the Moon. From whence I reason on this manner. As the Moon is no less the
Moon, nor consists the less of hirselfe, when she departs from the Sun,
and by wandering loses the light she borrowed on him, then when she is
enlightened with his beams in herfull Orb and Aspect, and in neither regard
either she depends of him, or he of her, but both holding the order and manner
of their institution do service both to God and the world: so also the Kingly
or Politic power resting on her proper strength, sub^^teth al^aies by
hirselfe: and although she receive great light (...) the Pontifical and
spiritual power, to live well and (...), yet is not changed at all her (...)
or Essence (...) her approach, nor by her departure, nor (...) nor (...) much
less is she subject to her, when she (...) to her. Now it remains that we
severally declare the faults of the reasons, wherewith Bellarmine supposes
that his first reason is underpropped.

CHAP. XIIII.
THerefore touching the first: I do constantly deny, that there is any such
ordination or subordination of the ends of their powers, so far as their
powers are such. For the end of Politic or Civil power, so far as it is
politic absolutely contains no more, then a temporal (...). I mean, the
Common-good, and a well ordered tranquillity for the quiet conduct of life, as
Bellarmine himself confesses in another place. The Civil power, says he,
has her Princes, Laws, Judges, etc. and likewise the Ecclesiastike her
Bishops, Canons, Judgments. That has for end a temporal peace; this eternal
salvation. Neither does this Civil power proceed further, and is referred to
none other end, as it is such. For in that it aspireth to eternal happiness
it has not that of her self: not I say so far, as it is Politic does she
direct her endeavors thither, as to her last scope: but in respect that she is
spiritual, or else is furthered by the society and Counsels of the
Ecclesiastike power, As appears by innumerable both peoples and Cities, in
whom the Civil power was strong and powerful by severity of laws, although
they had very slender or no notion at all of this everlasting happiness,
whereof we speak. This also the Apostle declares 1. ad Titu:.
when he wills us to pray for Kings, and all that are in authority, that we
may live a peaceable life in all piety and chastity: ascribing peace and
tranquillity of life to the Politic government, but piety and chastity to
Christian discipline. Therefore to speak in one word we must know, that the
ends of humane actions are in the intention and not in the understanding, that
is to say, not that which the understanding can invent by discourse of reason,
is the end of the Action, but that which the will does desire to attain by
doing, while the mind meditates on the Action, that is the end of Action.
Whence Nauarrus says very well, In relect. cap. no^^t number 92. de. (...).
That the end of the Laike power is the good, happy, and quiet temporal life
of men, which also is the end of the laws, which proceeded from the same. And
that the end of the Ecclesiastike power is an everlasting supernatural life,
and that the same is the end, of the laws which proceed from her. I would
prosecute this further, but that I think that the matter is plain enough to
men of wit even by Philosophy it self.

But the second reason is so frivolous and captious, as nothing can be spoken
more fondly, or be gathered more unsoundly, for is there any old wife so
doting, as understands not the weakness of this consequution, They are members
of one body, therefore one depends of another. For neither does a foot depend
of a foot, nor an arm of an arm, nor a shoulder of a shoulder, but they are
joined to some third and middle member, by themselves or by other members, to
which they adheare. And is it not gathered by the same manner of reasoning, and
by the same argument plainly;

The arms of every man be members of one body: But in every body the members
are connexed and depending one ^^ another, but it is not rightly affirmed. That
the right depends of the left: Ergo The left arm of every man depends of the
right, and is subject to it.
Who would not laugh at such kind of Arguments so full of vanity? I hate those
miserable demonstrations, which do rather inwrap and infold the matter they
have in hand with qu^^ckes, illusions and captious sophistications, then
explane the same, for as the arms are knit to the shoulders and the shoulders
are knit to the neck and head; nor the right arm or the right shoulder is
subject to the left, or contrarily; so the power spiritual and temporal, or
Ecclesiastike and Politic, although they be members of one Politic body, and
parts of one Christian commonweal and Church, yet neither is subject to the
other: and neither can without great sin press and encroach upon the borders
and Jurisdiction of the other: but both, as it were the shoulders of one body
are knit to the head which is Christ. Whereof this, I mean the Politic
prescribes to the Citizens and Subjects, the precepts of living wherein the
peace and tranquillity of humane society is maintained; and the other, raises
and instructs men's minds to the supernatural contemplation of immortality
and eternal happiness: (which does subsist with Civil tranquillity, and
sometimes without it) whereof it follows that these powers are divided and
severed in the same Christian Commonweal, so as neither can be subject to
other so fair forth as it is such. And surely unless Bellarmine confess
this he will be convinced by his own doctrine delivered other where: for in
his third book, De Romans Pontif. c. 19. where he consutes the trifles of the
Smalchaldike Synod of the Lutherans, and answers to that argument of theirs,
wherein they say, That the Pope makes himself God, seeing he will not be in
aged by the Church nor by any man: he shows that the consequence is saulty, in
an argument drawn from Kings, who also themselves have no Judge in earth, as
concerning temporalties. The Kings of the earth (says he) certainly
acknowledge no judge in earth, in the point which appertains to politic
matters, shall there be therefore as many Gods as there be Kings? What other
thing is it, I pray you, that Kings have no Judge in earth, as concerning
politic matters, then that which we will prove, that the Politic power is
distinguished from the Ecclesiastike, and that the Pope can by no means
dispose and judge of the same? For if he could, surely either Kings should have
a Judge in earth, even, As touching politic matters, or the Pope must always
dwell in heaven. Therefore it cannot be but that Bellarmine either disagreeth
from himself, or that he has slipped for want of memory, or that which I
believe not, that he desires to vary and change the truth, when as in one place
he affirms for certain and granted that Kings have no Judge in earth, as
concerning Politic matters: and in another place he sets the Pope as Judge
over all Kings and Princes, who may judge and depose them, and at his pleasure
dispose of all their kingdoms and estates. For whereas he makes the
distinction in these words, directly and indirectly, that belongs only to
the form and manner of proceeding, but not to the force and working of the
judgment. For it is ever true that he has a Judge in earth as concerning
temporalties, whom the Pope judges in temporalties what way soever, either
directly or indirectly, And I pray you, what odds is there, in regard of the
misery and calamity of a King, that is judged by the Pope, and deprived of his
kingdom, whether the Pope has done it directly, as if he should give
sentence, upon the King of Sicily or Naples, as the direct Lord of the fee upon
his vassell: or h^th do^^^t indirectly, as upon other Kings, who are (...)
subject to him by any Ch^ntelar law, it so be a like (...) both the judgments:
And this is suffi(...) argument. No, let us examine what (...).

(...) is plain even (...) ^^thered thereof by the Au(...) ^temporall power is
subject to (...) to prove a matter by demon(...) bring^th soo^th a sig^e, and
that surely (...) which many times de^^^ues us by a (...) therefore I answer to
the argument by de(...). For although it be true that a tem(...) ^^und to
change the manner of his go (...) ^^^^^tuall good be ^^^dred thereby ^et is it
(...) by a necessary consequence, that the (...) to the Sp^^^tuall: but this
onel^, that a ^^^^^tuall good is more excellent then a temporal good, the
which is true and we confess it. For if one be more ^orthy then another, it
does not follow by and by that the less worthy depends of the more worthy, and
is ^^^strate and su^^^^ted to it: for they may ^all out to be comprehended ^^
kinds or order^ so ^iuers by nature, that neither can depend of other, or be
h^ld by any bond of subjection. Therefore we grant that a Pr^^ce in the case
prop^^nded ought to change the ^orm of C^uill administ^at (...) to ^o it by the
church or by the h^a^ thereof and chief Pastor in earth, which is the Pope;
but o^^l^ ^^ Sp^^^tuall punishment, the horror whereo^ to a good man (...)
gree^^ous then all the pu(...) by the testi^o^^e of a (...) it has with(...)
but not by temporal punishment, (...)
as is (...) of Kingdom, seeing a (...) poralti^^, Therefore as much a (...)
he is to be left to the divine judgment a (...). Hence ^^dorus whose opinion
is registered amongst the Canons, 23 q (...)
Whether the peace and di^cipline of the Church be increased by faithful
Princes, or (...) of them who has delivered and committed the Church to their
power.

CHAP. XV.
Although this last Argument is sufficiently weakened by that which has been
said, yet it is worth the labor to make a little further discourse, and more
at large to explain my whole meaning touching this point. Therefore we must
understand, that all Kings and Princes christian, as they are the children of
the Church, are subject to the Ecclesiastike power, and that they ought to obey
the same, so often as the commands spiritual things: which unless they shall
do, the Church, by the power and Jurisdiction which she has over them, may
inflict spiritual Censures upon them, and strike them with the two edged sword
of the spirit: although she ought not to do at always, (as has been before
declared) but with that s^ord only, not with the visible and temporal sword
al^^ Cap 9.
because (...) sword is committed only to the Civil and Secular power.
Wherefore so often as the spiritual power, stands in need of the assistance of
the temporal sword; she is accustomed to entreat the favor and friendship of
the Civil power, her friend and companion. Contrariwise that Ecclesiastike
Princes and Prelates, are subject to civil Princes in temporalities, and ought
to obey them in all things, which belong to their civil government, in no
other manner, then the Civil are bound to obey them commanding spiritual
things, so as they be such as repugne neither the Catholic faith, nor good
manners. Yea that not so much as the Pope himself, is excluded and free from
this temporal subjection for any other reason, but because that by the bounty
of Kings he has been made a King himself, I mean a civil Prince,
acknowledging no man for his superior in temporalties, and thus much does that
most eager patron of Ecclesiastike Jurisdiction confess, whom most mensay is
Bellarmine in his answer, ad precipua capita Apologiae, etc. That opinion
(says he) is Page 114.
general and most true, that all men ought altogether to obey the superior
power. But because power is twofold spiritual and temporal, Ecclesiastike and
Politic, of which one belongs to Bishops, the other to Kings: the Bishops
must be subject to the Kings in temporal matters, and the Kings to the
Bishops in spiritual, as Gelasius the first in his Epistle to Anastasius, and
Nicolaus the first in his Epistle to Michael. And because, the Bishop of Rome,
is not only a chief Prince Ecclesiastike, to whom all Christians are subject
by the law of God, but is also in his Provinces a Prince temporal, nor
acknowledges any superior in temporalties; no more than other absolute and
sovereign Princes do in their kingdoms and jurisdictions, hence it comes
to pass; that in earth he has no power over him.

Wherefore not because he is chief Bishop, and spiritual father of all
Christians, is he therefore exempted from temporal subjection, but because he
possesses a temporal principality, which is subject to none. Therefore in
those matters, which belong to the safety of the common wealth, and to civil
society, and are not against the divine ordinance, the Clergy is no less
bound to obey the sovereign Prince temporal, then other Citizens are: as In
lib. 5 de Cle^ic^ Cap. 18.
Bellarmine himself declares excellently well; adding also a reason,
secondly, for that Clergy men, besides that they are Clergy men, they are
also Citizens, and certain civil parts of the common wealth. Clergy men,
(says he) are not any way exempted from the obligation of civil laws, which
do not repugne the sacred Canons, or the clericall duty. And although he
says, that he speaks not of coactiue obligation, yet is it more true, that
they may be constrained by a temporal judge to the obedience of the laws,
where the cause does require, that in that case they should not enjoy the
benefit of their exemption, which it is certain enough, that they received
from the laws of Emperors and Princes. For in vain does he challenge the
benefit of laws, who offends against them.

Hence it is, I mean out of this society and fellowship of clerks and laikes
in the common weal, that in public assemblies the Clergy, if they be to
consult of temporal affairs, do fit in the next place to the Prince.
Therefore spiritual power, (by the word of power, it is usual to signify the
persons, endued with power) does both command and obey politic power, and the
politic her again. And this is that indeed, whereof B. Gregory the Pope,
admonishes Maurice the Emperor, Lib 4 Epist. 75.
let not our Lord, (says he) out of his carthly authority be the sooner
offended with our Priests, but out of his excellent judgment, even for his
sake, whose servants they are, let him so rule over them, as that also he yield
them due reference. That is to say, let him rule over them, so far forth as
they are Citizens, and parts of the common wealth: yield reverence, as they are
the Priests of God and spiritual fathers, to whom the Emperor himself, as a
child of the Church, is in subjection. And this course and vicissitude of
obeying and commanding between both the powers, is by a singular president
declared of 3. Reg cap 1.
Solomon, who feared not to pronounce Abiathar the high Priest guilty of death,
because he had a hand in the treason of Adoniah. For the story says, The King
also said to Abiathar the Priest. Go thy ways to Auathoth, to thy house, and
surely thou shall die: but to day, I will not slay thee, because thou have
carried the Ark of the Lord, before David my father, and have endured trouble,
in all those things, wherein my father was troubled. Therefore Solomon
dismissed Abiathar, that he should not be a Priest of the Lord. Behold how
Solomon shows, that in a civil and temporal business he had authority over
the Priests, whereas notwithstanding it is evident that in the old law the
Priests were over the Kings, and used to command, and also to withstand them,
in all things which belonged to the worship of God and the Priestly function.

But for that Bellarmine would feign have it Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 29.
that Solomon did this not as a King, but as a Prophet and an executioner of
divine justice, I require some proof of this interpretation, seeing it
appears no where by the Scriptures, and therefore rests upon mere conjecture
only. For in that place, there is no mention made, neither of any commandment
specially given by the Lord, nor of any extraordinary power delegated unto him,
but rather the clean contrary, Solomon himself declares openly enough, that
he executed this judgment as King according to the ordinary power of the
government which he en^o^ed in the right of his kingdom, by using this
preface: The Lord lives, who has established me, and placea me upon the
throne of David my father.

And indeed the whole business was not spiritual or Ecclesiastike but
temporal and politic only, wherein Solomon knew very well that the King as
King was the lawful and ordinary judge, and therefore we do not read, that by
one interest he gave judgment upon Adoniah, and by an other upon Abiathar.
Again where Bellarmine to strengthen his interpretation takes hold of those
words, vtim^leatur sermo Domini, etc. it is very slight I will not say absurd,
for what belongs this to the manner of fulfilling? who knows not that the
same speech of the Scripture, is as well verified of that, which is performed
after an usual law, and an ordinary authority, as in this place, as of that,
which is fulfilled either extraordinarily by some wonderful event, or by the
impiety and tyranny of men? The wicked when they crucified our Savior, (...).
divided his garments, that it might be fulfilled, which is spoken by the
Prophet, or, that the Scripture might be fulfilled (...).
. Therefore such kind of words are wont to be added in the Scriptures, to show
the truth of the prediction and prophecy so as to draw an argument from hence
to gather an other matter, must seem very ridiculous and childish. Indeed
Solomon in that case, was the executer of the divine justice. I allow it: he
was a Prophet also, it is true, and what then? And yet we read that he did
that, by his kingly authority, and common or ordinary power, and none, not the
least mention made of any special commandment. Neither is there any place in
Scriptures, where we may read that this jurisdiction, was by special name
committed to him. Moreover it is not likely, that the author of the story,
being inspired with the holy ghost, would without any touch or warning pass
over so different causes of so great a business and of so great weight, if so
be the King had passed his judgment by virtue of one power and authority,
against Adoniah being a lay person, and another against Abiathar a Priest.

In like sort the same learned man is deceived, when he says. That it is no
wonder, if in the old testament the sovereign Eod. lib. 17. cap.
power, was temporal, in the new spiritual, because in the old testament the
promises were only temporal, and in the new spiritual and eternal. For
neither in the old testament was the sovereign power altogether temporal,
neither is spiritual in the new. But each in his own kingdom, that is, in
the jurisdiction of his own power, as is most meet, did then bear sway, and
at this time rules: even then, say I, both of them contented with their own
precincts, abstained from that, which was not their own, that neither the
temporal power, invaded the spiritual jurisdiction, and Priestly function,
nor the spiritual pressed upon the temporal as in their own right. Now that
right which Solomon did show at that time to belong to Princes temporal over
the Clergy, is acknowledged and retained by Kings in the new law and in the
christian common wealth. From hence came those privileges, which diverse
Princes, excelling in devotion and piety; granted to Ecclesiastike persons
Extant in Cod. et Decret atque in lust eccles.
. For to what end were privileges given to them, if by a common right they
were not subject to kings? seeing that, they who are defended and exempted by
the common aid, and by mere law, have no need of any privilege, or
extraordinary help I. incous. 16 D^de minor. l. 1 de constit. princi.
.

And with these agree, even those things, which Bellarmine himself does most
rightly (...) against the Canonists. That the exemption of the Clergy in
civil causes, as well touching their persons as touching their goods; was
brought in by the law of man, and not of God, and he confirms it both by the
authority of the Apostle whose that same rule so much celebrated, Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, as well includes the Clerikes as the
Laikes, by Chrysostomes testimony) and also by the testimony of the ancient
Fathers: and lastly, in that as he says, No word of God can be brought forth
whereby this exemption can be confirmed. And I add this as a most pregnant
argument of this truth, that in the most flourishing estate of the Church, and
under those Princes who acknowledged the Pope the Pastor of the universal
Church, and the Vicar of Christ, it was enacted and observed by the Imperial
laws, that the Clergy should answer before secular Judges touching civil
crimes, and be condemned by them, if they were found guilty of the crime laid
against them (...). 3. Sitamen. ^^at. 6.
. And indeed, least we mistake, we must understand, that not all these
privileges of persons and businesses, which at this day the Clergy enjoys,
were granted by the same Princes, nor at the same time. For first Constantinus
Magnus endowed them with this singular privilege only, that they should not
be obnoxious to nominations and susceptions, that is that being nominated or
elected they should not be constrained to bear office, or to undertake any
wardship, or to take any office which concerned the collection or receipt of
Victual or Tribute: whereas before they were called to all these things
without exception as well as any other Citizens. In the eight year after, by
the same Prince his favor they obtained immunitie and excuse from all Civil
functions, as appears by the Constitutions of the same Emperor (...) and 2.
Cod. Theod. de Epist. and Cler^^. li. 16.
; wherein he gives this reason of his privilege: Least the Clergy by the
sacrilegious malice of certain men might be called away from divine service.
And surely it is a thing worth the marking, against the unthankful ras^nesse
of certain Clerikes, who can endure to ascribe the beginning of their
immunities to the courtesy and gift of secular Princes, because the same godly
Princes does term those exemptions Privileges; for thus he: By the faction
of heretical persons we find, that the Clerikes of the Catholic Church, are
so vexed, that they are oppressed with certain Nominations or Susceptions,
which the common custom requires against the privileges granted to them.
Afterward Constantius and Constance about the year thirty six from the
granting of the first privilege, Arbitio and Lollianus being Consuls, granted
an other privilege to the Bishops, that they should not be accused of any
Crimes before seculr Judges I mansu^tudinis 12. cod. tit.
But other persons of the Ecclesiastical order, inferior to Bishops, that is,
Clerks and Monks, continued unto Iustinianus his time under the jurisdiction
of civil Magistrates; and for the same cause Leo and Anthemius Emperors,
(about 60 years before Iustinianus his Empire) ordained by way of favor, That
Priests and Clerks, of the orthodoxall Faith, of what degree soever, or Monks
in civil causes should not be drawn by the sentence of any Judge greater or
less, out of the Province or place or Country, which they inhabit; but that
they may answer the Actions of all men that have cause of suite against them
before their ordinary Judges, that is, the Governors of the Provinces. Behold
how these being godly and catholic Princes, affirm that the ordinary Judges
of the Clerks and Monks are the Presidents of the Provinces, whom
notwithstanding none of the Fathers or Bishops of that age challenged that they
were in the wrong, or that they did not speak truly, holily, and orthodoxally.
Whereby it is plain, that they conceived too peruersly of Iustinianus, who
affirmed that he usurped any Jurisdiction over the Laikes, whereas they are to
give him very great thanks, that he was the first of the Emperors, who
exempted the Clergy, (being before that time altogether subject to civil
Magistrates) from secular judgment in civil Causes. Which things being thus,
it is plain enough, that secular Kings and Princes, are endued with sovereign
power temporal, and that the Clergy is subject unto them in Civil affairs.
Otherwise truly, neither could Kings have granted those privileges: nor holy
and wise men, would have provided so ill for themselves and the whole Church,
that being of them selves absolute and free, and loose from the bands of
temporal power, would suffer themselves to be brought into Obligation for
these manner of Courtesies and Privileges, for they plainly acknowledged that
they were in their power and jurisdiction, by whom they could be endowed with
such a manner of liberty, for that cannot be loosed and exempted, which was
not bound or concluded before. Besides, the Princes thorough out the world,
were at that time of so great piety and devotion, that if they had either
found out by themselves, or understood by the Bishops or Princes of the
Priests, that by the law of God, the Clerikes were free from secular
Jurisdiction, they would forthwith have provided and enacted laws and Edicts
for the same, nor have challenged any title or interest either to their persons
or goods. For if out of an only zeal of devotion they gave away so frankely
and so profusely, even those things which they conceived to be their own, how
much more would they have abstained and held their hands from those things
which by no title or right were due unto them.

Therefore the exemptions and privileges, which christian Princes have granted
to Ecclesiastike persons, for honor and reverence unto them, do sufficiently
declare, yea convince, that those Princes are greater then all Priests in
temporal power, nor that the chief Bishop and Prince of Priests, and even the
Vicar of Christ is exempted for other reason, and reputed as a privileged
person, but that he is a temporal Prince also, and sustaines a two fold
person, the one of Peter's succession in the government of the Church, the other
of asecular Prince in a temporal jurisdiction, which he has received by the
liberality of other Princes.

CHAP. XVI.
BY the same reason may the difference be overthrown manifestly, which he
puts between heathen Princes and Christian Princes, as far as concerns
temporal Domination over Ecclesiastike persons: which place I cannot now pass
by in silence without blam. For he says that the Lib. 2 de Roman. Pontif. cap.
29.
Bishop was subject (Ciuiliter and de facto) to Heathen Princes: Because
Christian law depriues no man of his right and inheritance. Therefore as before
the law of Christ men were subject to Emperors and Kings, so also they were
after. But when Princes became Christians, and of their accord received the
laws of the Gospel, presently they subjected themselves to the President of
the Ecclesiastike Hierarchy, as sheep to the Pastor and members to the head,
and therefore afterward ought to be judged by him, and not to judge him.

It is an exceeding great fault in disputing, to take those things which are
enunciated of any one subject, for a certain cause: or are removed from one
subject for a certain cause, and to attribute or detract them to, or from
another thing diverse and unlike, and to which the same cause does not agree: or
indistinctly and confusedly to shuffle those things together in the conclusion,
which ought to be severed and parted by some distinction. Which fault who
cannot plainly deprehend, in this former reasoning of Bellarmine? in which
that is indefinitly and generally concluded of both the kinds of power and
judgment, which ought truly and rightly to have been enunciated of one of
them alone.

For that Princes converted to Christ, submit themselves as sheep to the
Pastor, and members to the head, that cannot without wilful cavil be
understood but of Spiritual subjection: since they were not made his children
or sheep in other respect, then for that they were by the same spirit
regenerate in Jesus Christ, and governed by the faith of the Church. Therefore
in all matters, which belong to spiritual jurisdiction, it is true that they
ought to be judged by him, and not he by them. But this submission what is it
to Civil judgment and temporal jurisdiction? Was it fit to (...) and
confound together matters of so diverse and differe it kinds? And that which
might truly be affirmed of one of them alone, to pronounce generally and
indefinitly of them both? If he had said, and therefore ought to be judged of
(...) spiritual matters, but not to judge him afterward, surely he had
concluded his argument very well. But that same simple and absolutely, ab illo
eos iudicari posse, is a (...) collection. For there is a twofould kind of
judgment, whereof by the one only Princes may be judged by the Pope: but by
the other, the Pope himself might be judged by them, but that he had obtained
a temporal government which is subject to none other.

I pray you tell me, when Constantinus Magnus came to the Church, did the
Roman Empire, which before his Baptism was his, did it by and by pass into
the hands and power of Siluester the Pope? and the Emperor, who was a man that
affected glory so much, did he acknowledge the temporal power of that Pope
over him? Did either Clodouaeus transfer the kingdom of France, or Donaldus of
Scotland, or others their kingdoms into the temporal power and jurisdiction
of the Pope, as soon as they had embraced the faith? That same caveat of
Paulus, the Ciuilian is good: 1. Si vnus 27. ante omnia. D. depist.
Above all things we must take heed, least a contract made in another matter,
or with another person, hurt in another matter or another person. Therefore let
Bellarmine search as much as he list, the Annals and Records of all Nations,
let him read through all Scriptures and Stories, he shall find amongst them no
one step, whereby it may be gathered, that those christian Princes, when they
gave their names to the Church, did submit their Scepters to the Pope and did
specially and by name a bandon their sovereign temporal Magistracy? But it
must appear that Princes wittingly and knowingly did descend and give
themselves into the dition and authority temporal of the Pope; or we must
confess, that as much as concerned regal dignity, they remained after
Baptism in the same power and condition, wherein they were before they
received holy imitation of Christianity, for as he witnesses himself, the
law of Christ depriues no man of his right and peculiar fee. But before they
gave their name to Christ, of right and in fact, as he says, they exercised
civil authority over the Pope, and might lawfully judge him in temporal
Cases: therefore they might likewise do it lawfully after Baptism. Which if
it be so, it cannot be by any means, that they should be judged by him in
temporal matters, seeing it is impossible, that any man should be superior
and inferior in the same kind of authority, and in respect of one and the
same thing. It is true that those christian Princes, for the reverence they
bare not only to the Pope, but also to all other Bishops, yea and Priests
also, did very seldom put that judgment in practice: But this argues a want
of will only, and not of power also. Wherefore as a Consul or President when
he yields himself to adoption, transferres none of those rights, which belong
to him by his office, into the family and power of his adoptiue father,
neither can transfer them, but reserues them all entirely to himself; so
Princes in the beginning having delivered themselves into the spiritual
adoption of the ecclesiastike Hierarchy, could by that act loose none of those
things, which belonged to the right of a kingdom, and their public civil
estate: for that the nature of these powers is divided, so as although being
yoaked and coupled together they did very htlv and handsomely frame together in
the same christian Commonwealth: yet neither of them as it is such, is subject
or master to the other, and neither does necessarily follow and accompany the
other, but each may be both obtained, and also lost or kept without the other.

But now because the learned Bellarmine is very much delighted with
similitudes, and besides proves thy common opinion de indirect a potestate
temporals summ^ Pontificis, by no testimony either of Scriptures or of ancient
Fathers: but only by certain reasons fetched a simili (a very poor and weak
foundation to build a demonstration upon I think I shall not do amiss, by a
similitude of much more fitness to confirm also our opinion of this matter.

The son of the family, although he go to wars, and bear public office
and charge, is by the law of God and man subject to his Father, in whose sacred
household power he is yet abiding Ephesians. 6. (...). 3.
. And again the father, who has this power over his son, is subject to his
son as a magistrate, but (...) another kind of power. For the one, as he is a
Parent challenges authority over his son, whereby he may correct, chastise,
and punish him offending and committing any thing against the laws of the
family, or practicing any thing against himself, or otherwise doing that which
is unworthy and unfitting a good son, not by the right of a Magistrate, but,
by the authority of his fatherly power; and not with every kind of punishment,
but only with certain, which are allowed by the law. Therefore, if his son
deserve ill, he may disherit him, cast him out of the house, deprive him of the
right of the family and kindred, and chastise him with other domestical
remedies (...).
. But he can not disanull his Magistracy, nor take from him his goods in the
camp, nor condemn him by a public judgment; neither inflict any other mulct
or pain due for his fault by the law, either directly, or indirectly, because
this course exceeds the measure and jurisdiction of a fatherly power: But the
other, although a son, and obliged by the fathers bond, yet as he is a
Magistrate in public authority, rules over his father, and in public
affairs, and even in private (so be it they be not domestical) may command
him as well as other Citizens (...).
. If there be a son of a family, says Vlpian, and bear an office, he may
constrain his father in whose power he is, suspectum dicentem haereditatem
adire and restituers. From hence, if the son of the family be Consul, or
President, he may either be emancipated or given into adoption before himself
Lib 3. De adopt.
. For which cause the father is no less bound then if he were a stranger, not
only to obey his son, being in office, but also to rise to him, and to honor
him with all the respect and honor, which belongs to the Magistrate (...).
lib. 24. val Matthew. 2. ca 2. (...) apoth Rom Cell. lib 2. ca. 2.
.

In the very same manner the Pope, who is the spiritual father of all
Christians, by his fatherly Ecclesiastike power as the Vicar of Christ does
command Kings and Princes, as well as the rest of the faithful: and in that
respect, if Kings commit any thing against God or the Church, he may sharply
chastise them with spiritual punishments, cast them out of the house and
family of God, and disinherit them of the kingdom of heaven (most fearful
and terrible punishments for christian hearts to think on) because all these
things are proper to his fatherly power spiritual. But neither can he take
from them, temporal principality and domination, nor inflict civil
punishments upon them, because he has obtained no civil and temporal
jurisdiction over them, by which such manner of chastisement ought to be
exercised: as also for that, the fatherly power spiritual, wherewith the Pope
is furnished is very far divided from the civil and temporal in ends,
offices, and even in persons also. For God as he has committed spiritual
power to the Pope and the other Priests, so also has he given the civil by an
everlasting (...)tion to the King and the Magistrates, which be under him.
There is no power but of God. Romans 13.


To this place belongs that ancient gloss, which the Cardinal of Cusa lib 3.
de concord. cathol. ca. 3.
writes that it was assured to the Canon. Hadrianus Papa 63. in which Canon it
is delivered, that the Pope with the whole Synod, granted to Charles the great,
the honor of the Patriciate. For the gloss said that a Patrician was a father
to the Pope in temporalities, as the Pope was his father in spiritualities. And
the same Cardinal in the same book speaking of the electers of the Cap. 4.
Germane Emperors: from whence the electors, says he, who in the time of Henry
the second were appointed by the common consent of all the Almans, and others
who were subject to the Empire, have a radical power from that common consent
of all men, who might by the law of nature constitute an Emperor over them: not
from the Bishop of Rome, who has no authority to give a King or Emperor to any
Province in the world, without the consent of the same. The same Cardinal,
being himself, both a great Diume and Philosopher, adds many other things in
that place, by which he confirms our distinction and declares, that Emperors
and Kings are both over and under the Popes. And thus much touching the first
reason of Bellarmine, and the arguments brought by him to prove the same.

CHAP. XVII.
THe second reason follows, which is concluded by two fould arguments. The
second reason, says he, the Ecclesiastike Commonweal ought to be perfect,
and in it self sufficient in order to her end. For such are all Commonweals,
rightly founded: therefore ought she to have all power necessary to attain
her end. But the power to use and to dispose of temporal matters, is necessary
to this Spiritual end: because otherwise wicked Princes might with impunity
nourish Heretics, and ouerturne religion: therefore she has this power also.
Again, every Commonwealth, because it ought to be perfect and sufficient in
it self, may command another Commonwealth, which is not subject to it, and
constrain it to change the Government, yea even to depose her Prince, and to
appoint another, when it cannot otherwise defend it self, from her ininries:
therefore much more may the Spiritual Commonweal command the Temporal
Commonweal, being subject to her, and force it to change the Government, and
to depose the Princes and appoint others, seeing she cannot otherwise maintain
her Spiritual good.

I answer, that here are so many faults in this place, as it seems that the
Author did either idly and carelessly transcribe all this out of some other,
or if it be all his own, that he did not very well remember those things,
which he had said before. For a little before, when as he labored by another
argument to prove, that the Civil power is subject to the Ecclesiastike, he
affirmed that these powers were parts only of one Commonwealth, and that they
did constitute only one Commonwealth. The first reason, says he, is thus: The
Civil power is subject to the Spiritual power, because each of them is a part
of the same Christian Commonwealth. And again, secondly Kings Bishops, and
Clerikes and Laikes do not make two Commonwealths but one. But in this place
he quite changes these two Powers into two Commonwealths, which therefore
ought to be so severed and disioyned, as that Kings and Laikes do make a
Politic and Temporal Commonwealth: Bishops and Clerikes a Spiritual or
Ecclesiastike: then which nothing could be spoken more absurdly or unfitly for
the present purpose. For either he speaks in this place of an Ecclesiastike
power, which is wholly severed from the Civil power, as it was once in the time
of the Apostles, and now is in those places, where Christians lay amongst
Heathen and Infidesl: in which case it is evident that the Power or
Commonwealth Ecclesiastike, as he calls it, or the Prince and Hierarch
thereof has no authority at all, not so much as Spiritual over the Civil
Prince: because he is not a child of the Church. 1. ad Corin. 5.
Or he speaks of the power Ecclesiastike joined with the Civil, as in a
Christian Commonwealth, and then he does wrong to make her two
Commonwealths, one Ecclesiastike and the other Politic, when as they be
only two powers of one Christian Commonwealth, and parts and members of one
Church and Mystical body of Christ, as himself delivered before.

Further it is false which he assumes. That the power to use and to dispose of
temporal matters, is necessary to a spiritual end, etc. For the Prince of the
Apostles himself openly teaches, that he had no such manner of authority over
the temporalities of Christians except those, which themselves of their own
accord, did confer and offer to the Church, when he says, Act. 5.
Ananias, why has Satan tempted thy heart, that thou should lie to the holy
Spirit, and defraud of the price of the field? Whilst it remained, did it not
belong to thee, and being sold was it not in thy power? If the Apostles had
had power to dispose of the temporalties of Christians, Peter surely had not
said, Did it not? etc. and when as Ananias might presently have replied: yes,
you had power to dispose of my goods, and therefore fearing least you would
take from me more then was cause, I concealed part of the price. But because
the Church had not this power, therefore without cause did he lie to the holy
Ghost. And how, if out of this foundation of Bellarmine it should follow, that
the primitive Church had not all necessary power to attain unto her end? for,
for the space of 300 years and more, wherein she lived under heathen Princes,
after the passion of Christ, she never had this power to dispose of Christians
temporalties: in which time notwithstanding, it is most certain, that an
infinite multitude of men and almost the greatest part of the world, had given
their names to Christ, and that a more severe and strict discipline reigned in
the Church, then at any time beside, that it is impious to say, that the Church
was not then furnished with all necessary means of Right and of Fact to
attain her end, for the works of God are perfect. And surely he should do
Christ no small injury, who thinks that the Church is by him left and
delivered to the Apostles, destitute of necessary means for her preservation.
Whatsoever was necessary for the Church to attain her end, was abundantly and
plentifully bestowed by Christ on his Apostles when he said: Ego dabo vobis os,
and sapientiam, cui non poterunt resistere, and contradicere omnes aduersarij
vestri Luk 21.
. Therefore, whosoever conceiues that Christ recommended his Church to Peter,
and willed him thrice to feed his Lambs and Sheep, and supposes that for
the feeding of those sheep, and to the accomplishing of the end of his
commandment, he did not grant them all things necessary both in Right and in
Fact, he seems to me no better then an Atheist, and to doubt of the
providence, power and goodness of God. Let us imagine that he did not give all
power necessary for the execution of so great a charge; can any other reason
why he did not, be assigned, then for because either the Lord knew not what was
needful, or had no ability in him to give it, or (which is a point of
extreme malice,) he meant to deceive his servants and friends, by enioyning
that duty unto them, which he knew very well that they were never able to
perform. By these things, it is clear, that the temporal authority and
power to depose Princes, is no way necessary for the Church to attain her end:
although in humane consideration, it may seem sometimes to be profitable. For
God, who has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and
has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the strong 1. Cor. 1.
, knowing that his Church only stood in need of spiritual arms, did so from
the beginning furnish her with them, that she overcame all humane power and
might, so as it might be said truly: a Domino factum est illud and est mirabile
in oculis nostris Psalm. 117.
. S. Bernard writes excellently, (as he does always,) to Eugenius the Pope
Lib. 4. c. 3.
: This is Peter, who was not at any time known to walk clad in silks, or
adorned with precious stones, not covered with gold, nor carried on a white
steed, nor waited on with a guard of soldiers, nor compassed with troops of
servants attending on him: and yet he thought that without these, that
wholesome Commandment might be discharged Siamas me, pasce oues meas: herein
thou have succeeded not to Peter but to Constantine. Therefore although the
temporal power whereof we speak, may seem to men to be necessary for the
Church, yet to God it seemed neither necessary, nor profitable, peradventure
for that reason, which the success of matters and experience it self has
taught the posterity, least the Apostles and their successors trusting on
humane authority, should more negligently intend spiritual matters, and
should chiefly place their hope in arms and in a temporal authority and
might, which they ought to settle in the power of the word of God and in his
singular help. And indeed if a man would take a view in Story of the state of
the Church from the passion of Christ to this day, he shall see, altogether
that she grew very soon, and flourished very long, under Bishops that were
content with their own authority, that is, with spiritual jurisdiction: who
being the Disciples of the humility of Christ, judged, that the only strength
to defend the Church, did consist in the power of preaching the Gospel, and
the diligent observation of Ecclesiastike Discipline, without any mention of
temporal power. And again ^^om the time that certain Popes went about to
annex and adioine a sovereign temporal government to that spiritual
sovereignty which they had, that the Church decased every day, both in the
number of believers, and behavior and virtue of governors; and that same
severity of the ancient discipline being either remitted, or to speak more
truly, being omitted, that many Ministers of the Church discharged their
places more slothfully and carelessly then before.

I omit that if these men's reasons were good it would follow by contraries:
that the temporal common wealth, as they speak, has power to dispose of
spiritual matters, and to depose the sovereign Prince of the Ecclesiastike
common wealth: because, It ought to be perfect and sufficient in it self, in
order to her end, and to have all power necessary to attain to her end: But
the power to dispose of spiritual matters, and to depose the Prince
Ecclesiastike is necessary to the temporal end, because otherwise wicked
Ecclesiastical Princes, may trouble the state and quiet of a temporal common
wealth, and hinder the end of the civil government, as indeed diverse Popes
have been causes of much unquietness. Therefore the temporal Commonwealth
has this power. The consecution is utterly false and absurd, (for a temporal
Prince, as he is such a one has no spiritual power) and therefore the other
is false too, to which this by analogy is a consequent.

But as we use to speak, dare absurdum non est soluere argumentum: Therefore I
do answer otherwise to the former part of this second reason. That here be not
two commonweals as he supposes, but one only, wherein there be two powers,
or two Magistrates: the Ecclesiastike and the Politic, whereof each has those
things, which he does of necessity require to attain his end: the one his
spiritual, the other his temporal jurisdiction: and that neither this
jurisdiction is necessary to that power, nor that for this. Otherwise we must
confess, that each power is destitute of her necessary means, then when they
were severed, as sometimes they were: which I have already showed to be very
false, as well out of the end of the temporal or civil government, at it is
such Su. c. 14.
, as by the state of the Church, being established under heathen and infidel
Princes Sum hoc Capite.
. According to this manner, in one and the same civil policy I mean, in one
City or kingdom, many magistrates are found invested with diverse offices,
power and authority, who govern the common weal committed to them in parts,
every one of whom receives from the King or common wealth necessary power to
attain the end of their charge, so as none of them may or dare, invade and
arrogate to themselves, the jurisdiction and rule of an other. If the Consuls
want any part of the Tribunes power, or the Tribunes any of the Consular
jurisdiction, it can not be said therefore, that both have need of an others
power to compass their ends: for each office according to the ground of the
first institution is perfect and furnished with all necessary authority for the
execution of his charge.

Or to bring forth more known examples. As in one kingdom and under one King
there are two great offices, whereof the one the Chancellor, the other the
Constable has by commission from the King, (the one has (...) and the
special charge of the law and justice, the other the managing of arms, and
the government of all military discipline committed to him,) and each of them
according to the quality and condition of his office is absolute, and receives
from the King all authority necessary for the execution of his charge, and the
compassing of his end. Neither, if peradventure one of them either of
negligence or injury do hinder the course of the other, may he that is so
hindered by his proper authority disanull his office, or usurp his
jurisdiction, or to be short enforce him to amend his fault, but by lawful
means granted him by commission from the King: but it is requisite that each
complain to the King of others abuse, of whom they have received their
authority so distinguished in offices and function, that he may right him that
is wronged and determine by his own power and judgment the division of the
whole cause. Now so long as these officers do agree in the kingdom, the one
maintains an others authority, and uses of his own to supply that which is
wanting in the other.

But if a Countryman, to avoid judgment of law do depart into the Camp to
the Army, the aid of the Martial at arms being required, he is wont to be
sent back to the place, from whence he fled: and of the contrary, if one that
forsakes his Colors shall slip into the City, the City Magistrate being
requested by the Magistrate at arms, will by and by see him conueighed to the
Camp to be punished for his misdemeanour. But where they do disagree, they
give those wounds to the Commonwealth, which the Prince only can help and
cure: because it is not lawful for them to use another man's authority, and is
fitting for the one only to meddle in matter of arms, and for the other with
matter of justice. In the same manner two sovereign Magistrates of the
Christian Commonwealth, the King and the Pope, do receive from the common
King and Lord of all, the great God of Heaven and Earth; a diverse power, each
perfect in his kind, and govern the people by different jurisdictions and
offices. And these surely, so long as they agree together in concord of minds,
do naturally assist one another, to the maintenance and conservation of each
power and authority, so as both the Ecclesiastike power, does with the Heavenly
and Spiritual sword, strike such as be seditious and rebellious subjects to
their secular Prince, and in requital the power Temporal and Politic does
with an armed hand, pursue Schismatikes, and others falling from the faith, or
otherwise carrying themselves stubbornly toward their holy Mother the Church,
and does sharply chastise them with temporal punishments and civil
corrections: and Mulctes. But when they are rent into contrary factions, and
oppose themselves one against the other, the whole Christian Commonwealth
either wholly fales to ground, or at least is most grievously wounded: because
there is none but God alone, who can lawfully divide that cause, and redress
the wrong offered of either side.

CHAP. XVIII.
BEing desirous to pass on to other matters, I was a little staide, by a doubt
which did arise touching the sense of the late argument of the second reason,
which was conceived by the author in these words. Cap. proximo sum.
Also every Commonweal, because she ought to be perfect and sufficient in
hirselfe, may command another Commonwealth, not subject to her, and enforce
her to change her government, yea also to depose her Prince, and to ordain
another, being she cannot otherwise defend hirselfe from her injuries. For to
confess the truth, when I first read these words in him, I paused awhile, that
I might thoroughly understand the meaning of these words, and what the moment
and weight of this argument might be. For he seemed not plainly and expressly to
approve it, because he did lay open to us certain means of forceing a
Neighbor Commonwealth, and deposing the Prince thereof. And when I had a long
time skanned and examined the same, I resolved that either it was a riddle, or
that his words do admit this sense and interpretation. Every Commonweal may
denounce and wage a just war against another Commonwealth, which bears both
hatred and arms against her, when as she cannot otherwise deliver hirselfe
from her injury, and if she be the stronger may by force and arms force her
to conditions of peace: and if she suppose that by that Caution she has not
yet provided sufficiently for her security (because peradventure she has to
do with a people that is by nature false and treacherous) may reduce the whole
Country into her power and jurisdiction, and give her laws and orders, remove
her Prince, take away her authority, and at her pleasure alter the whole
administration of the Commonwealth into another form. But if this be the true
sense of these words, as I suppose it is, that argument surely was to small
purpose brought of Bellarmine, for that is not gathered from hence, which he
concludes forsooth. Much more may the Spiritual Commonwealth, command the
Temporal Commonwealth, being subject unto her, and force her to change her
administration, and to depose Princes, and ordain others, etc. Because in this
case there be not two Commonwealths, but only one Christian, resting on two
powers, whereof neither is subject to other, as we have above sufficiently
demonstrated: as also, for that if we grant, that they are two Commonwealths
distinct, the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, and the Temporal, he must of
force confess, that in the one all Bishops and Clerikes only are comprised, in
the other all secular Princes and Laikes; or that this is compounded of only
Ecclesiastikes, that of only Laikes. For although the Laikes and Clerikes
together, do constitute one Church and one christian Commonweal, yet they
do not make together one Ecclesiastike and spiritual Commonwealth, as it is
distinguished from the temporal: nor one temporal and secular Commonwealth,
but according to the division and separation above named, the Laikes make the
temporal, and the Ecclesiastikes the spiritual: in the case wherein the
temporal is distinguished from the spiritual after this manner. But now
seeing the Ecclesiastike commonwealth, contains only Clerikes, whose weapons
ought to be none other, but Prayers and Tears, how can it be, that she being
weak and unarmed can compel (but by Miracle) a temporal Commonweal armed,
to change the manner of her administration?

Therefore there is nothing more fond then this comparison and consequution of
Bellarmine, since in reasoning he proceeds: from Commonwealths well provided
for exercise and furniture of arms, to Commonwealths, the one whereof is
utterly disfurnished of arms. For as often as one State either repelleth the
injuries, which another would offer, or reuengeth them, being offered, she
fights with those arms, which are allowed her, and which by law of arms she
may use: that is to say, Corporal and Visible, by force whereof she ouerturnes
the bodies of her enemies, inuades their holds, battereth towns, and
overthrows the whole state of the enemy Commonwealth. But the spiritual
Commonweal, which he calls, is quite destitute of this kind of arms, and
because it is composed of Clerikes only, it is lawful for her, to fight with
spiritual arms only, which are, Prayers and Tears, for such are the
defenses of Priests: in no other manner neither ought they, neither can they
resist Can. non pila. can. conuentor. 23. q 8.
For all of them are commanded in the person of Peter to put up the Material
sword. How then can the spiritual Commonwealth constrain the temporal
Commonwealth, which contemnes the spiritual thunder-boltes, that she should
change the manner and form of her Administration or depose her Prince, and
ordain another? Now if any peradventure do propound, that the Ecclesiastike
Commonwealth should be assisted in the execution of so great a matter, by the
humane forces of secular men, (for Princes and all other Christians ought to be
Nurses and defenders of the Church) he will be answered out of hand, that in
that case the Ecclesiastike Commonwealth, does not constrain the temporal
commonweal, but is only the Cause, wherefore an other State temporal, by
whose help that spiritual one is defended and protected, does revenge the
wrong done unto the Church. In no other manner than if the whole Commonwealth
should revenge an injury or a slaughter received in the person of one Citizen.
Even as it is recorded, that the rest of the Tribes of Israel, did wage a
bitter and a grievous war against the Beniamites, for rauishing the wife of
one Leuite Iud. cap. pen. and ^. ^.
. So the Graecians in times past revenged Menclaus his injury, with the ruin
of Troy. And the Romans punished with a sharp war, Teuca, Queen of the
(...), for the murder executed on L. Coruncanus; forced the Queen to depart
out of Illiricum, and to pay a great yearly tribute (...). 2.
. Will any man here say, that the ^e^ia^ites, Troianes, Illyrians, were
vanquished and repressed by the Leuite, Menclaus or Coruncanus, now dead, and
not rather by them who for their sakes took arms and punished the enemies? In
like manner will any say, it is the ecclesiastike Commonwealth, which bridles
and reduces into order, the temporal, playing upon them with much injurious
and insolent demeanor: and not rather an other temporal state, which enters
in arms for the sake of the Ecclesiastike republique; and without whose help,
the Church her self and all her Orders would lie trodden and trampled under
foot? What if there be no temporal state, which will or dare contest with
this state which is enemy to the Ecclesiastike commonwealth? by what means
then will she revenge herself? To use few words: although we grant them their
comparison and conclusion, there can nothing be made of it, but that the Pope
has such a power to dispose of temporal matters of Christians, and to depose
Princes, as either the King of France is known to have over the English,
Spaniards, or other neighbor people, who do him wrong, or any of these upon
the State and Kings of France, if they have offended them, which power in what
manner, and of what proportion it is, can only be determined and decided by
the sword.

CHAP. XIX.
THese although they may suffice for the refuting of the second reason, yet
least in these writings of this most learned man, I should pass over any
thing, which because it is either untouched, or negligently handled, might
beget any error, or cast any scruple into the Reader, it is a matter worth the
pains to examine and sift, what that might be which for the strengthening of
his reason he brings out of S. Bernard, in the books de Consid. ad Eugen Lib.
4. c. 3
. Bernard indeed advises that the material sword is to be exercised by the
soldiers hand at the beck of the Priest and commandment of the Emperor,
which we surely confess, for wars both are undertaken more justly, and
discharged more happily, when the Ecclesiastical holiness does agree and
conspire with kingly authority. But we must note, he attributes only to the
Priest a Beck, that is, the consent and desire to wage war; but to the
Emperor the commandment and authority. Whereby it is evident, that he
speaks in no other respect, that the Material sword belongs to the Church,
then for that in a Christian estate, although the authority and command for
war be in the power of Emperors, Kings and Princes, yet wars are with more
justice waged, where the consent of the Ecclesiastike power comes in, which
being guided by the spirit of God, can more sharply and truly judge between
right and wrong, godly, or ungodly. But what if the Emperor will not draw his
sword at the beck of the Priest? nay what if he shall draw it against the
Priests beck and assent? does S. Bernard in this case give to the Priest any
temporal power over the Emperor? (for this is it which we seek in this
place, and whereon our whole disputation turns) surely none at all. But he
rather teaches, that none belongs to him, whenas he says, that the
Material sword, (by which sword the sovereign power temporal is signified)
may not be exercised by the Church: but only by the hand of the soldier, and
commandment of the Emperor. Which same point Gratianus delivers more plainly,
being almost S. Bernards equal. Imperium D. de (...) Pan^. ca. 13. ad Romans
When Peter, says he, who was first of all the Apostles chosen by the Lord,
did use the material word, that he might defend his Master from the injury of
the Jews, he heard, Turn thy c 23 q ^. in (...).
sword into the seabbard, for every one, who takes the sword, shall perish by
the sword, as if it had been told him openly: Hitherto it was lawful for the
and thy Predecessors to prosequ^te the enemies of God with the temporal sword:
hereafter for an example of Patience turn thy sword, that is hitherto granted
to thee, into the scabbard: and yet exercise the spiritual sword which is the
word of God, in the kiling of thy former life, for every one besides him or his
authority, who uses lawful power, who as the Apostle says, (...). 13.
bears not the sword without cause, to whom also every soul ought to be
subject: I say every one, who without such a warrant receives the sword, shall
perish by the sword.

If these of Bernard and Gratian be true, it can by no means be, that the
Pope should with any right exercise temporal power upon the Emperor, or other
secular Princes: for it cannot be exercised but by the sword, and the sword
cannot be by the soldier drawn, but by their commandment: and so this
temporal power, would prove utterly vain and unprofitable in the person of
the Pope, when as the execution thereof should be denied him. Unless some
Emperor perchance should be besotted with so fatal a fatuitie, that he would
command the soldiers to bear arms against himself; or should be endued with
so great sanctity and justice, that he do by his edict signify that they
should not spare himself if he should offend. Hitherto belongs that, which S.
Ambrose writes, ^^b 10 comment in Euan. Luca
The law says he, forbids not to strike, and therefore peradventure Christ
said to Peter, offering two swords. It is enough, as though it were lawful
until the Gospel, that there might be in the Law an instruction of equity,
in the Gospel perfection of goodness.

Besides we must understand, that that place of the Gospel, touching two
swords, which they object unto us, is not ^ Lut. 22.
necessarily to be understood of the Temporal and Spiritual swords, yea that
it is far more agreeable to the speech of our Savior in that place, that it
should be understood of the Spiritual sword, and the sword of the Passion: as
Amb. expounds it learnedly and holily in that place. For Christ in that last
speech with the Disciples before his Passion, admonished them, that they should
be sent to preach the Gospel, of a few other manner of conditions after his
death came they should receive this commandment, Euntes in Mundum vniuersum
predicate Euangelium vniuersae ^ Mare. 16.
Creaturae: then before they had been sent by him, when as yet he lived with
them in the earth: as if he had said, hitherto I have so sent you as you have
needed neither bag, nor girdle, nor shoes, but hereafter I will send you to
preach the Gospel: and you will have need of a bag and a scrip, to wit of
Care and Patience: and also of the two swords, the Spiritual and that of the
Passion, whereof it is said. Lut. 2.
A sword shall pierce thy soul, for there is a Spiritual sword, (says
Ambrose in that place) that thou should sell thy patrimony, purchase the
word whereby the naked inward reins of the soul are clothed and furnished.
There is also a sword of the Passion, that thou put of thy body, that with the
cast clothes of thy flesh sacrifised, thou may buy a crown of Martyrdom,
which thou may gather out of the blessings of the Lord, who preached that it
was the sum of all Crowns, if a man suffer persecution for righteousness.
Lastly, that you may know of what passion he spoke, least he should trouble the
minds of his Disciples, he brought forth the example touching himself,
saving: Because as yet, that which is written ought to be fulfilled in me: that
he was reputed with the iniust. Isaia 53.
Thus he, To which I will at last adioyne, that Bellarmine himself, in the
books, de summo Pontifice, Lib. 5. cap. 3.
proves that it is not the meaning of that place of the Gospel, that it
should be understood of the Spiritual and Temporal sword. I answered, says
he, that no mention is made in that place of the Gospel, of the Spiritual and
Temporal sword of the Pope, but only that by those words the Lord would
admonish his Disciples that in the time of his passion they should be in those
straightes, and in that fear, wherein they are wont to be, who are glad to
sell their c^ate to buy them a sword withal. Where upon he affirms, that S.
Bernard, and Pope Boniface the viij. did mystically only interpret this place
of the two swords.

Which seeing it is so, and that it is certain both by the interpretation of
the Fathers, and also by the confession of Bellarmine himself, that the words
of our Savior, are not truly, properly, and strictly to be taken of those
swords, (about which all our swords are drawn, and we together by the ears)
surely then that speech of Bernard is very wrongfully alleged, to prove that
the Pope in any case has Temporal power over Christian Princes, or that the
Temporal sword is under the Spiritual sword; the which neither S. Bernard
says there, neither ^^uld so say without wresting and perverting the place.
Therefore although we grant never so much, that the place is to be understood
mystically of the Spiritual and Temporal sword, yet that exposition of
Bernards will only work thus much, that we may understand, that Christian
Kings and Princes, ought to wage war for the Church, by the Counsel of the
Church or of the Pope. Which no sober man will ever deny. And so Christ (if in
this manner we understand his words mystically) two swords being showed said,
Satis est. not to signify that one sword should be subject to the other: or
that both of them should be in the hand of the Pope and the Priests, (for that
exposition is faulty, and is repugnant both to right reason, and also to the
doctrine of the ancient Fathers, wherein it is taught that Kings and Emperors,
have God only for their superior in temporalities) but to admonish us, that
there should be at the last in the Christian Commonwealth a meeting and
concourse of both the swords, Spiritual and Temporal, when Princes should be
converted to the faith, and that by them two, the Church should be every way
protected and defended from injury.

But because we are fallen into this notable place of S. Bernard, I would wish
the reader by the way, diligently to consider with me, that which I know not,
whether any has observed heretofore. What is the reason that he, writing to
Eugenius the Pope of the temporal sword, first says, tuo forsitan nutu, etsi
non tua manu cuaginandus. Then a few lines after, does add, that the same
sword is to be used nutu sacerdotis: and adds not forsitan? Does that same,
forsitan, either abound in the former sentence, or fail in the latter: The
truth is, that the godly and wise man did it of purpose: that he might with
some finenesse distinguish the person of the Pope, from the pontifical or
sacerdotall authority and office, and teach, that it imports very much,
whether the Pope or Eugenius, although both Pope and Eugenius were the same,
do bid or forbid any thing. I mean whether the Pope, as a man obnoxious to
the perturbations of the mind, would have the sword drawn, not for the Church
according to the duty of his function: but by the instigation of a corrupt
affection: or as a Priest, that is, a good and holy man, do command or refuse
that the sword should be drawn and war waged, serving not his own turn, but
the profit of the Church. As if he should say o Eugenius, chief Bishop, the
temporal sword is not absolutely and simply to be drawn at thy commandment,
but peradventure; even then, when as for the evident commodity of the Church,
you shall advise them with wise and sound counsel who have the sword in their
power: but not then, when as out of the desire you have, either to practice
ancient enmity with any, or to power out any new conceived hatred, or to
satisfy any ambitious desire to rule, you shall purpose to set christian
Kings, and people by the ears, or to wage and bring any was upon them. For
that is a point of a Priest, this of a Man. For that is a meditation and action
of a Priest, this of a man; that of a Bishop, this of Eugenius, or some other
that holds the Bishops sea. That this was S. Bernards meaning in those words,
the actions of certain Bishops who have been beyond measure transported with
anger and pride, have plainly declared. But let us return to our purpose.

CHAP. XX.
THe third reason in Bellarmine is: It is not lawful for (...) to tolerate a
King that is an infidel or an be(...) vncendeauour to draw his subjects to
heresy or (...). But to judge whether a King do draw to heresy or (...)
Pope, to whom the charge of religion is committe^. Ergo, It belongs to the Pope
to judge, that a King is to be (...) not to be ^epo^ed. And he labors to
prove the proposition of this reason by three arguments.

Therefore I answer to that: That he says, that it is not (...) to tolerate a
King that is an heretic or an (...) etc. that this proposition is as false as
false may be: Otherwise all antiquity is to be condemned, which did bear with
great submission and patience, Kings heretical and infidel^, who went about to
destroy the Church of God; (...) propter con^cientiam; that is, not (...) that
they wanted strength to enforce ^icked (...) that they judged that they might
not by the law o^ God. But becau^^ we have in our books against the (...) and
also a^oue in this book, we have (...)
(...) hurtful and mischievous er^^^, there is no cause wh^ we should dwell
any long (...) the fa^^^ood thereof. It only remains that (...) show the
faults of the arguments, wherewith (...) to prove his false proposition.

I (...) first argument he f^tches out of Deuteron^mie; where the people is
forbidden to choose a King, which is not (...) brethren, that is, who is not a
Jew, least he d^aw them to idolatry: therefore also Christians, are forbidden
to (...) one that is no christian. Grant all this be true. Then (...) these
parts thus granted he proceeds in this (...) Again: It is equally dangerous
and hurtful to choose one that is not a Christian, and not to depose a non
Christian: as it is known. Ergo, Christians are bound not to suffer ever them a
King not Christian, if he endeavor to turn the people from the ^au^.

I answer, that this consequence is not good, and that by such vicious and
deceitful manner of arguing many are turned from the truth. Now the fallacy is
in this, that he determines and assumes for certain that there is law,
wheresoever the same hurt or danger is; which I shall prove presently to be
most false. Neither is it like that, which the (...) deliver, v^^ ^adem ratio
est, ^us idem esse (...). I ill^d 32 D ad lig. Aquil.
. Therefore we must observe, that he does not sa^e, (...) demp^^^att esse,
eligere non Christianum and non deponere non Christianum: that it is as faulty
or unlawful, etc. which if he had said I had denied the antecedent: but he
says (...) esse that it is as hurtful and dangerous etc. whence he does falsely
gather that Christians are ^ound not to suffer over them a King that is no
Christian. For it follows not, where the same harm and danger is, that the
same power to do any thing is granted to the party who is (...) or endangered,
nor where equal harm and danger is, there also is equal sin or merit; and
this may be easily proved by examples. He that re(...) ounds, or is spoiled of
his goods, suffers the same danger and mischief, whether it be by force from a
robber, or a wandering soldier, or that he be oppressed of a Magistrate by an
unjust sentence. But the same remedy is not provided against both these, to run
upon a robber, and to kill him, in defense of himself and his goods, it is
very lawful I. vt vim D. de just. and tur. c. 2. de homicid. L. 2. C. quando
lice at vnu^ique.
, reserving as they say, the moderation of the defensive resistance, that it be
without blame. But it is not likewise lawful to resist a Magistrate, who
according to the power of his jurisdiction had passed an unjust sentence
against him, by reason of the authority which judgments and matters judged use
to have. Mark I pray you, although in both respects, there be the like harm
and loss to him that is spoiled, yet the same law is not of force in both
places. Again it is a matter of the same danger and hurt, deliberately to
enter into a ship, whose kee^e you know to be ^^aken and has sprung a leake:
and to enter into that, which you take to be sound, when as indeed she is
rotten and full of leakes. I say it is a matter equally dangerous not equally
unlawful. In the first case, you tempt God, and procure to your self your
own death: but in the later, it (...) have used all possible diligence, you
do not offend, it ignorantly you commit your self to such a ship. So it is a
matter of the same danger and hurt, to mary a woman for her wealth or beauty,
which you know to be ^^ an unquiet, and a (...) disposition: and by chance to
light upon one, which you do not know to be such a one. And yet he that casts
himself into so manifest a danger seems greatly to offend, who in the shaping
of the course of his life, does tempt God. But he, that being ignorant of his
to tune, and of the moro^^ty and sharpness of the woman, shall mary her, not
only commits nothing against God, but by his daily troubles and miseries, if
he bear them with a strong and patient mind, does please him as it were by a
certain kind of martyrdom. I ^ight produce many examples of this kind, to
convince the captiousnesse of this argument of Bellarmines. Therefore as it
follows not, if he that knows a woman to be extremely wicked, and so
froward, that there is no hope to hu^ with her in peace and quietness, ought
not to take her to wife, (because by that act, he does cast himself into (...)
danger) that he also who casually and unwittingly ha^h light of such a one,
ought to forsake or refuse her, notwithstanding the bond of matrimony, although
it be a matter of the same danger and hurt, if he keep her. In like manner it
follows not, if Christians be bound not to choose a King who is no Christian,
or an heretic, that they are ^ound also, not to endure him being now chosen,
because many things hinder a business which is to be done, which do not
dissolve the same being done, as we have other where showed at large. And this
is sufficient to weaken the force of this argument.

CHAP. XXI.
But yet I am constrained to stay here a little longer, that I may further
discover and repress another error, which he adioynes as a Complement to his
former reason for to confirm that which he said. That Christians are bound not
to suffer over them a King, that is no Christian, etc. And because he would
have none to doubt of this proposition, because in times past Christians did
both tolerat, and honor many Princes, even because they were Princes, without
any scruple of conscience, which were partly Heathen, partly Heretics, that I
say he might prevent with some solution this so strong an objection and so
peremptory against his former positio^, he presently adioyneth these words. Now
if Christians in times past did not depose Nero, and Diocl^tianus and Iulianus
the Apostate, and Valens the Arian, and such like, it was because the
Christians wanted temporal strongth. For that otherwise they might justly have
done it, appears by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. where he commands that new
Judges in Temporal causes, should be set over the Christians, least the
Christians should be enforced to bring their causes, and debate them before a
Judge, that was a persecutor of Christ. For as new Judges might be appointed,
so also might new Princes and Kings have been for the same cause if they had
had strength sufficient for such an enterprise.

Here be many things, worthy to be reprehended, and which I do much marvel,
that a man so learned, and trained in authors both sacred and profane, would
ever commit to writing. For first he says, that the want of strength was the
cause, why Christians in times past did not depose Nero, D^^cle^ian, Julian,
Ualens and the like, we have sufficiently declared to be most false, by clear
and undoubted testimonies in our books Lib 4 cap 5. and lib. 3. cap. (...).
Deregno, and also above in this book, and will forth with demonstrate, even
out of the Principles laid and granted by himself. Secondly there is nothing
more^o^d nor more unreasonable, ye^, that I may speak it without offense of so
great a man, nothing more (...) to allege the authority of S. Paul for to give
grace and cre^^t to (...) proposition, in whose writing there is not so (...)
one word, which without (...) ^^construction and ^au^^l can be applied (...)
they say or by ^g^^e and by interpretation to (...) of such a position. And
indeed, that I (...) speak freely* they do with two much liberty of
interpretation abuse S. Paul^ doctrine, who out of that first (...) to the
Corinthians, do collect that it was (...) Christians to depose Ethinke or
Heretic Prin(...) other in their places. Indeed the Apo(...) in that place
rebuke the Christians, to that they (...) one another with suits, and had no
judgment among them at all: And also for that they drew one another to the
Ben^^es o^ Ethnike and infidel Judges, to whom every Christian name was
hateful. And yet he did this not that he ^ould teach them or signify to them
by this (...), that Ethnike Magistrates had no jurisdiction o^^^ Christian^, or
that the Christians might by any de(...) bring to pass that Ethnikes should
carry no politic do^^ (...) them: But that he might show, that it was a (...)
the religion and profession of a Christian that they who were newly regenerate
in Christ, and were called into his fellowship, had ^ather to maintain
Law(...) and questions before Infidel Judges, then to pacific and compose
their business and controversies begun amongst them, by the judgment and
arbitration of the Brethren, which is, of the Christians.

Therefore the Apostle does not by this speech disanull the authority of the
Heathen, neither signifies that the Christians may make defection from them:
but only misliketh and reprooueth the peevishness and stiffenesse of certain
Christians, that whereas they had brethren, that is, men of the same religion
with them, who being by common co^^ent appointed A^bitratou^s, might with a
loving and friendly affection justly and wisely dis^eptate and order their
causes within their domestike and private walls, not being contented ^ith
these, would contentiously appeal to the great s^andall of religion, to such
Judges as were both without says and justice. Whenc^ S. Th^^as upon that place
says, But it seems to be otherwise, which ^s said. 1. P^t. 1. ^e ye^
s^biect to every humane Creature for God, either to the King as the sou^raigne,
or L^^utenant^ ^^^t as it were from him, for it appertains to the a^t^oritie
of t^^ Prince to iu^ge of his subjects. Therefore it i^ against the (...) of
God, to f^r^id that his iu^g^ment should be (...) I^fide^l. But we must say,
that the Apo^^^^ (...) but that the (...) being ^laced under ^^fidell Pr^^ces,
may make their app^^rance before them, if the^ be un^m^ned ^^r this were
against the su^i^ction, which i^ due to Pri^c^s, but ^e for^^^^ them that they
should not be (...) ^^^^ard to run to the judgment ^eates of Infidels. Upon
the self same place The^deret and Hier^me do almost write the self same
things. The Apostle (says he) does not here forbid the ^ait^^ull, living
under vn^aithfull Princes, to appear before them, when they are summ^ned, for
this were against the ^ubiection which is due to Princes, but forbids their
^astie and voluntary running to infidel Judges, in those busine^^ (...) which
may be determined by the faithful.

Therefore the Apostle in that place commands nothing, which may either take
away or di^inish the jurisdiction and authority of infidel Judges over
Christians, or any way give prejudice to the same: ^ea he could not justly
command any thing against that subjection, since it is of the law of Nature,
being confirmed by God his authority, as by S. Ambro^e his witness, the
Apostle himself teaches other where Romans 1^.
. Therefore this constitution of Judges, whereof we speak, did by no means
exempt Christians, from the subjection and jurisdiction of Ethnike Magistrates,
but only took from them the necessity of appealing to them, when as they
should have Judges constituted by common consent among themselves, by whose
arbitrations the questions that rise among them might be composed. Now indeed
these Judges were no better then Vmpires without authority, without power to
draw any person before them, exercising only a voluntary jurisdiction; and
therefore if either a cross and ouerti^^ a^t Christian, or any I think had
called a Christian before an (...) fidell Judge: this authority of these
Christian Judges had nothing auailed him that was thus called, but that he must
needs present himself before the heathen be^^h: nay he were in conscience
bound to present himself, by reason of the subjection, which we owe our
superiors by the law of Nature.

Moreover if a man do look more wishly on that place of the Apostle, he that
of serve that in that place the Apostle takes pains to instruct their
Christian minds to Fuangelicall perfection, which is a matter rather of
counsel then of precept, seeing he exhorts them that they would rather take
wrong and suffer loss, then so to ^^nuase su^es among themselves. According to
that of our Savior. Matthew. ^
If any man shall strike the one the right cheek, hold him thy other, and he
that will go to law with thee, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cl^ake also. And so the Fathers of the Church, Ambrose, Primastus, Theodoret,
and all the rest understood that place, for that he says. Now surely, there is
altogether a fault amongst you, that you have judgments amongst you, why do
you not rather suffer loss? That, unless it be understood of the preservation
of life, or of the most perfect state of life, cannot possibly be admitted,
seeing it is a plain ^ase amongst all men, that they do not offend, who being
oppressed with injuries and contumelies, desire to be relieved and succored by
the Judge. Therefore S. Paul in that place, does like a good father of many
children, who worthily rebukes his children, that fall out among themselves,
both for that by dissentions and iarrings they violate brotherly love, as also
for that they had not been more willing, to end and determine the controversy
which did arise among them rather by the advice of the brethren, then wrap them
in the noise and tumults of Judicial courts, and decide them by the verdict
of strangers.

Seeing these thing, are thus, good God what a miserable blindness and
ignorance is this, or indeed a wilful craft and cunning, to seek to gather out
of those words of Paul, that it had been lawful for the Christians to depose
all I think Emperors or Magistrates, if they had had strength and power to
effect the same? Seeing especially that the Apostle does other where command
all Christians of necessity to be subject to those Ethnike powers non solum
propter^^am, least if they should practice defection, they should suffer
punishment from these Magistrates whose displeasure the had incurred: sed etiam
propter conscientiam, for because they could not with a sound and safe
conscience withdraw themselves from their obedience and subjection, which is
the ordinance of God, or resist and Rom 13.
withstand the same. For this is of necessity to be subject for conscience
sake, or propter Deum, for God as S. Peter commands. 1. Peter 2.
Moreover the first Christians after the Apostles, did ingenuously confess,
that the Emperor, although he were a Heathen and a Persecuter of the faith,
yet was ordained of God, and was inferour to God alone. Tertull ad Scapul and
in Apologet.
Therefore if Christians for conscience had need to obey those Heathen
Magistrates, is it not plain that they contained themselves from all practice
of rebellion and defection, not because they could not, but because they
lawfully might not? Or if the Emperor were inferior to God only, and the
less could not depose the greater, how could the Christian subjects depose
him? What does either the Apostle fight with himself, or does Peter teach one
thing and Paul another? Or even those ancient fathers, who succeeded the
Apostles, were they ignorant of their whole ^^g^t and ^^^ledge against I^nded
or Heret^k^ Kings and M^g^^tra^^ ^ For that they had force and strength equal
(...) and more then fuil^^t to e^ecute an explo^t against them we have in
another place demonstrated very (...).
largely.

Therefor it is ^^^dent by these, that the authority of the Apostle Pa^^ does
nothing app^^ta^^ to the former proposition of Bellar^^^e touching the deposing
of Kings: and therefore that he committed a great error, that in a matter so
serious, and of so great moment, he has de^^ded the Reader with a false
shado^ of the Apostle, authority. If the constitution or creation of Judges
made by the Christians at the Apo^^l^^ direction, had taken a^a^ the
authority, po^er, and ^^nst^^tion of the msidell Judges, or in a^^ pa^^hadal
^^ga^^d the same, or had exempted Christians from their subie^^^n, there could
nothing have been stronger th^^ ^^^^unes argument, nothing more tr^^^ th^n ^^s
op^^^. But because that constitution of Iudge^, d^^ no more pr^i^dice ^eath^^
I^^^^diction, the^ the ch^sing of Pe^^e Kings at ^^^uetide, or the creation of
Princes and Judges by the ^anto^ youth in the (...), is pr^iud^c^all to the
true Kings and Magistrate^, it i^ certain that no Argument for his opinion can
be dra^^^ from thence.

But because we prosecute the several points in this question, I must
ad^^^^tise you, that S. Thomas is in some places (...).
of that opinion, that he thinks that the right of the Lordship and Honor of
Ethn^ke Princes may justly be taken away; by the ^^^tence or ordination of the
Church, having the authority of God as he says. S. Thomas his authority is
of great force with me, but not so great, as that I esteem all his
disputations for Canon^call Scripture, or that it should overcome either reason
or law. Whose ghost I honor, and admire his doctrine. But yet there is no
reason, why any man should be moved with that opinion of his, both because he
brings out either no sufficient and strong reason or authority, for his
opinion: and also, because in the explication of the Epistle of Paul to the
Corinth. 1. he is plain of the contrary opinion: lastly because he has none
of the ancient Fathers consenting with him, and there are many reasons and
authorities to the contrary. And the reason which he brings, because that
infidels by the desert of their infidelity do deserve to loose their power
upon the faithful, who are translated into the sons of God. An ill reason
and unworthy so great a man: as though if any man deserve to be deprived of
o^ce, benefice, dignity, authority or any other right whatsoever which he
possesleth, may therefore presently be spoiled by another, rather then by him
of whom he recemed and holds the same, or by another, that has express
commandment and authority from him. Who knows not, that the Chancellor,
Constable and other officers made by the King, do deserve to loose their
place, if in any thing they abuse their office? but yet notwithstanding no man
can take it from them, so long a^ the Prince on whom only they do depend,
^u^ereth them to execute their once. In like manner infidel Princes, although
by the desert of (...) ^^fidelitie they deserve to (...) their authority: yet
because they are constituted by God, and are inferior to him alone, they
cannot he dispossessed of their authority, and deposed but by God himself.
And indeed the same Thomas, in an exposition of the Epistle of Paul, above
recited in this Chapter, shows plainly enough, that the Church has not that
authority, whereby she may depose ^thinkes, for he says, it is against the
law of God, to forbid that the subjects shall not abide the judgment of
infidel Princes. Now it is sure, that the Church can command or forbid nothing
against the law of God, further to take from infidel Princes, the right of
Lordship and Dignity, is indeed to forbid that no man should stand to his
judgment. Therefore the Church has not that power. And let any man, who will,
peruse all Stories, he shall find no where, that ever the Church assumed to
her self that authority, to judge Princes infidel or heathen. Neither did
she only forbear for scandal, as Thomas thinks in that place: but for want
of rightful power, because she was not Judge of the unfaithful, according to
that of the Apostle, 1. Cor 5.
What have I to do to judge them who are without: and also because Princes
appointed by God, have God only Judge over them, by whom only they may be
deposed. Neither is it to the matter, that Paul, when he commands Christian
servants to exhibit all honor to their Masters being Infidels, adds that
only, Least the Name of the Lord and his doctrine be blasphemed: for he said
not that, as though for that cause only, servants should obey their Masters,
but that especially for that cause they should do it: and therefore he
expressed the greatest mischief, which could arise thereof, that he might
defer servants from the contempt of their Masters, to wit, the public
scandal of the whole Church of God, and of Christian doctrine. Therefore the
Apostle means not by these words, that servants may lawfully withdraw
themselves from the yoke of service against their Masters will, if they might
do it without scandal to the Church, for they should not commit flat ^
a^cilla 60 D de f^rt l 1. (...) fugit.
theft in their own persons, by the law of Nations: But he would show that
they did not only sin, which in other places he plainly teaches Romans 13. ad
Philip 6. Colos^. 3.
, but also draw a public scandal upon the whole Church, which is far more
grievous and hurtful then a particular man's fault, and above all things to be
avoided.

Therefore now it remains, that according to my promise, I make proof, that
the former proposition of Bellarmine touching the authority to depose heathen
Kings and Princes, is false, even out of the Prin^^^ (...) and granted by
himself. The matter is plain, and easy to be done, for in his second book
De Romans Pontif. he confesses Cap. 29.
that the Apostles and all other Christians were as well subject to heathen
Princes, in all Civil causes, as other men, his words are these: I answer
first it might be said that Paul appealed to Caesar, because indeed he was his
Judge, although not of right, for so does John de Turrecremata answer: lib. 2.
cap. 96. summae de Ecclesia. Secondly, it may be said and better, with Albert
Pighius lib. 5. Hierar. Ecclesi. cap. 7. that there is a difference between
Heathen and Christian Princes: for when the Princes were heathen, the Bishop
was not their Judge, but clean contrary, he was subject to them in all civil
Causes, no less then other men, for it is plain that the Bishop was not Judge
of them: because he is not a Judge but of the faithful 1. Cor. 6. What have I
to do, to judge of them which are without. And that of the contrary he is
ciuilly subject to them, both of right and indeed, as it is plain. For the
Christian law depriueth no man of his right and dominion, Therefore even as
before the law of Christ men were subject to Emperors and to Kings: so also
after. Wherefore Peter and Paul every where exhort the faithful, to be subject
to Princes, as appears, ad Romans 13. ad Titum 3. and 1. Pet. 2. Therefore
worthily did Paul appeal to Caesar, and acknowledged him his Judge, when he
was accused of the sedition and tumult, which was raised amongst the people.
Thus he, whereby it is plain, that not only want of strength was the reason,
why the first Christians deposed not heathen Princes, but also, because all law
both divine and humane was against such an action, and in the same book and
Chapter, he teaches more openly, when he says that to judge, punish, depose,
belonged only to a superior, which is most true, and without all controversy
is confirmed by the common judgment of men.

And now by these most certain Principles set down and granted by him, every
one that has any skill in reasoning, may gather that the Christians, although
they were mighty both in numbers and strength, could not by right depose Nero,
Diocletian, and other heathen and wicked Princes, and that is concluded by this
strong and unanswerable demonstration.

Subjects cannot judge, punish or depose a Superior. But all Christians were
subject to Nero, Diocletian, etc. and other Emperors, and Heather Kings. Ergo,
they could not depose such Emperors or Kings.
The proposition is granted by him: and likewise the Assumption, which do
stand upon most certain truth, and the conclusion depends of the Antecedents
by a necessary consecution, and is directly contrary to that, which he had
said. That Christians in times past might lawfully depos Nero, Diocletian, etc
But for that they wanted temporal power and strength they forbear that
purpose. Therefore it is false and worthy to be reprehended; For aientia and
negantia simul vera esse nequeunt. Hereby also is the falsehood of the opinion
of S. Thomas evident, which we have refuted above in this Chapter.

CHAP. XXII.
I Said that Bellarmine used a threefold argument for the confirmation of his
third reason: which is, That it is not lawful for Christiant to tolerate an
Infidel or Heretic King, whereof I have already noted the faults of the first.
Now we must examine in this and the next Chapter what manner of arguments they
are, and what strength they have. Therefore the second argument is this.

To tolerate an Infidel or Heretic King, laboring to draw men to his sect,
is to expose religion to manifest danger.

But Christians are not bound neither indeed ought they to tolerate an infidel
King with the manifest danger of Religion: for when there is difference and
contention between the law of God and the law of Man: it is a matter of Gods
law to keep and observe the true faith and religion, which is one only, and
not many: but it is a point of man's law, that we have this or that King.

To these things I answer, that Bellarmine and others from whom he had these,
do not reason rightly, nor according to art, but do propound two arguments
together confusedly and commixtly without form. For, for that which he assumes:

But Christians are not bound, yea they ought not, without evident danger of
religion, to tolerate an Infidel King.

Instead whereof should have been placed in good Logike this Assumption.

But Christians are not bound, yea they ought not to expose religion to evident
danger:

That the Conclusion might follow thereof:

Ergo, It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an Infidel or Heretic
King.

For the assumption which he sets down is almost just the same, with the
Proposition that is in question. But to allow him somewhat, let us grant that
he has fall ioned and disposed his Reason in excellent good form, and let us
answer to the force of the argument. I say then that his Proposition is false.
I say again, that it is not true that, To tolerate an Heretic or Heathen
King, endeavoring to draw men to his sect, is to expose Religion to manifest
danger. But it is only to suffer Religion to lie in danger into which it is
fallen by the fault of an Heretic or Infidel King, to which it is now exposed
without the fault of the people: seeing now the people has no just and lawful
remedy left them to deliver Religion, but only Constancy and Patience. And
this can not be imputed as a fault to Christians, unless we will by the same
exception sharply accuse all those ancient fathers and Christians, who did
without any shrinking or tergiuersation, or without the least token of
rebellion submisly obey Constantius, Iuliaenus, Valens, and other renouncers of
Christian religion, because they came lawfully to the Empire, and whom they
might most easily have removed or deposed, they honored them with all honor,
duty and reverence, even because they were their Emperors and Kings. These
holy fathers then, and worthy Christians in that age, did tolerate Heretic and
Infidel Kings, although if we only look at their temporal strength, they
were furnished with excellent means and opportunities to depose them: and yet
none that is in his wits will ever say that they exposed Religion to most
evident danger, through that manner of Christian patience and tolerancy. Now I
speak of tolerating that King, who either being a Heathen is ordained by the
Heathen, where Christians do not rule: or who when he was admitted and
enstalled into his Government, was accounted a Christian. For to elect a King
over themselves, no law nor religion enforceing, whom they know to be either an
Heretic or an Infidel, is indeed to expose Religion to most evident danger,
and in that behalf, it were a grievous sin in the Christians: and they that
do it, are worthy miserably to perish therefore.

Now for that which he deduceth, out of the opposition between divine and
humane law, I answer ^ree^ly, that he is much deceived in this, that in this
matter he supposes there is a cross encounter and conflict between the law
of God and the law of man. For they are not repugnant.

To keep faith and Religion, and to tolerate an Infidel or Heretic King.

Neither is the one by divine law, the other by humane, as he imagines: But
they be two Precept^ of Gods law.

1. To worship and serve God with true Religion. 2. To obey and serve the King.
Which may and ought to be kept and fulfilled together, as the Jesuits
themselves affirm. Contra Ar. nau^. page 69.
And we have proved at large, lib. 3. contra Monarchomacho^. Cap. 8.
Therefore in this case the subjects not only may, but also ought, to tolerate
such a King, and in the mean time to continue constantly in the true religion,
and so to give to Caesar those things, which are Caesar's, and those things
which are Gods, to God. For if, as Bellarmine delivers, it be not lawful for
a Counsel Lib 3. de Romans Pont. c 29.
to judge, punish or depose a Pope indeuouring to disturb or to destroy the
Church of God but only,

To resist him by not doing that which he commands, and hindering that he do
not execute his pleasure.

Why should we not in like manner, and with much more reason, hold the same
judgment of Kings? Seeing that they also, by the testimony of the same Lib. 1.
de Romans Pont. cap. 9 and lib 3. c. 19.
Author, are superior to the People, and have no judge in earth: and whereas
besides many famous Diumes be of opinion, that an Occumenicall Counsel has
greater authority over the Pope, then the people has over the Prince? Because
the Church is ever governed by the spirit of God, nor does any thing rashly.
And the Pope being often times moved and tossed with the winds and tempests
of sedition enterpriseth many things wickedly, cruelly and unjustly, without
counsel and judgment.

But it is a hard matter to tolerate a wicked King, and to retain true
Religion, will some reply. I grant indeed it is so, but it is not impossible.
Impossibility (I must crave pardon to use the word) excuses from the
observing of the Commandments, but difficulty and hardness does not. But
that he says, That it is of the divine law to keep true faith and religion:
but of humane law, that we have this or that King. This surely is all true, but
take heed Reader for all this, least you be deceived. Bellarmine omitted that
which was principal, for he ought to have added:

But where we once have this or that King, it is of the divine law, that in
Civil causes we obey him with all honor and reverence.

By this adiection which no Catholic can deny, that Argument of his is
crushed. For in the manner propounded by him, the law of God and Man do not
concur, nor fall a cross one of another, as he imagines, (which if it
should fall out, it were reason that the humane should yield to the divine) but
in truth there concur two heads of the Divine law, the one, to observe faith
and Religion, the other, To honor the King and to obey him in Civil matters.
Both which may and ought to be fulfilled, By giving to Caesar, as is said, the
things which are Caesar's, and which are Gods, to God, as we have learned out of
Bellarmines doctrine in the person of the Pope, endeavoring to destroy the
Church.

CHAP. XXIII.
THere remains the last Argument, which he propounds by way of a subtle and
captious question in this manner.

To conclude, why may not a faithful People, be freed from the yoke of an
unfaithful King and drawing to Infidelity, if a believing wife be free from
the Obligation of staying with an unbelieving husband: when he will not stay
with his Christian wife, without intur^^ to the faith, as he plainly deduceth
out of Paul 1. ad Cor. 7. Innoc. 3. Cap. Gaudemus, extra de diuortijs? for the
power of the husband over the wise is no l^sse, then of the King over the
subjects, but indeed somewhat more. There is nothing more frequent in the
mouths of all the Monarchomachi, then this Argument: because they do easily
deceive very many thereby, for it is such a one, as nothing does move more
vehemently at the first sight, and being looked into and understood does urge
more weakly. Therefore I answer to it, that these two points be very diverse
and unlike,

To be delivered from some man's yoke; and

To be delivered from the Obligation of remaining with some man.

and therefore, that they are not rightly compounded and compared together,
seeing that the husband himself, to whom the Obligation of remaining with an
other is remitted, is not by this at all delivered from her yoke, from whom he
departs. Whereof the Church yields us examples every day, which freeth and
absolueth married Persons, for diverse Causes, for Bed and Board, as they say,
(that is) for conversation and obligation of Continuance one with the other,
the Marriage bond never the less remaining, which is a Sacrament of Christ and
the Church. Wherefore the force of such an Argument drawn from married persons
is nothing, unless he proceed from the Matrimonial yoke, to the Regal yoke,
as if he had said:

Why may not a faithful People be freed from the yoke of a King faithless,
and drawing others to Infidelity, if a believing wife be free from the yoke of
an unbelieving husband. Now if it please the Reverend Bellarmine to turn that
his Argument into this, that it may have more moment and weight, then I will
answer the same after an other manner. And thus. That either he speaks of
those married persons who contracted Marriage, when they both were believers, and
one of them fell into heresy or infidelity afterward: or of heathen and
infidel Couples, of whom the one converted to the faith, the other continuing
obstinately in his Pagan superstition. If he understand his argument of the
former, he does slander his Author Innocentius, who speaks never a word of
such a Matrimony in the said Cap. Gandemus: and besides it should be false,
which he obtrudes to us for an argument, that the believing husband is free
from the yoke of his unbelieving wife, when he will not continue with his
Christian wife, without injury to the faith, as the same Innocentius expressly
teaches, in cap. Quanto.. si vero. extra de Diuort.

But if says he, one of the believing married persons, either fall into
Heresy, or pass over into the error of Gentilitie, we do not think that in
this case the party that is left, may fly to any second marriage, while the
other lives, although in this case the Contumely seems the greater which is
offered to the Creator. And again the same Innocentius in Cap. exparte extra,
De conuers. coningat. rescribeth to the same purpose: That Matrimony
contracted between lawful persons, and consummate by carnal Copulation,

In no case can be dissolved, although one of the believers, between whom this
Marriage is ratified, should prove an Heretic, and would not continue with the
other, without Contumslie to the Creator. Behold the argument drawn from
married Persons, does not only not strengthen these men's Opinion, but also
weakneth, and even oppugneth the same, as if a man should in this manner
propound the argument (...) by way of interrogation.

Why should a believing People be freed from the yoke of a King unbelieving or
heretical, endeavoring to draw his subjects to his sect, if a married person
believing be not free from the yoke of the other Mate unbelieving, although he
will not continue with the believing yoke fellow, without inturie to the faith
and contumely to the Creator. As Innocentius III. openly teaches, in cap.
Quanto.. sivero. De Diuort. and in cap. ex part. De conuers. coniugat. adeo vt
Panorm. in illum.. Si vero. does say, out of the reason there laid, That the
Church cannot dissolve such a Marriage, and free the believing yoke fellow from
the yoke of the unbelieving, when as notwithstanding a believing yoke-mate may
much more easily be perverted by a yoke-mate unbelieving, then the whole people
by a King. But the bond of the subjection, whereby the people is tied to the
King, since it proceeds both from natural and divine Law, seems much more
hard to be dissolved, then that of married Persons between themselves: that from
thence a man may easily prove, that the Church can do no more in one then in
the other.

But if he understand his argument of the later married persons, the answer is
easy, out of the same Decretall Epistle of Innocent, to wit. That between
such couples the Marriage is not good, as much as appertains to the
indissoluble This is according to Cardi. Bellar. own doctrine in his Lib. 1. de
matrimoni. cap. 12.
bonds of Matrimony. And therefore such kind of married parsons have full
liberty to dissolve the matrimony, that they may depart either with consent and
good likeing, or with mislike and displeasure, and the one of them, even
against the liking of the other, may by refusal and divorce at his pleasure
dissolve that knot of marriage: for the woman may as well send letters of divorce
to the man as the man to the wife.

For (says he) although the Matrimony among Infidels be true (because they go
together according to the commandment of the laws) yet it is not firm. But
amongst the believers it is both true and firm, because the Sacrament of faith
being once admitted is never lost, but makes firm the Sacrament of marriage,
that it continues in the married persons, while that continues. It is no wonder
then if the married persons brought to the faith, be free from the fellowship
and power of his fellow, remaining in Infidelity, when as although both had
continued in Infidelity, it had been even as free for each of them to depart
from the other, and by divorce to dissolve marriage because in the beginning
there passed no form and rate bond of Obligation between them. And therefore
the Apostle does not command but advise, that the believing wife should not
depart from the unbelieving husband if he be willing to stay with her, as S.
Augustine teaches learnedly and eloquently lib. 1. De adulterinis Coni^giis,
and the holy Canons taken from thence do admonish us 28. q. 1. C^n. 8 and 9.
.

Which matters since they stand thus, surely it follows, that the adversaries
do to small purpose fetch an argument from married persons to show that people
may be freed from the Regal yoke, whether they regard the marriages of the
Believers, or of the unbelievers: Because they are coupled with a most straight
and indissoluble knot of society, whose band cannot be broken, no not by the
Church it self, neither for Infidelity nor Heresy of the one part. So as from
hence he does furnish us with an argument tending rather to maintain the
strength and perpetuity of Regal authority, then to dissolve and destroy the
same; And these are tied by no necessity of Obligation in the face of the
Church, but the husband converted to the faith if his fellow will not follow
without scandal, may at his pleasure take to him another: And again, the
woman brought to the faith, if the husband refuse may in Christ marry with whom
she will. Seeing therefore there is no firm marriage between these and the
politic subjection, and Kingly domination and rule, is ratified and approved
amongst all Nations, and in every law, as well by divine as humane power, what
can be more unreasonable or fond then to compare and suit them together, and to
deduce any argument from the society and yoke of unbelieving married persons,
which may be shaken of at pleasure, to break the yoke of Regal power and
authority, and to make the same judgment of them both, as if they were as like
as might be.

CHAP. XXIV.
I Told you in the xxiij. Chapter, that there were five reasons in Bellarmine,
whereby he would prove, that the Pope has temporal power over all secular
Kings, and Princes Christian: of which reasons we have run through three, and
observed how weak they are, and of what diseases they labor, it remains
now, that we make our suruay of the other two, which are not a whit better
conditioned. The first whereof is by him laid down in these words.

When Kings and Princes come to the Church to be made Christians, they are
received with a Covenant, either express or secret, that they should subject
their Scepters to Christ's, and promise that they will observe and defend the
faith of Christ, yea under the penalty of losing their kingdom. Ergo. When
they prove Heretics, or hurt Religion they may be judged by the Church, and
withal be deposed from their government, neither shall any injury be done
them, if they be deposed. I answer this reason, by denying the consequent. For
although it be true that Princes coming to the Church, do submit themselves
and their scepters to Christ, and even of their own accord do make those
promises either secretly or expressly which Bellarmine reports; yet it is not
true, neither does it follow thereof, that they may be judged and deposed by
the Church or Pope if they break their promise, or neglect to keep their
Covenant and Oath. Because that sovereign jurisdiction and temporal power of
Christ over all Kings and the whole world which he has as the son of God,
does not appertain to the Church or Pope: but that power only which Christ
assumed to himself, when he was conversant amongst men after the manner of
men, according to which the Pope is Christ's Vicar. Whereupon Bellarmine
himself writes Lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 4.
excellently well:

We say, quoth he, that the Pope has that office which Christ had, when after
the manner of men he lived amongst men in the world. For we may not give the
Pope those offices which Christ has as God, or as animmortall and glorious
man, but only those, which he had as a mortal man. But Christ usurped no
temporal dominion and power when he lived as a man amongst men in earth, and
therefore neither the Church as the Church, nor the Pope as head of the Church
and Vicar of Christ, can have any temporal power, as the same learned man
declares and proves at large, in that Chapter, Wherefore although Kings and
Princes when they come to the Church, do subject their Kingdoms to the Lord
Christ, and have Christ their judge from whom they have also their Kingdom:
but because the judgment is of a temporal affair, when the business is
touching a kingdom forfeited, they have him only their Judge, and not the
Church or the Pope. Whereby it does easily appear how captious those reasons
and conclusions are which Sanders, from whom Bellarmine has received this
stuff of his, does deduce out of those manner of promises, made either
secretly or expressly. For as concerning those forms of asking and answering,
which he with many idle words and falsely deuiseth between the Pope and the
Princes which come to the Church: we must answer, that they are fondly
conceived by him, and that they neither ought, nor are accustomed to pass in
the admittance of Heathen Princes, which come to the Church, least the Church
should seem either to suspect them, or to divine and conceive ill of them for
the time to come. Therefore their burning love toward Christ, and present
confession of their faith, whereby they in general terms promise, that they
will give there names to Christ and become children of the Church, and will
renounce the devil and his works, and keep the commandments of God and the
Church, and such like, are cause sufficient enough, that they should be
received. All which matters they do indeed promise to Christ, the Church
receiving the promise, as his Spouse, in whose boosome they are regenerate; or
the Bishop himself, not as a man, but as a Minister of Christ, God himself
discharging a Deputies office herein, and therefore the obligation is
principally taken to Christ himself, by the Church or the Pope. Whereby
although they have also promised all other things, which Sanders has
comprehended in that forged form of his, and shall afterward neglect, or
wholly contemn that covenant agreed on, they can be punished by him only, into
whose words they did swear, and who is the Lord of all temporal estates, and
whom they have for their only Judge over them intemporall matters, but not by
him to whom the care only of spiritual matters and to take the promise is
committed.

And to these spiritual matters are those things most like, and most resemble
them which we see daily to be observed in the civil Government. They who
aspire to the succession of Feudes or Fees, whether they come in by hereditarie
right or by any other title, cannot enjoy them, unless they first be admitted
into his clientele and service who is Lord of the Fee, that is, unless they in
words conceived do take the oath of fealty to the Lord, which they commonly
call Homagium or Hominium. But if it be the Kings fee to which they succeed,
the King does seldom in his own Person take the oath of fealty, but
executes that business for the most part by his Chancellor, or soem other
Deputy especially assigned for that purpose. Therefore the Chancellor when he
admits to Fees and Honors great Personages swearing into the Kings words, he
discharges the same office under the King in a Civil administration and
jurisdiction, which the Pope does under Christ, in the spiritual government of
the Church, when he receives Princes coming unto her, by taking the oath of
their faithfulness and piety toward God: And the Chancellor, the Tenant once
admitted, (although after he break his oath, and commit the crime which they
call Felony) may in no cause take away the Fee, which is the proper right of
the King alone, and not granted to the Chancellor at all: So neither can the
Pope deprive of Kingdoms and authority, or any way temporally punish Princes
received into the Church, although they offend grieuouslie afterward, or
forsake the faith: Because that is reserved to God only. Therefore although
Christian Kings and Princes be in the Church, and in respect that they are the
Children of the Church, be inferior to the church and the Pope,
notwithstanding in regard that they do bear a sovereign rule temporal in
the world, they are not inferiors, but rather superiors: and therefore
although they have forfeited their kingdom by secret or express covenant, yet
neither people, nor Pope, nor church can take it away from them: But only
Almighty God alone, from whom is all power, and to whom aloue they are
inferior in Civil administration. And neither shall Bellarmine nor any other
be ever able to bring, or as I may say, to dig out of the monuments of any
age, any forcible argument, whereby he may make it plain unto us, that secular
Kings and Princes when they were received to the Faith by the Church, did in
such manner renounce their interest, as both to lay down altogether the
temporal authority which they had received of God, and also to subject
themselves to the Church, to be judged in Civil affairs, and to be chastised
with temporal punishment. And if none of them can demonstrate this, they must
needs confess, that Kings and Princes did after the faith received, retain
their Kingdoms and Empires, in the same Right, the same Liberty, and
Authority, wherein they possessed them, before such time as they came to the
Church, because, as the Adversaries do confess, Lex Christineminem private
iure suo. If therefore, before Baptism they had no Judge above them in
temporal matters, but God alone: neither ought they to have any after
Baptism. But we have spoken more of this matter in the refutation of the first
reason. In this place I stand not much upon Bozius his dotages.

Now for that he vnderlaies after this fourth reason, in the words following.

For he is not fit to receive the Sacrament of Baptism, who is not ready to
serve Christ, and for his sake to loose whatsoever he has. For the Lord says,
Lu. 14. if any man come to me, and hates not father and mother, and wife and
children, yea and even his own life, he cannot be my Disciple. I cannot tell,
to what end he uses these words. Surely no man denies it. But what of it? Such
a reason belongs no more to the purpose, then that which is furthest from the
matter, nor that neither which follows in the same place. Besides says he,
the Church should grievously err, if she should admit any King which would
with impunitie cherish every manner of sect, and defend heretics, and
overthrow Religion. This is most true: But as I said, it belongs nothing to the
purpose, for now the question is not of that matter: but of the temporal power
of the Church, or of the Pope, who is the substitute head thereof under Christ:
I mean, whether he have that power, whereby he may chastise with temporal
punishments Kings and Princes duly received, if after they shall break the
faith, and forsake the duty, undertaken by them in the lauer of regeneration
or no. Now neither part of this question is either proved or disprooued by
these correllaries and additions, and for this cause we pass them over.

CHAP. XXV.
THe fifth and last reason is drawn, from his Pastoral charge and office: in
these words.

When it was said to Peter, Feed my sheep, John the last, all the power was
given him, which was necessary to maintain the flock.

But a shepherd has a threefold charge, one about Wolves, that he drive them
away by all means he can: the other about the Rams, that he may shut them
up, if they hurt the flock with their horns: the third about the rest of the
sheep, that he give every one convenient food: Ergo, The Pope has this triple
charge.

Out of this principle and foundation are drawn three strong arguments as he
surmiseth. But not to go far, first I answer to this very fundamental
proposition: that it is all true, and makes for me, and that the very
contrary of that which he affirms may very handsomely be gathered from
thence, I say, gathered, that the Pope has no temporal power at all, or may
exercise any upon Christian Princes, as he is the Vicar of Christ, and
successor of S. Peter, seeing such a manner of power is not necessary for the
Pope, for the discharging and fulfilling of his Pastoral duty.

And that is evidently concluded by this argument: Christ by commending his
sheep to Peter, gave him all power necessary to defend the flock: But he
gave him no temporal power: Therefore temporal power is not necessary to
defend the flock. Secondly, we will proceed in this manner. It is a thing
unreasonable, that the Pope, who is the successor of S. Peter, should have more
power then had Peter himself: But Peter had not any temporal power over
Christians; Therefore, Neither the Pope as he is his successor.

The proposition of the former reason, is without all controversy true. And
the Assamption is proved by the testimony and confession of Bellarmine
himself. For lib. quint. de Romans Pontif. where he endeavors to establish his
opinion of this thing by a similitude of the flesh and the spirit, he writes
thus. For as the spirit and flesh stand one toward the other in Man: so do the
two powers in the Church; for the flesh and the spirit, be as it were two
Commonwealths, which may be found both separated and toyned together, flesh
is found without the spirit in beasts: spirit is found without flesh in the
Angels: and a little after. Even so the Civil power has her Princes, Laws,
Judgments, etc. Likewise the Ecclesiastical, her Bishops, Canons, Judgments:
the one has for her end a temporal peace: the other, everlasting salvation:
sometimes they are found severed, as once in the time of the Apostles, sometime
toyned as now.

If these powers were severed in the time of the Apostles, as in truth they
were, both in Right and in Deed, it follows necessarily, that S. Peter had no
temporal power, otherwise it should be false, that they were severed, for it
there be place to the similitude propounded by him, it will follow, that as
there is nothing fleshly in Angels, and nothing spiritual in beasts: so in the
time of the Apostles, there should be no temporal power in the Church, or
spiritual in the Civil state. Therefore we must confess, either that
temporal power is not necessary for the chief Pastor of the Church: or that
the Prince of the Apostles himself, and chief Pastor S. Peter, was not
furnished and accomplished with all things necessary for the discharge of his
Pastoral duty. And this is as contrary, as contrary may be, to that which
he had already said in his fundamental reason, as I may call it: to wit,

That all ability necessary to defend the flock, was given to Peter. The
same also is proved by this, that all civil and temporal power at that time
depended of heathen Princes, to whom Peter himself, witness Bellarmine Lib.
2. de Romans Pont. ca. 29.
, although the head of the Church and Vicar of Christ, was subject in
temporalities, both by Right and in Deed. Whereof it follows, that either S.
Peter was induced with no temporal power, or that he received it from heathen
Princes: otherwise as we said before, it should be false, that those powers
were then separated. But it is certain that he received none of them, and
therefore that he had none at all. And certainly these reasons are more plain,
then any man without fraud and cunning can gainesay: that it is a wonder to see
that learned men and otherwise godly, should so be blinded with an
inconsiderate and unadvised heat, that they should not stick to embrace and
follow doubtful things for certain, obscure for evident, crooked for
straight: for plain and easy reasons, those which be perplexed and
intricately bewrapped with many controversies and contradictions. But they take
care, you will say, to amplify and adorn the Sea Apostolic with the increase
and accession of this power and authority. And is there any Catholic, who
does not commend their minds that are affected to that Sea, which is the
foundation and strength of our faith? That they do grace and advance by all
means that Sea, which no man can sufficiently commend according to her worth,
I do much commend them: but that they attribute more to it, then is fit, and
that with the great scandal of many, that I do not commend, for we our selves
also do no less honor the same Sea, we no less love, reverence, admire it:
as that which is the true seat of Peter, and being placed in the rock which
is Christ, has overcome all heresies, and obtains by good right the chief
place in the Church. But the truth forbids, that we should advance her with
this increase of Power: our Conscience bearing us witness, before God, and the
Lord Jesus, before whom in the day of the revelation of the just judgment, both
these our writings, and theirs shall appear, consigned with their own merrits.

Therefore, there is small cause, why they should bring this former reason for
themselves. For Christ when he said to Peter, Pasce oues meas, appointed him
indeed Pastor of his flock: but a Spiritual Pastor not a Temporal: and gave
him all ability necessary for that office, whereby it appears that Temporal
power is not necessary for the Pope, because Christ gave it not to Peter
himself. Neither have we heard any where that either S. Peter or any other of
his Apostles, did practice any temporal power or authority, by virtue whereof
he did either directly, or indirectly (that no man may suppose any force in
words) punish the forsakers of the Christian faith with Civil punishment after
the manner of Magistrates. It is true indeed that sometimes it has come to
pass, that Temporal punishment as death or Torment has followed a spiritual
sentence: the church at that time standing in need of miracles and wonders to
confirm the faith, which kind of punishments, did strike a far greater fear
into the minds of Christians, then if after the manner of men they had
suffered punishment at the hands of Civil Magistrates. And this is that which
the Apostle writes to the Corinthians: 1. Corin. 4.
What will you? shall I come to you with a rod or in love and in the spirit of
meekness? The rod he calls that spiritual power, which by the wonderful
working of God, did at that time produce wonderful effects, as even at this
day sometimes, he upon the like occasion does produce, among people which be
newly won to Christ.

CHAP. XXVI.
SEeing these matters stand thus, the way is made more easy for us to refute
those arguments which Bellarmin deduceth out of his former foundation, being
now already opened by us, and retorted back upon himself, for they fall to
ground, partly through their own fault and weakness, and partly because they
are not well set upon the foundation, whereon they are built. For first out of
that, that Power is necessary for the Pastor about the Woolues, that be may
drive them away by any mean he can, he reasons in this manner.

Woolues which destroy the Church of God are Heretics:

Ergo If any Prince of a Sheep or a Ram become a Wolf, that is, of a Christian
become an Heretic, the Pastor of the Church may drive him away by
excommunication, and also command the People, that they do not follow him, and
therefore may deprive him of his government over his subjects.

But he is deceived or does deceive us, by shuffling together true and false
things into the same Conclusion. For in that he says, that the Pastor of the
Church may drive away an Heretic Prince by excommunication, that is very true,
and is derived out of that principle by a necessary consecution. But that he
may only, marry that he ought not to do it, but at such times when as he may
co^modiously do it, without scandal and hurt to the Church, as I have
dedeclared before Cap. 9.
. For where there is danger least the peace of the Church may be dissolved, and
least The member of Christ be torn in pieces by sacrilegious schisms. the
severe mercy of the divine discipline is necessary (that is to say, is wholly to
be left to the judgment and punishment of God) for Counsel of separation,
(that is of excommunication) are both vain, and hurtful and Sacrilegious,
because they become both impious and preud, and do more disturb the weak
good ones, then correct the s^urdy ill ones.

(...).
This is the doctrine of S. Angustine, approved by the common voice of the
Church, whereby it is evident, how ras^ly and unwisely, certain Popes, have
separated from the Church by excommunication, most mighty Emperors and Kings,
with the great scandal of the whole world, and dissolution of the peace of the
Church, whom it had been far better to have tolerated, and to have
discovered their faults only, and with mourning to have bewailed them in the
Church.

For the comparison of the Peace and Unity which was to be kept, and for the
salvation of the weak brethren, and such as now were fed only with milk,
least the members of the body of Christ should be torn in pieces, by
sacrilegious schisms (...)
. Therefore the Popes might do this, but they ought not. Non omne quod licet,
honestum est. Very well says the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. and 10.
, omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt. Therefore the first part of the
conclusion is true, that the Pastor of the Church, may drive away heretic
Princes by excommunication.

But that which follows, (and withal command the people, that they follow
him not) has two ears to hold by, as I may say with Epictetus, the one sound,
the other broken. I mean a twofold understanding, the one true, the other
faulty. For if he speak in this sense, that it is the duty of the Pope, to
command the subjects, that they follow not an heretic Prince in his heresy,
that they run not with him in his madness, nor admit and swallow down his
damnable errors; for that they suffer not themselves, to be infected and
defiled with his filthy and corrupt manners it is as true, and is derived very
truly out of the same principle and fountain, and this is the best sense of
those words. For there is nothing so convenient and comely for the pontifical
dignity, and the whole order Ecclesiastike, nothing so profitable and necessary
for Christian people, as that according to the pattern of the ancient fathers
of the Church, the principal Bishop himself first, and the rest of his
brethren, all of them, should preach the word, should be instant in season, and
out of season, convince, entreat, rebuke, in all patience and doctrine.2
Timoth. 4.
. That like Faithful witnesses and good servants whom the Lord has set over
his family, they may so work both by word and example, that the people follow
not the errors of their King, nor either dissemble, nor forsake the Catholic
faith, through any either threatenings or allurements of the King, which because
most of them either do not all at this day, or at the least much more slackly
then they ought, and that duty, which it becomes them to perform themselves,
they put over to certain begging Friars: what marvel is it if many in our
age, have been carried away as it were with a whirle wind of errors from the
Lords sheepfolds, into the toiles of the devil. This, as I have said, is the
best sense: But notwithstanding that Bellarmine does not speak in this sense,
both the cause, which he has in hand, and this clause following, Ac proinde
prinare eum dominio in subditos, does plainly declare. Therefore he gives us
the broken care of the pot, I mean the corrupt, and the very worst sense of
those words: forsooth, that the pastor of the Church may command the subject,
that they execute no commandment of such a Prince, and that by any means they
yield him no reverence, obedience, honor, in those matters which belong even to
a temporal and civil authority. And therefore deprive him of his dominion
over his subjects. But this is false, and flat contrary to the law of God, and
precepts of the Apostles. Fear the Lord, my son, and the King Prou. 24.
: Admonish them to be subject to Princes and powers, to obey their commandment
Tit. 3.
. Be subject to every creature for God, or to the King as sovereign, fear God
honor the King, and diverse of that kind, which things seeing they be spoken of
wicked Kings and persecutors of the ^ 1. Pet. 2.
Church, (for at that time no other ruled in the world,) they can not but
belong to the worst and unworthiest kind of Kings. Therefore this is that which
I said before, that either he deceiues of purpose, or is deceived, by shuffling
together true and false points into the same conclusion. For it is true, that a
Pastor of the Church, may drive away an heretic Prince by excommunication: but
it is false that he may deprive him of his dominion over his subjects. For
obedience due to Kings and all superiors, is both by (...) of nature and of
God: how then can the Pope by The Pope (...) God.
any mean dispense with people against the same?

For they that with more diligence, and exact care do search the scriptures,
do observe a too fold kind of the precepts of Paul: one is of those, by which
he publishes the law of God, which he was sent to preach, and does both
propound, and expound the will of God, comprehended in the old and new law. Of
which precepts almost infinite his Epistles are full, wherein are these also
which he delivers touching obedience and reverence to be given to Kings and
Princes. And the other kind is of those things, which do not depend of the law
of nature or the express word of God, but which the Apostle himself of his
proper authority ordains by humane wisdom assisted by the grace of God, for
the ordering and settling of the worship of God, as that a Bigamus or a
quarreller, be not admitted to a Bishopric 1. Timoth. 5.
, that a widow under the age of 60. years, be not chosen to the office of
Deaconesse, and the like. And between these commandments the difference is,
that in those which be of the latter kind, the Pope may dispense for some
cause: For he has no less authority, then the Apostle himself, in the
disposition and ordination of the Church: because the whole Church is committed
to him, as to the Vicar of Christ and successor of Peter, and because he is not
bound to the laws of his predecessors. But in those matters which belong to
the former kind, he has no power at all to dispense I^an. de turre (...).
lector. did. 34.
, because Non est discipulus ^per Magistrum, neque seruus supra Dominum Math.
10.
. The inferior may not break the law of his superior: or qualify the same to
pleasure any. For which cause Speculator does affirm that the Pope can not
absolve any man from a lawful oath, because the obligation of keeping an oath
and performing it to God, is both by the law of nature, and of God: And others
deny that the Pope can dispense with any witness, that he may be believed
unsworn in a judgment Hi^polyt de Marsil. sing. 214.
. And Innocentius III. Pope in his rescript witnesses, that the Pope can not
grant license to a Monk, that either he may have the property of any goods, or
have a wife Cap cum ad monasterium. de stat. monachor.
.

I am not ignorant, with what a far fetched and trifling explication, certain
Canonists interpreters, who submit all things to the power of the Pope, do
bend and wrest from the proper and native signification of the words, that same
place of Innocentius, against the judgment of the best sort of divines. I am
persuaded that it troubled them, which they had heard, that Constantia the
daughter of Rogerius Normannus, a Nun, was by Clement the III. brought out of
the Monastery of Panormus, to be married to Henry the VI. son of Frederike
Aenobarbus, of whom the Archbishop of ^lorence writes, that when she was fifty
^ Part. 3. tit. 19. cap. 6.
years of age, and had long professed a Monastical religion, that she bare
Frederike the II. And that she might take away all suspicion of a supposite and
foisted birth, that she was openly delivered in the middle of a street in
Panormus, under a sheet over spread: proclamation being made before, that it
should be lawful for all women to be present, who would come to see that
spectacle. Therefore this Frederike was borne says he, of a Nun that was now
fifty years of age) and because they had heard also that an other Pope had
granted a certain King of Aragon an indulgence, that of a Monk he might be a
married man. Wherefore these men I mean the Canonists, being beyond all measure
addicted to the Popes, being loath to reprehend such manner of actions, least
they should do disgrace to their Popes, who were greedy of honor, and knowing
that the words of the prescript set forth by Innocent the III. did affirm the
contrary, they labored to help themselves by such foolish interpretations, as
it irketh me to report in this place, least I should intertaine the reader with
toies. But it had been much easier for them, to maintain the truth and the
equity of the rescript, then to practice to make a certain law of the
singular, and unlawful actions of Popes, as though they were a rule to live by
Let us su^ter the Popes to give account of their actions to God, neither let us
imitate them in all things. But if any do propound to us for examples such
actions of theirs, we will answer with Joan de Tur. Crem, Siluester, Sotus, and
other learned men: That these were deeds of Popes, but not decrees, and that
the deeds of the Popes, do not make an article of the Christian says, and
that it is one thing, to commit any thing defacto, mother thing to determine
what might be done de^ure. I my ^^e and Siluester, have seen a Pope do greater
matters, with the canda^^ of whole Christianity: and John de Tur. Crem.
speaking of unlawful dispensations, says, which if it shall so be at any time
done by any Pope being either ignorant in the Scriptures, or blinded with
desire of wealth, and money, which is wont to be offered for such exorbitant
dispensations, or that he might please any man, it does not follow that he
might justly do those things. The Church is governed or ought to be governed
by Right and Laws, not by such actions or Examples.

CHAP. XXVII.
THerefore it is the opinion of many learned men that the Pope cannot give
power to a religious Person to break his vow, that he may have the property of
any goods or a wife, according to the true and simple sense of Innocentius his
words. And yet if we will diligently search and consider how much some things
differ from other, and with a right judgment to compare them together in the
points wherein they properly agree or differ: there will because to confess
that the Pope has far less power given him to absolve a People from the
Religion-of their oath, by which they have willingly and frankely obleiged
their faith to their Prince, then to dissolve the vows of religious Persons,
that although in this last point peradventure, in some men's opinion, he may
seem to have power to do something deplenitudine potestatis, yet in the other
we must think that he is able to do just nothing. Both for that the whole
Order Monachall, and other Orders in the Church (as certain think) have
proceeded from humane Constitutions, and the positive law, over whom in that
consideration the Pope has full and all manner of power that may be, as we
have said a little before. But the submission and obedience due to Kings and
Princes and all Magistrates and superiors is grounded upon the law of Nature
and of God, being confirmed by both the Testaments. For although it be a matter
of humane law and ordination to use this or that form of Commonwealth or
Government, or to have this or that Prince; but to reverence him, whom we had
once received, and submisly to obey him in all things, which are not contrary
to Gods commandments, it is a matter not only of humane, but also both of
Natural and Divine institution. And this I think, no man will deny.
Quipotestati resistit, Deiordination^ resistit. Whereby it comes to pass,
that that which was free and arbitrary in the beginning, that is presently
turned into a necessity of obedience after that one faith of subjection is
given.

As also, because by the vow of religiont, he obligation is taken only to God
and the Church, whereof the Pope is the Vicar, or deputed head: and therefore
if the Pope, to whom the free procuration and dispensation of all the
buisnesses of the Church is permitted, shall as it were in a fashion of
renewing a bond, transfuse and change the obligation, taken to the Church, into
another Obligation, and also do interpret and consture that by the promise of
a great good, (or performance) there is satisfaction made, to the Lord God, who
is the principal creditor in that business, peradventure it will not be very
absurd to say, that there may by chance prove a liberation and freedom from
the knot of the former vow and promise: unless some may think, that it cannot
be for this cause, because the transgression of a lawful vow, is simply and of
his own nature sinful, and that which is sinful may not be allowed to be
done to obtain any good, although it be very great, Rom 3.
But the solution of that objection is very easy.

But the matter (...) far otherwise in the case of an Oath, which men in
their bargains and covenants are wont to take to confirm and ratify another
Obligation thereby. Seeing such a manner of oath is a certain increase of that
obligation, to which it is added for security, in such manner as suerties^ip,
or assurance of any Pledge or Moregage is usually taken. And therefore although
the oath be said to be made to God, yet in this case the obligation does accrue
not to God principally, but to the person to whom the oath is sworn: quia per
iuramentum ^urans non intendebat placere Deo, sed satisfacere proximo Panor^^.
in cap. 1 (...). 4 de (...).
. Whereby it comes to pass, that he to whom the Oath is taken, has much
more interest by that Oath, and obtains much more power either to retain it,
or to remit it, then is granted to the Church in a vow, for the Church or Pope,
(even as they confess who submit all things to his pleasure) cannot without
great and just cause dispense with the solemn vow of Religion. But he to whom
an other has by oath bound his faith in the matter of giving or doing, may
both alone, and without cause, of his mere pleasure wholly free the Promiser
from the Religion of his Oath, and (...) it to him, whatsoever it be, of
himself; so as his only leave and good will obtained, neither is there any
more need of the Popes absolution, neither if he shall not perform that which
he promised, may he be reputed guilty of perjury before God. Therefore it is
in a man in this Case, who can at his pleasure either retain one that is
bound, or dismiss him free, which because they are so by the consent of all
men: how can it be, that the Pope may take from the Creditor against his will
an Obligation taken to him by the best law that may be, I mean by the Law
natural, divine and humane, by an oath every manner of way lawful, which was
added to the lawful contract? seeing in this kind as in the former, there is no
place left to Construction by which it may be presumed that he is satisfied, to
whom principally the oath was made: viz. No Creditor speaking a word against
nor showing the contrary seeing presumption yields to the truth I. v^t D.
quod met. ca l continum. 127. ^um ita D. de verb. ob^^g.
.

But let it be, that he may upon cause take it away, and free the Promiser from
the bond of his Oath, (because I will not strive longer with the Canonists about
this matter) let him then take it away, and what then force after think you
will seem in this our business? you will say that the people will be free
from the commandment and subjection of the Prince, a soon as they are loosed
from the bond of their oath. Think you so indeed? what do you not see, that
this Oath, is but an Accessarie only, to ratify and assure the Obligation,
whereby loyalty and obedience was promised to the Prince? do you not know
that Accessaries are taken away and discharged with avoiding of the principal
Obligation, for although the principal being cancelled the Accessarie falls,
yet by the taking away of the Accessaries the Principal is not destroyed.
Therefore the Obligation remains yet, to which this Oath was added: which
because it consists upon natural and divine Law, does no less straightly hold
the minds and consciences of men before God, then if it were supported with an
Oath, quia Dominus inter iur amentum and loquelam nostram, nullam vult esse
distantiam Can. iuramenti. 22. q. 5.
, as much as concerns keeping faith of the promise. Although the breaker of
his Oath offends more, by reason of the contempt of God; and notwithstanding
that in the external Court Perjury is more grievously punished, by reason of
the solemnity of the promise, then the faith neglected of a man's single
promise and bare word, as we say.

But if the Pope would also cancel this Obligation de Apostolicae potestatis
plenitudine, and deliver and discharge the Subjects from the Oath of the King:
and enjoin them that they should not dare to obey his requests, commandments
and laws under pain of Excommunication: Shall not the express commandment
of God seem to contraueene this warrant of the Pope, I mean the commandment
of the honoring of Kings with all obedience? Is it not lawful in such a
business and in a cause the greatest almost that may be, to do that which the
Popes interpreters are accustomed to do, in Controversies of less moment? And
that is, to make diligent and careful inquisition into this same plenitudinem
Potestatis, whether it extend it self so far, as that by it should expressly
be forbidden, which God does expressly command? or that which God directly
forbids to be done, the same may lawfully be commanded by it? God commandes me
by Solomon to fear the King: by his Apostles to honor the King, to be subject
and obedient to him. This surely is a commandment both of natural and divine
Law: that the inferior should obey the superior, as long as he forbids
not, who is superior to them both, in the same kind of power. And he in this
business between the people and the Prince, when the question is about
temporal authority and subjection, is God alone, then whom alone the King is
less in temporal matters, as in spiritual the Pope.

Seeing then all men do ingenuously confess, that this fullness of the
Apostolic power is not so great, that the Pope may in any sort dispense in
those things, which are bidden or forbidden by the express word of God (which
Axiom, or Proposition Bellarmine chiefly rests on, while he would show,

That the Pope cannot subject himself to the coactiue sentence of Councels.
The Popes power over all men is, (says Lib 2. cap 18. de Council.
he) by the law of God: but the Pope cannot dispense in the law of God. We
ought not to marvel a whit, if the Divine commandments of fearing and
honoring the King, are so deeply impressed in the minds of many Subjects,
that they giueno place to contrary precepts, but rather employ all their care
that therebe no obedience at all given to the adverse edicts of the Pope either
absolutory or prohibitory: It has been often told me by great Personages, and
those good men, that that divine Precept of honoring Kings, was of so great
force with them, and had taken so deep root in their minds, that they did
persuade themselves, that by no Bulls nor contrary Indulgences they could be
discharged of the scruple and weight of conscience, and purchase security in
the inner man, vz. their souls, that they should not perform and execute so
clear and manifest a commandment of Natuarll and Divine law, nor yield the
obedience promised and due to their Prince. And this is the reason, why so few
of the Nobility did make defection from Henry the 4. Emperor, none from
Phillip the Fair, none also from Jews the 12. both Kings of France, by reason
of the Popes Bulls and Censures, containing sentence of Deposition. For that
we mistake not any way we must understand, that this Plenitude of Apostolical
power, does only comprehend that power which the Lord Jesus the son of God,
when he lived in the world, as a man amongst men, was pleased to have: and that
so far the Popes represent Christ unto us, and is his Vicar, (as we have
showed above out of the doctrine of the most learned Bellarmine) but not that
power which he as the son of God, and God himself, equal with the father
had from all eternity, and reserved to the omnipotency of his Divinity.
Whereof he says, All power is given me in Heaven and in Earth Math. vlt.
.

Although I see some play the fools, or rather the madmen so much, that they
athrme, that this Omnipotency is also given to the Pope, and to prove the same
do spin out a notorious argument of their own vanity, in this manner.

Christ committed to the Pope the deputation of his office, as it is Matthew. 16.
cap. and 24. q. 1. can. quodcunque But all power in Heaven and in Earth was
given to Christ, Math. 28.

Ergo, The Pope which is his Uicarc has this power. Extra ae translat. cap.
quanto.

So Peter Bertrandus in his additions Adgloss. extrauag. Vnum sanctam. de mayor
and obed. Who also was so bold as to add, that which is not far from
blasphemy.

For the Lord should not seem to have been wise or discreet (that I may
speak it with his reverence) unless he had left such a one behind him, who
could do all these things. Had this man think you any brain? No marvel if
Io. Gerson said, that Pusillos, little ones, that is to say, simple and
ignorant Christians, being deceived by such kind of unskillful Glos^ators and
Postillators,

Estimare Papam vnum Deum, qui habet potestatem omnem in Caelo and in Terra.
Surely such gross flatterers have spoiled and corrupted the judgment and
lives of many Popes. Neither is it marvel, if Pius the fifth the Pope, did tell
Martinus Aspilineta, That the Lawyers, (he meant the Canonists, I think) were
accustomed to attribute a great deal too much power to the (...) in comm^n.
can. non (...) Papa 12. q. 2.
Pope. Of whom John de Turre cremata,

It is a great wonder In Ca^ (...). 3 q. 2.
(says he) that Popes do speak moderately of the power which is given them;
Even certain paltry Doctorculi, without any true ground, will needs by
flattery make them equal with God. To which appertains that which the
Cardinal of Cusa writes, a man very conversant in all Philosophy humane and
divine, and in story besides; that certain writers being willing to exalt the
Roman See, worthy of all praise, more a great deal then is expedient or comely
for the holy Church, do ground themselves on apocryphal writings, and so
deceive both Popes and people.

CHAP. XXVIII.
NOw the error of these men, whereby they give to the Pope all power both
humane and divine, was bredde partly out of the Apocryphal writings, as has
been said; partly out of certain rescripts of Popes, being conceived more
darkly then was cause, and wrong understood, according to the letter, as they
say. For, to speak the truth, there is no kind of people more unskillful and
ignorant, then these bare and mere Canonists are: which I would not have
understood only of the knowledge of liberal learning, and of the property of
speech, for this kind of ignorance is to be borne withal in them, as the
common fault of that age wherein they wrote: but even of the knowledge of that
very art which they profess, which they have clouded and darkened with
infinite varieties of distinctions and opinions. For the greatest part of them
dwelt only in the Popes Canons and Constitutions, seeking none or very little
outward help out of divinity and other sciences, as they should have done.
Those Rescripts whereof I speak, and which bredde error in these men, are
extant under the title of De translatione Episcopi, Ca. 2. 3. and 4.
wherein Innocent the third compares the spiritual marriage, which is
contracted between the Bishop and the Church, with the carnal marriage, which
is between a man and a woman: first in that, because as the carnal matrimony
takes her beginning from the Espousals, and is ratified by marriage, and
consummate by commistion of bodies: so also the spiritual contract of marriage,
which is between the Bishop and the Church, is understood to have his
beginning in the election, his ratifying in confirmation, and to be consummate
in consecration Secondly in this, that the speech of our Lord and Savior in
the Gospel, Those whom God has joined, let not man separate, is to be
understood of both the matrimonies, both carnal and spiritual. Seeing
therefore, says he, the spiritual bond is stronger then the carnal, it ought
not to be doubted, but that Almighty God has reserved only to his judgment
the dissolution of the spiritual marriage which is between the Pope and the
Church, who has reserved only to his own judgment the dissolution of the
carnal marriage, which is between the man and the woman: commanding, that whom
God has joined together, man should not separate. And again: As the bond of
lawful matrimony, which is between man and wife, cannot be dissolved by
man, the Lord saying in the Gospel, Mat^. 19.
Those whom God has joined, let not man separate: so the spiritual contract
of marriage, which is between the Pope and the Church, cannot be dissolved
without his authority, who is the Successor of Peter, and Vicar of Jesus
Christ.

And lest any man should object, If God have reserved to his own only
judgment the dissolution of both the marriages, both carnal and spiritual,
and the spiritual bond is stronger then the carnal: how can it be, that the
Pope, who is surely but a man, can dissolve that spiritual bond? Innocentius
answers in that place, that it is done in that regard, because they are
separated, not by humane, but by divine power, who by the authority of the
Bishop of Rome are removed from the Church, by translation, deposition, or
cession. For, quoth he, not man, but God does separate; whom the Bishop of Rome
(who bears the person not of a pure man, but of the true God in earth)
weighing the necessity or profit of the Church, dissolueth, not by humane, but
rather by divine authority. Thus he.

These manner of speeches, and the cause that these men are carried headlong in
that error, that they suppose, whatsoever is done by the Pope, is done by God
himself, because the words of Innocent seem to carry this meaning. I
confess, that there is no place in the whole Pontificiall Law more plain and
open for the words, nor more hard for the sense, that in expounding the same,
the wits of all Interpreters do fail. For what can be spoken more
vnderstandatly, plainly, and clearly then this; That not man, but God does
separate those whom the Bishop of Rome does separate or dissolve? Or what
follows more rightly of any thing, then this of that position: Ergo, that the
Bishop of Rome may dissolve matrimony, which is consummate, carnal copula,
between married persons? And yet there is nothing more false then this
conclusion; and therefore we must confess, that that whereof it follows, is
false also, because that which is false can never follow of that which is true.
Which when Hostiensis had observed, when (I say) he had considered the
inconsequence of that reason: In sum de elect. n^. 25.
But that reason, quoth he, saving his authority and reverence that gave it,
is not sufficient, unless it be otherwise understood: for by that it would
follow, that be might also by his authority divide carnal matrimony. But
for all that, Hostiensis does not tell us how this gear ought to be
understood otherwise: neither can he extricate himself from hence, that he
may maintain his opinion with the preservation of the truth. For, that he
supposes it might be understood of carnal matrimony, because, as he says,
before carnal copulation by a common dissent, it may be dissolved, the Popes
authority coming between: arg. cap. 2 and cap. expublico de conuers.
coniugat. Surely this interpretation is void of all authority and reason: for
as touching the rescripts alleged by him, and if there be any such like, they
speak of that dissolution of matrimony which is made by election of religion,
and when one of the married persons enters into a Monastery, before their
bodies be commixed nuptialis thori amplexibus: in which case there is no need
of the Pope, authority to interuene, or any pontificiall dispensation: but
that they are warranted by mere right, and the common help of the law, who in
that manner do procure a separation, and break off matrimony. Cap. ex part
14.. Nos tamen and d. cap. 2. de conuers. contugat.
But that a matrimony ratified, and not yet consummate, may upon another cause
be dissolved by the authority of the Pope, by the common dissent of the
parties, that we are to deny constantly, and that according to the most
learned Divines. For the conjunction and commission of bodies does neither add
nor take away any thing from the substance and (...), or essence of matrimony:
for the form of matrimony consists in the declaration of the indiuided
conjunction, and consent of minds, whereby they do naturally give themselves
one to the other. But the procreation of children, and the bed-fellowship for
that cause, is referred not to the constitution of matrimony, but to the end D
Thom. 3. q. 29. art 2. ^2 (...).
. Hence is it said by the heathen, that Nuptias non concubitus, sed consensus
facit: Not the fellowship of the bed, but the consent of the minds makes
marriages (...) D. (...). can. cum (...) 27 q. 2.
. And the same is confirmed by the sacred Canons and Constitutions (...)
. Otherwise surely that first marriage, which God instituted in Paradise, was
not a marriage, until the married persons being cast out from thence, began to
provide for issue: then which what can be more absurd? Moreover, there is no
Constitution or Tradition of the Church, no authority of Fathers, no decretall
Epistle of the Pope, in a word, there is no certain and solid reason to be
found, which does except from that sentence of our Savior, matrimony
ratified, although not consummate: Quos Deus con^unxit, homo ne separet. Nay
and he cannot except, unless it be true, that they, who being contracted, are
in the face of the Church joined in the Sacrament of matrimony, are not joined
by God.

But there is in this matter, as in others, so great either Ignorance or
flattery of diverse Interpreters of the pontificiall Law, that they are not
ashamed to auerre, that not only matrimony ratified, but not consummate, (and
that against the common judgment of the Divines, but also Matrimony both
ratified and consummated by carnal conjunction, may be dissolved by the Pope,
as well as by God himself: Uide Couarruuiam de matrim. part. 2.. 4. vbi id
notat and reprebendt.
which if it should be true, how weak the bond of Matrimony would prove
amongst them, who have grace and power with the Pope, or otherwise may corrupt
him with bribes, being blinded with desire of money, J leave to others to
judge. But there is no cause, why they should think that their opinion is
strengthened by the former rescripts of Innocentius: seeing the Pope himself in
an other place expreslie faith, Cap. ex part 4 not aute m. de convers.
coniugat.
that Matrimony between lawful persons, with words of the present time,
Contracted, may in no case be dissolved, except before that marriage be
consummated by carnal copulation, one of the married persons pass over into
religion. For it is not credible, that so learned and godly a Bishop, had
either so suddenly forgot himself, or wittingly had published opinions so
iarring and dissenting one from the other. Therefore there must some other
meaning be sought of these rescripts of Innocentius.

CHAP. XXIX.
NOw, if any ask my opinion, and interpretation of them, I am not afraid to
say, as in a matter of this obscurity, that I am at a stand; notwithstanding,
that I do think, that the difference in them is (...), that is, that the mind
of this good Bishop, and the sense of the words do differ; which often times
falls out in the writings of Lawmakers, when as either they do use words not
so fit for to express their meaning, or do omit some necessary particle, or
exception, for to make the constitution plain, and entire; for otherwise it is
not likely, that he who denies, that the Pope may grant license to a Moncke,
that he may have property of goods, or marry a wife; would affirm, that the
Pope may dissolve the Sacrament of marriage, I mean Matrimony ratified and
consummate. What is the matter then? I will speak what I think: I have
observed, that Innocentius has with that subtlety and finenesse tempered his
doctrine, that although he compare each marriage in this, that they are
dissolved by the judgment of God only: yet, where he speaks of the power of
the chief Bishop, and Vicar of Jesus Christ, he conioineth them together no
more, nor makes mention of carnal matrimony, but only of spiritual: which
not deemed to be separated by man, but by God himself; then when as the Bishop
of Rome dissolueth the same, the necessity or commodity of the Church well
considered, not out of humane, but rather out of divine authority by
translation, deposition or cession; by which silence, and omission of carnal
Matrimony, he does sufficiently implie, that in the manner of separation, it
does differ, and is secretly excepted from the spiritual matrimony: that the
Pontificiall authority does not extend to the dissolution of this, viz. the
carnal, as if he had spoken more plainly in this manner. God has reserved
to his own judgment, the dissolution, as well of the carnal, as of the
spiritual matrimony: notwithstanding, the Bishop of Rome, who is the Vicar of
Christ, and successor of Peter, the necessity or commodity of the Churches,
etc. may dissolve them: which when he does, not man but God does separate,
whose Person the Pope bears in earth. Now, why the Pope may dissolve a
spiritual marriage, and not a carnal also, the reason is plain and easy:
because the spiritual matrimony of it self, and every way does belong to the
ordination, government, and oeconomie of the Church, which Christ has wholly
commended to Peter and his successors. And therefore he must needs seem to
have granted to them this power to dissolve spiritual marriage, seeing they are
not able without it to execute, and discharge the office committed to them I.
^. D. de iurisd.
. And therefore whatsoever the Popes themselves, as Hierarches, that is
spiritual Governors, L. Si itor. D. deseruit. l^. 3 qui babet. D. de seruit.
p^aed. rustic. cap. 5. de offic^ud. dole.
do dispose and decree of the several matters and persons of the Church, we
must believe that God does dispose and decree the same, who has by name
committed this dispensation, and procuration to them.

But carnal matrimony was instituted, not for the ordination of the Church,
but only for procreation of issue Aug. li. 14. de ciuit. Dei. ca. 18. Thom. 2.
2. q. 154. art. 2.
: and for that cause it is said to be of the law of nature, and to be common
to all nations and countries: neither does it in any other respect belong to
the notice of the Church, but that it is a See the admonition to the Reader.
Sacrament in the new law, containing the my sterie of God and the soul, of
Christ and the Church. And therefore there was no necessity to permit to Peter
and his successors, the power to dissolve the same. They have enough to
discern and judge, if it be a marriage, that they may know if it be a
sacrament. Therefore, although the Pope may avail very much in the contracting
of a marriage, viz by removing all impediments, which do arise out of the
positive law, and ecclesiastical constitutions, and give order, that it may
duly and rightly be contracted, which otherwise were neither lawful nor firm:
yet when as either through the common law permitting, or the Pope dispensing in
cases prohibited, it was contracted, has no power for any cause in the world,
to relaxe and dissolve the same. Neither does it belong to the matter, that in
Courts and judgments Ecclesiastical, we see often that separation is made of
those persons, as have lived a long time together, under the conceit and show
of marriage. For neither the Pope in that case, nor the Judge delegated by the
Popes authority, does dissolve any matrimony: but by his judgment declares,
that the matrimony, which indeed was contracted de fasto, or was falsely
supposed to be a marriage, was no marriage at all: and enioyneth persons that are
not lawfully coupled together, because without sin they may not entertain that
society together, to depart one from an other, and to forbear their
accustomed acquaintance. But this is not to dissolve Matrimony, or to separate
persons lawfully joined, as concerning the bond of marriage. Whereby it is
evident, that both Innocentius the Interpreter, who afterward was the IIII.
Pope of that name, and also Ioh, Andr. (who is called the fountain and trumpet
of the Canon law) has very foolishly interpreted this part of the rescript of
Innocentius the III. Whom God has joined, let no man separate. Of their own
authority say they: but man does not separate carnal matrimony, when the
Bishop or the Archdeacon does dissolve it by the Constitutions of the Pope, but
God himself, by whose authority those constitutions were made. As though
Matrimony might be dissolved by the constitutions of the Pope? Indeed the
constitutions of the Pope may hinder, that marriage may not be lawfully
contracted between certain persons, and make a nullitie in the law, because
it was not contracted by the disposition of the same constitutions. But to
distract and divide a marriage which is lawfully contracted, and to break or
loose the band, no constitution either of Pope or church can do. Otherwise the
Apostle in those words; 1. Cor. 7.
The woman is bound to the law so long time as her husband lives, but if her
husband do sleep she is free: I say he did ill to make mention of death
only; if she may be free by some other means, viz. the Popes constitutions,
the marriage it self being dissolved. And now since these things are thus, it
is time to return from this by-way, into which the unreasonable flattery, and
ignorance of certain Doctors has drawn us, into that path from whence we
have digressed.

CHAP. XXX.
IT is now positiuely set down, and affirmed by the consent of all who can
rightly judge of divine matters, that the Pope cannot make grace to any, of the
natural and divine law; or, as we usually speak now a days, cannot dispense
against the law of nature, and of God: and grant that that may be done without
guilt, which God and nature have forbidden; or forbid lest that should be done
which God has expressly commanded to be done; and this not only the Divines,
but also the Canonists of the better sort, do very earnestly maintain.
Therefore this is a most grounded Ax^ome, whereon the weight of this whole
disputation does depend, and whereon is grounded the solution of that argument,
which we have transcribed out of Bellarmine above in the beginning of the 25.
Chapter. Surely, we do admit his proposition, which is, That it is necessary
for a Pastor to have power about the Wolves, that he may drive them away, by
all the means he is able. We admit also the Assumption. That the Wolves which
destroy and waste the Church of God, are heretics. Where he concludes in
this manner. Ergo, If a Prince, of a sheep, or ram, turn Wolf; that is to
say, of a Christian turn an heretic, the Pastor of the Church may drive him
away by excommunication, and also may charge the people, that they do not
follow him, and therefore may deprive him of dominion over his subjects.
Surely, a very unsound collection. In stead whereof, in good Logic, should
be put this conclusion: Ergo, If any Prince, of a sheep, or a ram, turn
Wolf, the Pastor of the Church may drive him away by all the means he can.
For this arises rightly out of the former Propositions, and therefore if we
grant them it cannot be denied. Therefore all this is true; and we grant it
all: but yet that which he annecteth and knitteth to this conclusion, is
neither agreeable nor consequent, which is, that the Pastor may enioine the
people, etc. For to be able, or not to be able (posse) where the right and
equity is disputed, ought to be understood not of the mere act, but of the
power, which is lawfully permitted, and which agrees with law and reason. So
as in this case the Pope may be said to be able to do that, which he is able
to do justly and honestly L ^^^lins 15. D. de condit. institut.
. And so the matter is brought about, as we are enforced to enquire, Id posse.
whether the Pope by the plenitude of his Apostolic power, as they speak,
can command and enioine subjects, that they dare not be so bold as to obey the
edicts, commandments, laws of their Prince under pain of excommunication.
And if he shall de facto command the law, whether the Subjects are bound to
obey any such commandment of the Pope. Surely, as I touched in the beginning;
for the Affirmative, I could never in my life, either my self find a weighty
argument, nor light upon any invented by an other: But the contrary proposition
is strongly maintained, being built upon the foundation which we spoke of ere
while; viz. That the Pope cannot in any sort dispense against a law of nature,
and of God. Upon which ground is raised a most firm argument in my opinion,
which is concluded in this form.

The Pope can command or dispense in nothing against the law Natural and
Divine. But to command or dispense in the matter of subjection and obedience
due to Princes, is against law natural and Divine.

Ergo, The Pope cannot command or dispense in the same: and by consequence
cannot command the subjects, that they do not obey their temporal Prince, in
that wherein the Prince is superior to him: and if he shall de facto command,
it shall be lawful for the subjects to disobey him with safety and good
conscience, as one that presumes to give laws without the compass of his
territory or jurisdiction. Both the Propositions are most certain. Out of
which the Conclusion is induced by a necessary consecution. He that shall
weaken the force of this Argument, shall do me a very great pleasure, and
make me beholding to him. For my part, that I may ingenuously confess my
slender wit, I do not see in the world how it can be checked by any sound
reason; for though it may be said, that obedience due to a superior may be
restrained and hindered by him who is superior to that superior, and that the
Pope who is Father of all Christians, is superior to all Kings and Princes
Christian, in this, that he is Father, and therefore that he may of his own
authority inhibite and restrain, that the subjects do not perform the
reverence and obedience due and promised to the Prince; yet this reason is like
a painted ordinance, not able to beat down the strength of the former
conclusion. Seeing this which is said, that obedience du to a superior may be
diminished or restrained, or taken away by his commandment, who is superior
to that superior: this is true only then, when he who forbids it is
superior in the same kind, and line of power and superiority; or in those
things, wherein obedience is due. As for example, the King may take from the
Lieutenant of his Army his command, and give charge that the Army obey him
no more; and the Lieutenant may upon cause command that the soldier obey not
the Tribune, nor the Tribune the Centurion, nor the Centurion the Decurion. For
that all these in the same kind, I mean about military government and
discipline, but one above an other, are superior according to the order of
dignity. The same is true in the orders of the heavenly warfare, and of the
ecclesiastical Hierarchy. But the obedience of the subjects toward the
Prince, whereof we speak; consists in temporal matters, wherein the Popes
themselves confess, that there is none above the Prince Cap. per Venerabilem.
qui fill. sunt legit.
. But if none be above him in temporalities, surely it follows, that there
is none that may forbid or hinder the subjection and obedience which is due to
him from his subjects in temporalities.

I have showed above that these powers the spiritual and temporal, are so
distinct, that neither, as it is such, does command or serve the other. And
that they are not to be regarded, who fly to their starting holes of
distinctions and quirkes, or rather those snares, of verbal captions, by these
words, direct and indirecte. For it is most sure, that he has a superior in
temporalties, whom an other may in any sort command aabout temporal matters:
or who in temporal causes may be judged directly or indirectly by an other.
For judgment is given of one against his will 1. inter stipulintem. 83. ^. de
verb. ^bl.
. And no man is judged but of his superior. Because an equal has no command
over an equal 1. 4. D. de rece^t. qut arbitr. l ill^ quo tempe^^uum. D. ad Sc.
Treb.
. And indeed, for the effect and issue of the matter, there is no difference at
all; whether one have authority and power over an other, directly or
indirectly. For in those words, direct and indirecte, or if you please,
directly, and obliquely, the difference is propounded to us only in the manner
and way, or order of obtaining and coming by the former, but not in the
liberty, force and effect of exercising, and executing the same. But good God?
what can be said more unreasonably, or more contrary to the self then this:
that a King has no superior in temporalties; but is free from all bands of
offenses, nor is brought to punishment by any laws, which all antiquity, and
the whole Church has ever held: and again, that the Pope upon cause, or in
some manner, that is to say, Indirectly, is superior to the King in
temporalties, and may punish him with temporal punishments, that is, with
loss of kingdom and rule, yea and life also? For after that he is once
defected and thrown down from his throne by the Pope, and reduced to the
condition of a private man, what remains, but that he should undergo the
last issue of this malice? and that is, either to provide for his safety by
speedy flight, and so live a miserable life out of his Country; or if he do
not in this manner provide for himself, be will forthwith be arraigned and
convinced in public judgment, and then fall into the hands of a Jailer, or an
Executioner, and so there will be an end of him. Now there is in this power,
which these good fellows do attribute indirectly to the Pope, a sovereign,
free, and uncontrolled liberty to oppress, and to exercise tyranny, even
over good and innocent Kings. For first of all they ordain, That it belongs
to the Pope to judge, if a King be to be deposed or not to be deposed.
Secondly, that there is no appeal from his judgment, Because he alone judges
all men, and is judged of no man. And so should it be in the power and pleasure
of a malicious Pope, whenever he conceiueth and burns with any private
hatred against any King, though he be never so good, to pretend some occasion
or other of an indirect prerogative, that he may turn him out of his
Kingdom, and reduce him to the estate of a private man. Which J would not
speak in this place, (for I would not presage so hardly of the Governors of
the holy See) but that all the world does understand, that the same has in
former ages been practiced by diverse Popes. And it is not yet above the age of
a good old man, since Julius the II. did most wickedly and unjustly take from
John King of Navarre, his Kingdom by Ferdinando of Aragon, by this very
pretense of the Papal authority, the same John being not guilty, or
convinced of any crime, but only because he favored Jews the French King.
And if to do matters of this nature, is not to be superior in temporal
affairs, I would gladly learn of these great Masters, what it is to be a
superior. One thing I know (if this opinion of theirs be true) that the Pope
is able to do more against Kings indirectly, then if he should have directly
any command over them. Of which point we have spoken something before Cap. 12.
The answer of the people to the Pope commanding to disobey their King.
.

If therefore the Pope, de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, shall go about
by his Decree or Bull, to forbid them to obey their King, may not all the
people again, or some in the peoples behalf, answer the Pope in this manner:
Holy Father, You are not above our King in temporalties; and in that respect,
you cannot hinder the temporal obedience which we perform unto him. Why do
you forbid us to do that which God commands us to do? Is it because it is
at your pleasure to interpret the will of God, comprehended in the divine Law,
and in the Scriptures? But notwithstanding there must no such interpretation
be made, as does wholly make the law void, and utterly does destroy and
dissolve the commandment. If there be any thing doubtful or dark in the Law
of God, we presently fly to the Sea of Peter, that is, to the Sea which you
now do hold, to receive the interpretation of the truth: but that which is
clear and manifest of it self, that needs no light of any interpretation.
Seeing then our Lord and Savior commands us, to give to Caesar those things
which are Caesar's, and to God those things which are Gods; and after by his
Apostle, to be subject to Princes and Powers, and to be obedient to them: It
is your part to declare unto us what things be Caesar's, that is to say, what
things belong to our King, and what be Gods; that both of them may have that
which belongs to them: and in this distinction of things we will willingly
hear your voice. But when you say, I will have you give nothing to Caesar, or
to your Prince, you contradict Christ, and therefore we hear not your voice.
We do indeed confess, and profess also, that the exposition and
interpretation of your Holiness should take place touching the observation of
the divine Law: but we affirm absolutely, that that is not to be received,
which makes a scorn both of the Law of God, and of Nature, and brings the
same into contempt. As for example, not to digress from the matter we have in
hand: We are commanded to obey our Princes and Magistrates: in the observation
of this commandment, we as obedient children, do willingly embrace your
expositions and restraints, which do not quite destroy and extinguish the
Commandment it self: as when you say, that from hence there grows no
obligation to obey Kings, but in those matters which belong to their temporal
jurisdiction: that all spiritual things are to be reserved to the Vicar of
Christ, and to the Church. Also, when as you do advertise us, that we ought
not to yield obedience to the King in that which he commands against the Law of
God, or Nature, or which otherwise is repugnant to good manners. But when as
you simply and absolutely command us, that we do not in any sort obey our
lawful Prince, or any of his charges, commandments, and laws: we may not
obey this commandment of yours, because this is not to interpret the
Commandment of God, which is granted to your Holiness, but utterly to
abrogate and overthrow the same, which you cannot do by any means. Christ
when he delivered to Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, did not give
him power Felin. in cap. siquando, nu. 4. de rescript.
faciends de peccato non peccatum, that is to say, that which is sin, to make
it to be none. Therefore in this point we will follow the common doctrine of
the Canonists: That we ought not to obey the Popes commandment, if either it
be unjust, or that many mischiefs or scandals are likely to ensue thereof, or
else the disturbance and disquietnesse of the state of the Church and the
Christian Commonwealth be likely to grow of the same: and therefore, if the
Pope should command any thing to religious men, which were against the
substance of order, that is, which should be contrary to the rule professed
by them, they are not bound to obey it, (as Felinus interprets in cap.
accepimus. de fid. instrum. and cap. si quando. de rescript) as the same
Innocent teaches In cap. n^ Dei 43. de Simon.
elsewhere: whom Martin of Carats in his tractate De Principibus, quast. 408.
and Felinus in de cap. si quando, and d. cap. accepimus, does report and
follow. How much less then ought the subjects of Kings to give ear to the
Pope, going about to withdraw them from the obedience which is due to their
King by the law of God and Nature, and confirmed with the most straight
obligation of an oath? If you will us to withdraw our necks from the yoke and
service of our King for this cause, because a spiritual good is hindered by our
obedience, which is given to him by us: we answer, that this mischief,
whatsoever it be, chances to fall out by some accident: for simply and of it
self, evil cannot grow out of good, nor good out of evil. Now we have
against our wills committed that accident, but we cannot hinder it. We
discharge the duty due to our King: and according to patience in doing well,
we seek glory honor, and immortality. Romans 2.
He if he abuse the obedience due unto him, and so great a benefit of God, he
shall feel God to be a most sharp Judge and Revenger over him. But it is not
lawful for us to forsake our duty, and to transgress the commandment of
God, that even a very great good should follow thereby, lest we purchase to
our selves the damnation which the Apostle does denounce. He that commands to
obey our Kings, and to yield to Casar those things which be Casars, puts no
distinction between good and evil Princes, and therefore ought not we to make
any distinction. L. de pretio. D. de put l. in ^em. act.
If, as B. Augustine teaches, he who See the admonition to the Reader.
has vowed continence to God, ought by no means to offend, even with this
recompense, that he believes he may lawfully marie a wife, because she who
desires to marie with him, has promised that she will be a Christian, and so
may purchase to Christ the soul of a woman, which lies in the death of
infidelity, who if she marie him, is ready to prove a Christian: What excuse
shall we use to God, if we for the hope of some contingent good, should
violate the religion and faith of our Oaths, which we have given to God and
our King? For there is nothing more precious then a soul, for which our Lord
and Savior has vouchsafed to die. And therefore if we may not sin to gain
that to Christ, for what cause shall it be lawful for us to sin?

Moreover, in that you say, that you do free us, and pronounce us free from
the bond of this duty; that takes not from us all scruple of conscience, but
causes us to hang in suspense, and the more to doubt of your authority;
because we know that the commandment, wherein you promise to dispense with
us, is ratified by the law of God and Nature; and that your Holiness can
never, no not by virtue of the fullness of your power, dispense with any in the
law of God and Nature. Therefore we will obey you in spiritual matters, and
the King in temporal matters. God commands both: we will perform both. To be
short, the comminations and threatenings, which you insert in your Mandate, we
do wonder at surely, and in some part we fear them: but yet we are not
altogether so fearful, as to be more afraid of them then we ought, or that
we should be so terrified with them, as for fear of an unjust Excommunication,
to deny to our King the just and lawful obedience which is due unto him. For
although it be a common speech, that every Excommunication is to be feared;
Can. seutentia. can. qui iuslas 11. q. 3.
yet we ought to know, that an unjust Excommunication hurts not him against
whom it is denounced, but rather him by whom it is denounced. Can. quomodo.
can. illud 11. q. 3. can. certum 24. q. 3.
Therefore if you strike us with the edge of your Excommunication, because we
will not at your commandment transgress the Commandment of God, and malum
facere; your malediction and curse shall be turned into a blessing, so as
although we may seem to be bound outwardly, yet inwardly we remain as it
were loosed and innocent.

These and such like, are the reasons which have so settled the faith, as well
of the Clergy as Nobility, and even of the whole Commons of France, toward
their Kings, that they have resolutely withstood certain Popes, who have
earnestly labored to withdraw them from their loyalty, and obedience of their
Kings; and have scorned the Popes Bulls, and the sentence of deposition and
deprivation from the kingdom: nay more, that they have not believed therefore,
not without reason, that they are bound by any Ecclesiastique Censures, or may
justly be enwrapped in any bonds of Anathema or Excommunication. For my part,
surely I do not see what may justly be blamed in the former answer and
defense of the people, unless it be imputed to them, and be sufficient to
convince them of contumacie, because they do not by and by put in execution,
without all delay, or examination of the equity, every commandment of the
Pope, as though it were delivered even by the voice of God himself; which I
think none in his right wits will judge. As for the other points, they are
grounded on most firm demonstrations, most sound reasons and arguments, and
reasons of divine and humane law: viz. That it is the commandment of God, that
honor and obedience should be yielded to Kings and Princes, no difference or
distinction of good and wicked Princes in that point being propounded: That all
the authority of the Pope consists in spiritual matters: That temporal
affairs are left to secular Kings and Princes. That the Pope is not superior
to Kings in temporal matters, and therefore that he cannot punish them with
temporal punishments. Lastly, that the Pope can in no sort dispense against the
Law of Nature and of God, whereby this obedience is commanded the subjects
toward the Prince: and for that cause can neither absolve and discharge the
subjects from that obligation, nor by just excommunication censure them, who
do not obey him when he forbids them to give lawful obedience to the
Prince. Al which points are severally and distinctly concluded before with
authorities, testimonies, and arguments, which in my opinion cannot be
answered; which notwithstanding I will leave to the judgment of the Church.
For this is my mind and resolution, to submit my self and all mine to the
censure and judgment of my most holy Mother.

CHAP. XXXI.
THose things which hitherto have been delivered by us, of the sovereign
authority of Kings and Princes, and of the duty which is not to be denied to
them in all things, which are not repugnant to Gods Commandments, and to good
manners: they are confirmed by the continual and solemn observation of the
ancient Fathers, and the whole Church. For although they had great opportunit^e
and means to pull down and to defect from their government wicked Christian
Princes, by whom they had been wronged with private and public injuries, yet
in no manner did they move any question against them touching their authority
and rule: they denied them no parcel of humane obsequie and obedience. Only
they wisely, freely, and stoutly resisted their errors. And so holding the
multitude in their duty toward God and their King, they observed both
precepts, of fearing God, and honoring the King. And in very deed this is the
principal remedy to preserve men's minds from slipping, and revoke them from
error; and the most ready way and mean to reduce Kings and Princes, being
furiously carried headlong with a frenticke heresy, from immanitie and
fierceness, to courtesy and mildness; from error to truth, from heresy to
the faith: which course the ancient Fathers ever held in such like cases: which
if the other Popes had followed in these latter ages, and had not arrogated to
themselves that same insolent, and proud, and hateful domination over Kings
and Emperors in temporal matters, it had gone better then at this time it
does with the Christian Commonwealth: and peradventure those heresies
wherewith we are now sore pressed, might have been strangled in the very
cradle.

For even the issue and the event of business to this day, does sufficiently
teach, that the Popes do little or nothing avail, while they hold this high,
slipperie, and steep headlong way; but that they do more times raise
troubles, schisms, and wars, by this mean in Christian Countries, then
propagate the faith of Christ, or increase the profit, and enlarge the liberty
of the Church. How unprofitable and hurtful to the Christian Commonwealth
that assault was of Gregory the VII. upon Henry the IV. (which Gregory was
the first of all the Popes that ever adventured this high course) we have
sufficiently declared before. But who is ignorant how that same furious
aggression and censure of Boniface the VIII. upon Philip the Fair, how little
it profited, nay how much it hurt the Church? Likewise that of Julius the II.
against Jews the XII. both Kings of France? of Clement the VII. and Paulus the
III. against Henry the VIII. and of Pius Quintus against Elizabeth, Kings of
England? Did not all these Princes, not only not acknowledge, but also
contemn and laugh to scorn that same papal imperiousness, carried beyond
the bounds of a spiritual jurisdiction, as mere arrogation, and an usurped
domination? For the two last Popes, I dare be bold to affirm upon a clear
ground, (for the matter is known to all the world) that they were the cause
that Religion was lost in England: for that they took upon them to usurp and
practice so odious and so large a jurisdiction over the Prince and people of
that kingdom. Therefore how much more justly and wisely did Clement the VIII.
who chose rather by a spiritual and fatherly charity, and a virtue agreeable
to his name, to erect and establish the state of the French Kingdom, which
began to stagger and sway in religion, then to contend by this same haughty and
threatening authority of a temporal jurisdiction? because he knew that seldom
or never it had happy issue.

Out of doubt, for Kings and Princes, who glory not without cause, that they
are beholding only to God, and the Sword for their Kingdoms and
principalities, it is proper to them of a natural greatness of mind, to desire
rather to die with honor, then to submit their scepters to an others
authority, and to acknowledge any judge and superior in temporal matters. And
for that cause it seems not to be good for the Church, and Christian
commonwealth, that the Pope should be invested in so great an authority over
secular Princes, by reason of the manifold slaughters, miseries, and lamentable
changes of Religion, and of all things besides, which dospring from thence. In
which consideration, I cannot but wonder at the weak judgment of some men,
who take themselves to be very wise, who to remove from the Pope the envy of
so hateful a power, and to mitigate and allay the indignation of Kings whom
it offen death so much; are not afraid to give out, and to publish in books
scattered abroad Ju libello qui Gallice inscribitur, Le verite difendue co^tre
le pladoye d^ A^thonu Arnauld.
, that this temporal prerogative of the Pope over Kings, is passing profitable
even for the Kings the^selus: because as they say, me^ sometimes are kept in
compass, more through the fear of loosing temporal, then of spiritual
estates. An excellent reason surely, and worthy of them, who put no difference
between Princes and private persons, and measure all with one foot. Surely,
these men reach so far in understanding, that they understand nothing at all.
As though that fear which falls upon private persons, is wont to possess also
the minds of Princes: who hold themselves sufficiently protected and armed with
the only authority of their government against all power and strength, and
impression of any man. That reason ought only to be referred to them, whom the
terror of temporal authority, and the severity of ordinary jurisdiction, do
reclaim from offending with fear of punishment; for these kind of people
(because they are sure that if they offend, they shall be chastised with some
pecuniarie or corporal mult) do for the most part abstain from doing hurt,
not for conscience, but for the displeasure, and fear of the loss of
temporal things. But Kings have not the same reason, but being placed on high
above all humane constitutions, and all positive laws, do give unto God only
the account of their administration, whose punishment the longer it is in
coming, the more severe it is like to be. Against private persons the
execution of punishment is ready, which they cannot avoid without the mercy of
the Prince. But what execution can be done against Princes, seeing they are
not tied by any sanctions of humane laws, nullisque ad poenam vocentur
legibus, tuti imperij poteslate? For that it is expressed in the law, That the
Prince is free from the laws: that both the Latin and the Greek Interpreters
do understand, as of all laws, so especially of poenall, that the Prince
although he do offend, may not be chastised by them, or as the Graecians do
speak, (...). Which is the cause, that Kings being assured, both the
greatness of their authority, and confidence of their Arms, fear not the
loss of any temporal estate, seeing there is not one among a thousand of them
so froward and friendlesse, but that he can find many friends to follow his
party, by whose help and advice, whether he be to use slight or strength, he
supposes he can maintain his Crown and scepter. And for this very reason it
is so far, that they will be terrified with these imperious and lording
minitations, to take their Kingdoms away, that they are rather inflamed, and
set on fire by them against all piety and religion. And it is very certain,
that this temporal power, which the Pope some ages past does challenge over
all men, is so hateful to princes, that even they, who do much honor the
seat of Peter, and do acknowledge the great power of his successors in
spiritual causes, yet they cannot without indignation endure to hear the
speech of this temporal domination. The reason is, because neither in the
sacred scriptures, nor traditions of Apostles, or any writings of ancient
fathers, there appears any testimony, nay, no token or print of footing of
any such authority of the Pope: and that a matter of so great weight, I mean
so great a command and power of reigning, should be euicted or wrested from
them without the manifest word of God, or pregnant proof of reason; neither
can they endure any reason of law, or indifferency of equity can admit.

Wherefore wise men have ever been of this mind, that the Popes should with much
more case procure the peace of the Church, if according to the custom of their
ancesters, they would quietly rest themselves within the bounds and compass of
the spiritual jurisdiction; and that according to their Apostolic charity
they should humbly entreat wicked Kings, requesting, beseeching, protesting
with prayers and tears, that they would return into the way, rather then that
they should go about through this hateful intermination, to strip them of
their temporal authority, as it were through force and fear (whereby they
profit nothing or little,) to extort and wrest from them amendment of manners
and faith. And if these Princes be so obstinate and stiff in their wicked
courses, that they can be moved with no tears, nor bended with no prayers; the
assistance of God must be implored, and they abandoned to his judgment. But
now let us go forward.

CHAP. XXXII.
THe second argument which Bellarmine deducteth out of his fifth reason before
related by us, is by him propounded in these words. A shepherd may shed and
shut up the furious rams which destroy the flock: But a Prince is a furious
ram, destroying the flock, when he is in faith a Catholic, but so wicked
as he does much hurt Religion and the Church, as if he should sell
Bishoprics, spoil Churches etc. Ergo, the Pastor of the Church may reclude
him, (he should have rather said exclude him, for recludere is aperire,) or to
reduce him into the rank of the sheep.

Surely, we do admit this argument, and whatsoever beside is by necessary
consecution inferred thereof: now no other thing can be inferred, but that it
is lawful for the Pastor of the Church, (by which name we understand the Pope
in this place) to expel an evil Prince out of the Lords fold, and to exclude
him that he rest not in the Lords sheepe-cotes with the rest of the Christian
flock: that is to say, by Ecxommunication to cast him out of the Communion of
the Church and of the Saints, and to deprive him of all the benefits of
regeneration in Christ, and to deliver him to Satan, until he make lawful
satisfaction for his offense and contumacie. And this punishment is wholly
spiritual and ecclesiastic, and the greatest of all other which the Church
has Can. corripiantu^ 24. q. 3.
: which he cannot go beyond, no not against a private person: unless it be to
go to the Prince civil, as being superior to the offender, and beseech him to
punish the injury offered to the holy mother; who for that she is a nurse of
the Church, ought to chastise with corporal and civil punishments the
offenders and rebels to the same. But the Church wants this temporal aid,
when as he is the sovereign Prince himself, who commits that for which he
may be worthily excommunicate, because he has no superior, and by no law can
be challenged to punishment, being free and safe through the Majesty of his
government. Therefore although the Pastor of the Church, or the Pope, may by
Excommunication exclude him from the flock, and so deprive him of all his
spiritual benefits: yet can he take away from him none of those things which
he possesses and enjoys by virtue of a temporal and humane interest:
because goods of that nature are not subject to Ecclesiastique, but to
Politic laws, which are in the power of Kings. And as no Christian, whether
Prince or private person, can avoid the Popes judgment in spiritual Causes: so
neither may any subject of what rank or place soever he be, decline the
judgment of his King or Prince in temporal affairs: for in that the causes
of Clergy persons are committed to other then to civil Judges, that was
granted them by the singular grace and privilege of Princes, whereas by the
common law, Cleriques as well as Laiques are subject to the temporal authority
of secular Princes. And this is grounded on that reason, which Bellarmine
himself delivers, viz. That Clergy persons, besides that they are Clergy
persons, are also Citizens, and certain parts of the common wealth politic.
Hence it is, that under the best and holiest Christian Princes, all the causes
of Clergy men, as well civil as criminal, so as they were not Ecclesiasticke,
were wont to be debated before civil and temporal Magistrates Vide S. cap.
15.
. Therefore the Clergy did owe to secular Princes this their liberty, which in
this point they enjoy, as we have declared before in the 15. Chapter. Whereby I
marvel that the same Bellarmine does affirm that the Pope might simply by
his own authority exempt Clergy men by the Canon Law, from the subjection of
temporal Princes. For (that I may speak it with the reverence of so great a
man,) it is as false as false may be. Because the law of Christ depriues no man
of his right and interest: but it should deprive, if it should take away
against their wills that temporal right and interest which Princes before they
became Christians had over Clergy men. Again, seeing the Pope himself has
obtained this exemption of his own, by no other right, but by the bounty and
grace of Princes (For as the adversaries confess, he was both de iure, and de
facto, subject to heathen princes, as other Citizens) it is an absurd thing to
say, that he could deliver others from the same subjection. Otherwise that
might agree to him, which the wicked blaspheming Jews did vpbraid to our
Savior Christ, He has saved others, himself he could not save.

And in this point the authority of the Fathers in Councels, could not be
greater then the Popes. Therefore this place requires that we also convince
an other error which has sprung and spread very wide out of the decrees of
Counsels, not diligently and advisedly considered, and which reaches at this
day I know not how far, and to what persons: viz. That Councels have freed
Clergy men from the authority and jurisdiction of Magistrates. Which is as far
from all truth as may be, for it is no where found in any Council, that the
Fathers assumed to them so much authority, as to deprive secular Judges of
their authority and jurisdiction over the Clergy, or in any sort forbid them to
hear and determine the causes of Clergy men being brought before them, unless
it were after that by the singular bounty of Divines, which began from
Iustintanus, that privilege of Court was granted to Church men. For when as
these grave Fathers themselves which were present and presidents in Councels,
were subject to temporal authority (as Saint Augustine teaches in expositione
cap. 13. Epist. ad Rom.) it could not be that they should by their proper
authority exempt themselves or others from that subjection. Therefore we must
understand that those ancient fathers of the church, amongst whom the
Ecclesiastical discipline did flourish with much severity and sincerity (which
at this day is too much neglected) used all the care and diligence that might
be, that the Clergy should carry a light before the people, not only in
doctrine, but also in inte^rity of manners and innocence of life: and for that
cause that they admonished all Clergy men, and decreed and enacted by the
Canons of their councels, that none of them should bring against another any
civil or criminal complaint before a secular Judge, but that either they
should compose all their controversies among themselves by the arbitration of
friends, or if they would not or could not, that at least they should end them
by the judgment of the Bishop. And surely, they ordered their matters in this
manner out of the same, or surely the very like advice which S. Paul in the 1.
Epistle to the Corinthians, gave the Christians, forbiding them, that they
should not draw one an other before the judgment seats of insidell Judges,
and there contend about their differences (which we spoke of a little before:)
I say out of the same advice these fathers ordained, that if any thing sell out
among the Clergy, after the manner of men, which might be a scandal to the
Laity (as are the faults which are committed of human frailety) that the
same might with more secrecy and closenes be amended before their proper
Ordinaries, nor should not come to the ears of the rude and barbarous
multitude, which often times measures the doctrine by the manners, and is
accustomed either to disdain or to scorn and laugh at these manner of slippes
in the Clergy. And moreover, lest the Cleriques, who ought to be careful and
diligent to maintain peace and concord, and both in word and deed to give
example of charity and patience, should seem by their often haunting and
frequenting of secular Courts, to show the way to all manner of strifes and
contention.

Then by these decrees of Councelles, there is nothing detracted from the
authority of the Laickes, but that they may hear the causes of the Clergy
men. For the Fathers did not, neither indeed could they forbid, that secular
Judges should not judge and determine of Clergy men's causes, being brought
before them; (for that had been to take from Princes and Magistrates that
right and authority, which the law of Christ does not permit them to do) but
indeed they did forbid that one Clergy person should not draw an other before
those kind of Judges, appointing canonical or ecclesiastical punishments
against them which did not obey. Now this they might appoint justly and
lawfully without wrong or prejudice to any: even as a good Father that has
many children, may command his children, and also forbid them under a private
and domesticke punishment, that they do not conte^d before a Judge about any
controversies amongst themselves, but that they cease and lay down all
quarrel and differences upon the judgment of their father or brethren: and by
giving his children this charge, he does not prejudice at all the authority of
lawful Judges. Even so the Fathers of the councels have inhibited their
sons, that is, the Clergy men, that they should maintain no action, nor
question amongst them selves before secular Judges, not by taking away from the
Laiques their power to hear and decide of their causes, but by abridging the
Clergy of their ancient liberty of going so freely unto them as they used to
do. And this is not to exempt the Clergy from the authority and jurisdiction
of temporal Magistrates, but only to take a course, by which the Clergy
having business with the Clergy, may easily attain their right without so
much noise and stirrings in Laymens courts. And lest any man should doubt
whether these things stand thus or no, I thought it worth my pains to set down
the very decrees of the Counsels: from which because they were not well
understood, this error has sprung, that from thence the Reader may
understand the truth of our discourse.

The first then which decreed any thing touching this point, was the 3.
council of Carthage, held the year of our Lord 397. at which S. Augustine was
present, and subscribed the same. In the 9. can of that council it is thus
written. Also we have ordained that whosoever Bishop, Priest and Deacon or
Clerk, when as a crime is charged upon him in the Church, or a Civil
controversy, shall be raised against him, if he leaving the Ecclesiastic
judgment, shall desire to be cleared by the public judgments, although the
sentence pass of his side, that he shall lose his place, and this in a
criminal judgment. But in a Civil, that he foresee that which he has
won, if he: desire to hold his place still. For he that has free liberty to
choose his Judges where he will, he does show himself to be unworthy of the
fellowshippe of his brethren, who conceiving meanly of the whole Church, sueth
to the secular judgment for help. Whereas the Apostle commands that the
causes of private Christians should be brought to the Church, and be there
determined.

Is there any word here, whereby it may be gathered by any probable reason,
that the Council meant to exempt the Clergy from the jurisdiction of secular
Magistrates? or does declare that the Laickes are not competent Judges for the
Clergy? Nay it shows the direct contrary: viz. that they do confess, that
the secular Judges may by good right hear and decide the causes of Clergy
persons, and that they do not disallow their judgments, as given by an
incompetent Judge; but that they only endeavor this, to restrain the
giddiness and forwardness of those Clerickes, that when as a cause has
already been begun to be debated in the Church, forsaking and contemning the
Ecclesiasticke Judges, do submit themselves to the order and judgment of
Laickes: in which case the Council does not disallow the sentence given by a
secular Judge, nor pronounces him to be no competent Judge, but a penalty
depriueth that Clerk of the fruit and benefit of such a sentence, by reason
of his lewdness and disorder. Now in that the Fathers of that Council did at
that time acknowledge the Civil Magistrates to be the competent Judges of
Clergy men; by that it may be understood sufficiently, that they restrained
this their decree to that case, wherein a crime is raised upon a Clearke in the
church, or a civil controversy set on foot against him. Therefore out of these
cases, it was by this Canon lawful for the Clergy without offense to
prosecute their suits in a civil court, and to debate their business before a
secular Judge.

After followed the famous Council of Chalcedon, Ann. Dom 451. which also in
the 9. Canon decrees on this manner: If any Clergy person have business with
a Clergy person, let him not forsake his proper Bishop, and run to temporal
judgments: but first let the business be sifted by the pr per Bishop, or at
least by the counsel of the same Bishop; they shall receive judgment and
order from them by whom both parties were content to be judged. If any shall
do otherwise, he shall be subject to the Canonical consures. Observe how this
Council directs her speech to the Clergy, that they should not leave their
own Bishops, to go to secular Judges; but not to temporal Magistrates and
Judges, that they should not hear Clergy men coming to them; and after the
cause debated, should pronounce sentence, and according to the course of law,
compel them to perform the judgment. Therefore by this Canon there is
nothing taken from the authority of the Laity. For those words of the Canon
or Decree, Sedprius actio ventiletur apud proprium Fpiscopum, do sufficiently
show, that the Fathers of the Council do only require, that all the causes of
Clergy men be at the first hand examined by the Bishop: secondly, if there
be cause, that they be carried to the examination of the temporal Judge. For
it is not likely or credibl, that that word, Primum, was idly and super
fluously set down by so many worthy and wise men: and so that Canon does
wholly accord with the Novel Constitution of Justinian, 82. made in favor of
the Clergy men: That Clergy men should first be conuented before their own
Bishops, and afterward before Civil Judges. Therefore the Civil Jurisdiction
of secular Judges over the Clergy is not weakened by this Canon, but rather
confirmed.

Likewise in the Council of Agatha, under King Alaricke. Ann. Dom. 506. the
Fathers which allembled in the same, decreed Can. 32 That no Clergy man should
presume to molest any man before a secular Judge, if the Bishop did not give
him license. The which Canon Gratian transferred into his Decre^um, not without
very foul dealing, both changing the reading, and wresting the sense; for
whereas the Council had said, Clericus ne quenquam praesumat, etc. that he
has drawn to his own opinion, depraved in this manner: Clericum nullus
praesumat apud s^cularem Iudicem Episcopo non permittente, pulsare: that is,
Let no man presume to molest a Clergy man before a Secular Judge, etc. That
the prohibition may include the La^cks also, that they should not convent a
Clergy man before a Secular Judge; whereas it is made only for Clergy men,
without any mention at all of the Laity. Besides, the second part of that
Canon does manifestly show, that the Council is thus far offended with the
Laickes which draw the Clergy before Secular Judgments, and propounds
Ecclesiastical punishments against them, if so be they shall do it
wrongfully, of a purpose to vex and molest them. For it follows in the same
Canon: But if any Secular man shall attempt wrongfully to torment and vex the
Church and Clergy men, (by moving of suits before Secular Judges) and shall
be convicted let him be restrained from entrance into the Church, and from the
Communion of the Catholics, unless he shall worthily repent. but Gratian
has corrupted not only the sentence of this Council, but also of the Epistle
of Pope Marcellinus, in eadem Cau^ and quaest Can 3. and for Clericus nullum,
has written, Clericus nullus: that it is no marvel, that the Canonists, who
did only read the gatherings of Gratianus, being deceived by this false
reading, have fallen into this error, which we now repichend. But it is a
marvel that Bedarmine in both places should follow the coriupt reading of
Gratianus, and not rather the true and natural section of the Authors
themselves, in his Controucisies, Lib. 1. de Clericis, cap. 28.

But in the first Council of Matiscum, which was held under King Gu^tramnus.
An. Dom. 576. Can. 8. is written in this manner: That no Clericke presume, in
what place soever, to accuse any other brother of the Clergy, or draw him to
plead his cause before a Secular Judge but let all matters of the Clergy be
determined in the presence either of the proper Bishop, or Priest, or Arch
deacon.

And in the third Council of Toletum, which was celebrated Ann Dom. 589. In
the reign of King Reccaredus in the 13. Can there is a decree touching Clergy
men thus: The continual misgouernment, and accustomed presumption of liberty,
has so far opened the way to unlawful attempts, that Clerickes leaving
their Bishops, do draw their fellow Clerks to public judgments. Therefore
we ordain, that the like presumption be attempted no more. If any shall
presume to do it, let him lose his cause, and be banished from the Communion.

These are the solemn, and almost the sole decrees of the Canons, whereon they
ground their error, who falsely supposed that Councels could, or in fact did
exempt the Clergy from the power of the Laity: whom the Canons themselves
notwithstanding do so evidently convince, that we need not bring any thing
else besides them, for to repress that conceit of theirs. And these matters
have been thus discoursed by me, not with that mind and intent, to rippe up
the privileges of the Clergy, or because I either envy that they enjoy them,
or wish that they were taken from them. They who know me, know very well in
what account I have ever had, and have Ecclesiastical persons. I do honor
the Priests of God, as my parents, and esteem them worthy all honor: but as
an humble child I advise them, that they be not unthankful, nor disdain
their benefactors, from whom they have received so many privileges. They are
bound to reverence and honor their temporal Princes, as their Patrons, and
Protectors, and procurers of their liberty; and not (as many of them at this
day use) to deny that they are beholding to Princes for those favors, but to
ascribe all their liberties, and exemptions, and immunities, to Pontificiall
and Canonical Constitutions; which is the most unthankful part which can
proceed from unthankful minds. For what temporal liberty soever they have,
they have received the same, not from the Popes, but from secular Princes; nor
from the Canons, but from the Laws.

CHAP. XXXIII.
I Will say more, and I will speak the truth, although peradventure it
purchase me hatred of them to whom all things seem hateful, which are never
so little against their humor and disposition. Therefore I will speak, and I
will speak a great word, which peradventure either no man hitherto has
remembered, or if any have, he has not at the least put any in mind as he
ought, whom it concerned to know the same. And that is, that the Clergy through
the whole world, of what order or degree soever they be, are not to this day in
any manner exempt and freede from the temporal authority of secular Princes,
in whose Kingdoms and countries they live; but are subject to them in no other
manner then other Citizens in all things which belong to civil and temporal
administration and jurisdiction: and that the same Princes have power of life
and death over them, as well as over their other subjects; and therefore that
the Prince (I speak of him who acknowledges no superior in temporal
affairs) may either of his clemency forgive, or punish according to the Law,
a Clergy man, committing any fault whatsoever, so the fault be not merely
Ecclesiastical. This although it seem hard, and half a paradoxe, to them who
being possessed with the error of the contrary opinion, do think that they
live within the authority and jurisdiction of the Pope only, and that they are
not bound to any Constitutions of humane laws besides: notwithstanding I shall
bring to pass in few words, that they may plainly understand, that there is
nothing more true then this proposition of mine, so as they be only willing to
open their ears to ^eare the true reason thereof with indifferency. The truth
thereof depends of those things which we have set down and proved before,
out of the judgment of the Divines of the best note, and shall presently be
demonstrated by necessary and evident conclusion drawn from thence. First of
all therefore, this is set down, and granted, and also confirmed with most
firm reasons and testmonies, that all, both Clerickes and Laickes, were in the
power and authority of Kings and Emperors, so long as the Church served under
heathen Princes. And this is the ground of our demonstration; with which I will
iorne that which has in like manner been set down and granted: that is to
say, That the Law of Christ deprsueth no man of his right and interest, because
he came not to break the Law, but to fulfill the Law. And therefore after
that Princes were brought to the faith, it is certain that all Clergy men
continued in the same order and rank, as far as concerned temporal
subjection, wherein they were before, when their Princes lived in their
infidelity: because the Law of Christ depriueth no man of his particular
interest, as has been said. And in that regard, privileges and exemptions
were granted to the Clergy, which they should not have needed at all, if the
Clergy had not remained, and that by absolute right, as before, under the
authority and jurisdiction of Princes. These things are so clear and plain,
and so witnessed and proved by so many testimonies and monuments, that it may
be thought a needless pains, to remember them in this place, or to add any
thing to them. Therefore let us see that which follows: I mean, let us see
how our former sentence does grow out of these principles, by a manifest
demonstration and necessary conclusion. It is in no place recorded by any
Writer, that the Princes who have endowed the Clergy with these privileges and
exemptions, did set them so free from themselves, that they should not be
further subject unto them, nor acknowledge their Majesty, or obey their
Commandment. Read those things which are written of those privileges: you
shall not find the least testimony of so great immunitie amongst them all.
They only granted to the Clergy, that they should not be conuented before
secular Magistrates, but before their proper Bishops, and Ecclesiastical
Judges. Now this is not to exempt the Clergy from the authority of the
Princes themselves, or to offer prejudice to their jurisdiction and authority,
if they shall please at any time to take knowledge of Clergy men's causes, in
cases which are not merely spiritual. Nay Princes could not, nor at this day
cannot grant to the Clergy, living in their kingdoms, that liberty and
immunitie, that they should not be subject to them in their temporal
authority, and when they offend, be judged and punished by them, but that
they must by the same act renounce and abandon their principality and
government. For it is a property inseparable to Princes, to have power to
correct offenders, and lawfully to govern all the members of the
Commonwealth, I mean, all his Citizens and subjects, with punishing and
rewarding them. And as in a natural body, all the members are subject to the
head, and are governed and directed by it, so as it must needs seem a
monstrous body, where are seen superfluous members, and such as have no
dependencie of the head: even so in this politic body, it is very necessary
that all the members should be subject to the Prince, as to the head, and be
governed by him, that is, to receive reward or punishment from him, according
as each of them deserve in the state. But the Clerickes (as the adversaries
confess) Bellarm. l. 1. de Cleric. c. 28.
besides that they are Clerickes, are also Citizens, and certain parts of the
civil Commonwealth: which is true, and in that regard they are reckoned
amongst the orders of the kingdom, and obtain the first place. Therefore as
Citizens, and parts of the civil Commonwealth, they are subject to the
Prince; neither can they, although the Prince would, but be subject to him in
temporalties: and otherwise either were he no Prince, or they no Citizens.
Therefore it is a foolish thing to suppose and imagine, that a Clergy man,
being conuented for any cause whatsoever, (so it be not merely spiritual) may
avoid the Palace of the sovereign Prince, or of him to whom the Prince, upon
certain knowledge, has specially committed the determination and decision
thereof. For in that Princes do very seldom hear the causes of the Clergy,
that argues want not of power, but of disposition. Hence is it, I mean out of
this temporal authority of secular Princes over the Clergy, that in our time
Charles the V. being Emperor, caused Hermannus Archbishop of Colonie to
appear before him, to clear himself of the crimes which the Clergy and the
University said against him: (...) 1545.
and that in many places the Princes have reserved to themselves certain
offenses of the Clergy to be specially punished, and do commit the same to
the knowledge and judicature of their officers: as are those crimes which are
called Priuilegiate in France, as of Treason, bearing of Arms, counterset
money, peace broken, and the like: neither are we to think that hereby any
injury is done to the Clergy, or that the Ecclesiastical liberty is in any
manner hindered or diminished. Many have Ecclesiastical liberty in their
mouths, who know not a ^ot what it is. We will in another place declare more
plainly what it is, and in what points it consists. (...) cap. (...).


Seeing these things stand thus, every man I think may see, that all the
immunitie of Clergy men, as well for their persons, as for their causes and
goods, have proceeded from secular Princes: but not, as some imagine, is either
due by the Law of God, or granted them by the Pope, or Canons. For that which
Bellarmine brings both for a supplement and a reason, that he might prove how
that the Pope and Councels did simply exempt Clerickes from the temporal
jurisdiction: viz. Di^t lib ^. cap. 28. (...).
That the Imperial Law ought to yield to the Canon Law: that is not generally
true, but then only, when the Canon Law is ordained and exacted of matters
merely spiritual and Ecclesiasticke: but the subjection or immunitie of
Clergy men in civil affairs is not a matter merely spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, but rather civil and temporal: in which cases the sacred
Canons do not disdain to come after the civil Laws. (...).
Neither is there any more force in that which he brings in after, That the
Pope may command the Emperor over those things which belong to the authority
of the Church. As if he should say, that the Pope may constrain the Emperor
to set and dismiss the Clergy free out of his power, because the liberty of
the Clergy belongs to the authority of the Church. For even by this we may
discern that this is false, that the Church never had greater authority then
she had then, when all the Clergy did in temporal subjection obey Christian
Princes, and Officers of Princes. Neither was this exemption and immunitie
granted to the Clergy to increase the authority of the Church, for that was no
less before, but to set them free from vexation and trouble which often times
the rigor and severity of secular judgments did bring.

Hence arose that question, whether it were lawful for Princes, every one
within his territories, without any injury to the church, in some case to
revoke the privilege of the exemption of the Clergy, from the intermedling of
secular Judges, and to reduce the whole business to the common law, and to the
state wherein it stood at the first? Whereof when I was asked not long since, I
answered nothing as then, but that it seemed to me a strange question, and of
a hard deliberation to resolve. For although it have been propounded by
diverse, yet has not been handled by any according to the worth of the subject.

The mouers of this question were moved by the common and usual reason of
taking Privileges away, which the Pope himself, and all Princes are
accustomed to observe; that is, if either they begin to be hurtful to the
Commonwealth, or the cause has failed, and is gone, for which they were
granted at the first, or the privileged Persons themselves do abuse them to a
wicked and unlawful end. And they said indeed that the cause of granting this
exemption, does continue, and is like to continue for ever; that is to say, the
reverence which all men ought to exhibit to that kind of men; but that the
abuse thereof was so frequent in many places, to the great scandal of the
whole Ecclesiastical order, that that benefit may seem deservedly to be
taken from them. Thus much they. But we will more largely and plentifully
decide this matter in our books de corruptione saculi, if God give me life
and strength.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
NOw therefore I return to the argument, which is propounded in the beginning
of the 32. Chapter: and J answer, that it nothing belongs to the taking away
of any temporal goods whatsoever, much less of a kingdom. For it is as
certain as certain may be, that Excommunication, by which only froward and
stubborn Christians are separated and excluded from the fellowship of the
faithful, and communion of the Church, does take from no body their
inheritance, and temporal goods. Unless it proceed from such a cause, which
the Prince has by his laws, especially ordained to be punished with the
publication or loss of goods. In which case, not the Pope, but the Prince, not
the excommunication, but the constitution of the civil law, does take goods
away from the person excommunicate. The Pope surely cannot take any
Patrimoniall right, no not from a Clergy man, though he be excommunicated and
deposed, or degraded by himself. Cap. cum ^ non ab homine. de iudic.
And indeed the case were very hard of Christian people, if so be that a
person excommunicate should forfeite his estate of all his lands and goods, by
excommunication alone, being once passed against him, either by the law, or by
any man, seeing that his goods being once seized into the Kings hands, do
scarce ever return again to the true owner. And so excommunication, which was
appointed for a remedy and a medicine to help, should prove a mischievous
disease to overthrow. For that the person excommunicate, although he shall be
restored again into his former estate of Grace, by washing his fault away with
due repentance, should never or very hardly recover his goods again, being
once returned into the Fiske or Exchequer, and peradventure wasted or given
away to some body, etc.

Therefore the censures Ecclesiastical, amongst which Excommunication is the
most grievous, do work upon the souls, not upon the goods and estates of
the Laity: as on the contrary, the bodies of men, and not their souls are
afflicted with temporal punishments. Seeing therefore that offenders are
punished with the loss of their goods by the auhority, not of the Pope, but of
the Prince: Seeing I say, it is not the Pope, that takes temporal goods from
any private person, by the power of his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and by
the force and virtue of excommunication, or other censure, although the same
be just and grievous; but the civil Prince only, who to pleasure the Church,
and to prosecute the wrong done unto her, is accustomed by laws enacted of
himself, to ordain sometime one punishment, sometime an other, at his own
pleasure, upon the contemners of the Church; how then can it be, that the Pope
can by his sole Pontificiall, and Ecclesiasticke authority take away from the
Prince himself, kingdom, principality, jurisdiction, authority, and all
dominion; who has no judge over him in temporal matters, and is not subject
to any civil pains? Is it so sure and certain, that the Pope has given him by
the law of God more authority over Princes, then over private persons? or are
Princes tied to live in harder terms in the world, then private persons, so
as the Church may practice that upon a Prince, which she cannot do upon a
private man?

But that the truth of this matter may as yet appear more plainly by an other
mean, I demand of these men, if the Pope have greater authority over Kings
and Emperors at this day, then he had in times past, before that he was
advanced to a temporal honor by the bounty of Constantine and other Princes?
or that his authority at this present is only like equal altogether: I mean
that which Christ conferred upon Peter, and which no mortal man can either
straighten or enlarge, and which he shall retain never the less, although he
should lose all temporal principality and government? And if he have greater
authority, whence I pray you should he have it: from God or from men? surely,
neither of both can be affirmed without a manifest us truth. For will any man
ever say, that is in his right wits, that any new authority was given of God to
the Pope over Christian Kings and Princes, from the time that he began to
reign, and to exercise a civil government in certain places, and to show
himself in men's eyes both with a Crown and Miter on his head? or if he should
say it, were he able to make it good by any reason or authority? much less
has any such authority accre^ed to him from men, because as it is commonly
said, Actus agentium non operantur vltra ipsorum voluntatem L. non omnis 19
D^de reb. ^^ed
.

And although Christian Kings and Emperors, who have and do submit their
necks in spiritual causes to the Vicar of Christ, (such as only profess the
orthodoxall faith) yet none of them all passed into the temporal jurisdiction
and authority of the Pope; none of them, but reserved to himself free and
untouched his secular jurisdiction. But if peradventure it be found that any
has done otherwise, the same is to be reckoned as an exception, by which the
rule in non exceptis, is more strongly confirmed. Out of this foundation,
which is laid upon most certain reason, a very good argument may be framed in
this manner:

The Pope has no greater authority over Christian Princes temporal, then he
had before he was a temporal Prince himself. But before he was a ten porall
Prince, he had no temporal authority over them any way. Ergo, Neither has he
now any over them.
The truth of the Proposition is so plain, that I need not underset it with
other arguments: but the Aslumption is proved thus:

No inferior and subject has authority over his superior and Lord, that he
may judge him in that wherein he is subject. But the Pope before he was a
temporal Prince, was inferior and subject to Kings and Emperors, as
concerning temporal matters. Ergo, he had no temporal authority over them,
that he might judge them in temporalties.
The proposition also of this Svllogisme is out of all question, seeing no man
can be judged but by his superior: a superior I mean in that very point,
whereof the judgment is made. For as we have often said, Par in parem non
habet imperium. And in nature it cannot be, that one and the same person should
be both inferior and superior; in the same kind of authority, in respect of
one and the same matter, no more then that the same man should be Father and
Son in respect of one and the same. And the same reason does Bellarmine use to
prove that the Pope cannot submit himself to the coactiue sentence of Councels
Lib. 1. de Conciljs c^. 18.
. The Assumption is confessed by the adversaries, when as they affirm, and
clearly confirm by reasons, That the exception, (unless you will say,
exemption) of Cleriques in civil causes, as well concerning their persons, as
Gods, was brought or by the law of man Bell. b. 1. de Cler. cap. vlt.
. For, (as Augustine witnesses) humane laws be the laws of Emperors,
because God has distributed to mankind the humane laws themselves by the
Emperors and Kings of the world. Therefore the Clergy have from Emperors and
Kings whatsoever exemption and immunity it is, which now they enjoy all the
world over in civil causes, as we showed in the last Chapter before. And that
even of their mere and free bounty; for they could not be enforced in any
sort by the Church, to grant the Clergy those privileges, seeing it is not
found to be expressed and provided by no law of God. And the law of Christ
depriueth no man of his proper right and interest, as the^selus confess, and
we have often signified. And therefore as their own learning carries; Bishops
ought to be subject to Kings in temporalties, and Kings to Bishops in
spiritualties. By all this discourse it follows, that Clergy men were bound
by the common law of other Citizens in civil and temporal matters, and were
alike subject to the authority of secular Judges, as well as the other
inhabitants of the Cities, before that they were by godly Princes endewed with
these Privileges, of exemptions: and many holy Popes have honestly confessed,
that in this case there is no difference between the Bishop of Rome or the
Pope, and other Clergy persons. Therefore that which might be done, let us
suppose it was done, that is, that the Pope being as yet invested in no
temporal principality, or privilege, does live under the government of an
other prince, as his fellow Bishops, and Brethren in France, Spain and
Britanie, and in other kingdoms do. Would it not be euinced by the necessity
of the former argument, that he cannot judge and punish Princes in
temporalties, to whom he is temporally subject? Therefore he has either
purchased a greater authority over Kings and Emperors, then he had before,
through the exemptions and privileges granted even by them; or else he cannot
as yet judge them in temporalties.

But if any be so fond perhaps to say, that the Pope has always had this
authority from the first beginning of the Church, viz. to judge and depose
evil princes, but through the injury of the times he has by accident been
hindered, that he could not exercise it: so long as he was subject to them
touching the temporalties: But now, after that he has withdrawn his neck
from the temporal yoke of princes, and made himself a temporal princes,
there is nothing to hinder, but that he may freely put in ure that
jurisdiction. I say if any shall use this vain ostentation, I must answer him
nothing else, but that the things he speaks are not only false, but also
(...), impossible: setting those things down which the adversaries confess,
and which is most true, that is to say, that the Popes before such time, as
they were by godly Princes clearly exempted from temporal jurisdiction, were
subject to them both de iure and de facto. For it is impossible that at that
time they should have that power; for that it is not competent, but by right of
superiority. Now it implies a contradiction, that the Pope was by right
superior, and by right inferior, at the same time, and in the same kind of
authority, in respect of one and the same; and the natural order of things
does not permit that the inferior, or subject should command his superior
and Ruler. Seeing therefore it is both absurd and impious to imagine that our
Savior Christ, qui non venit soluere legem sed adimplere; should constitute
and appoint any thing against the law of nature, and the most holy rule of
life, they must needs be in a great error, who affirm that this sovereign
authority, whereof we speak, was by Christ conferred on Peter, and in his
person on the rest of the Bishops who succeeded him, when as they bring nothing
to prove the same but certain far fetched reasons, and full weak, patched
up together; of similitudes, comparisons, allegories, and such like stuff, as
you may see by that which we have refuted. All which are to be rejected and
little esteemed, when as by the position and granting of them, some absurdity
does follow, as in this point, or when as more probable and strong reasons
grounded upon the authority of Scriptures and Fathers do maintain the contrary
opinion.

The last argument of Bellarmine is behind, in the refutation whereof we shall
not need to take much pains. The third argument (says he) is this: A
Shepherd may and ought so to feed his sheep, as is convenient for them.
Ergo, the Pope may, and ought, command Christians those things, and enforce
them to these things, to which every one of them in his condition is bound:
that is, constrain every one to serve God in that manner, wherein they ought
according to their state and condition. But Kings ought to serve God by
defending of the Church, and by punishing heretics and schismatickes.
Therefore he may and ought to command Kings that they do it, and unless they
do it, to enforce them by excommunication, and other convenient means.

Surely I see not what is contained in this argument, which either confirms or
infirmes the temporal authority of the Pope. For the beginning thereof is
necessarily to be understood of spiritual food. Now the Popes revenues,
although they be great, would not suffice to feed all sheep with corporal
pasture; and so the end also and conclusion must be understood of spitituall
coercion and compulsion: for he says, to enforce by Excommunication, and
other convenient means, (meaning) Ecclesiastical For the Pope is an
Ecclesiasticke, not a temporal Shepherd, but only so far as at this day he
has temporal rule in certain places. Therefore we grant the whole argument
and freely confess and profess, that the Pope by his spiritual authority
may command all Princes, and enioine them to do those things which appertain
to their safety and theirs; and unless they do it, also to enforce by
excommunication, and other convenient means. But the convenient means are all
spiritual means, and not temporal, unless they be practiced by a temporal
Magistrate. The which point John Driedo observing in his books of Christian
liberty, after that he had declared that these two authorities and
jurisdictions were by the Law of God distinct in the Church, and that all
secular authority in spiritual matters was subject to the Popes authority,
so as the Pope, in regard of his pastoral charge, has authority over a
Christian Emperor, even as a spiritual Father over a son, and as a
Shepherd over his sheep; that he may judge and correct him, if he should fall
into heresy, or deny public justice to the poor and oppressed, or should
enact Laws to the prejudice of the Christian faith. (all which things we also
affirm) he sets down no other pain or punishment against Emperors so
offending, but excommunication alone, because he knew that the Popes authority
and jurisdiction was content with spiritual punishments, and could go no
further, unless she would run out in the borders of temporal authority,
and invade a foreign jurisdiction, which by the Law of God is distinct and
separate from his. Now this is no convenient mean, which the adversaries use,
of deposing ill Princes from their government; but rather of all other means
inconvenient: both for that it has scarce ever succeeded happily to the Popes
themselves, or the Church, but is accustomed to bring into the Church and
Christian Common wealth, infinite calamities, by intestine discords, schisms,
and civil wars: as also, because in respect of the Pope, to whom spiritual
matters only are committed, such a mean must needs seem very strange, and
to proceed from an usurped authority. And therefore it is to be judged L.
Fitius 15. D de cond instit. l. 4.. condemnatum. D. dereiudic.
neither convenient, nor just, nor possible. Hitherto have I weighed in the
balance of naked and open truth, according to the slenderness of my wit, all
the reasons, and from those reasons the arguments, whereby Bellarmine
endeavors to prove that the Pope has supreme authority over secular
Princes, indirecte, indirectly.

CHAP. XXXV.
I Thought in the beginning, when I began this Work, that it was sufficient,
diligently to examine and discuss the reasons which this learned man
Bellarmine does use; but for that he sends us to other matters, which he says
are extant in Nicolas Sanders, saving, See more in Nicolas Sanders. lib. 2. cap
4. de visibili Monarchia, where you shall find many of those things which I
have delivered; I think I shall not do amiss, if I shall bring into light
those arguments of Sanders which are behind, lest the curious and obseruant of
our writings, should complain, that any reason of the contrary side has
been omitted; and also should imagine, that it is of purpose omitted, because
it is so strong, that it cannot be answered. All the world does know,
especially they who have with any care and attention perused Sanders his
books, that he spared no pains, and above all other men gathered together
most arguments to prove that the Pope was invested in this temporal authority
over all Christians, whereof we speak. But yet it is very likely, that that
man was so far blinded, either with a bitter hatred which he bare against
Queen ELIZABETH, being banished out of her Kingdom; or with too great
affection toward Pope Pius V. to whom he was many ways bound; or else with
some other, J know not what smoke of humor and passion, that he did not see,
how that for certain and sound arguments, he used many shows, which were not
only false and far fetched, but even dissenting from common sense, and the
judgment of natural reason. Therefore will I transcribe into this place, very
compendiously, the rest of his arguments, which as I think were of purpose
omitted by Bellarmine.

Saul's kingdom was taken from him, for that he had not observed the
Commandments of the Lord, which were delivered him by the ministry of
Samuel; from whence he collecteth thus: Therefore seeing after the holy Ghost
sent from heaven, the spiritual authority cannot be less now in the Church
of Christ, then it was before in the Synagogue; we must also now confess,
that the King who has despised to hear the Lord speaking by the mouth of the
Pope, may be so deprived of the right of his Kingdom, as that another in the
mean time may be anointed by the same Pope, and that from that day he is
truly King, whom the Pope has rightly anointed, or otherwise consecrated, and
not he who being armed with troops of servants does usurp the Kingdom.

That Ahias the Silonite, when Solomon was yet living, foretold, that Jeroboam
should be ruler of twelve Tribes: 3. Reg. 11.
whereof, says he, it is conceived, that either a whole Kingdom, or some
part, may be taken away by the spiritual authority of the Church. For what
power was once in the Priests and Prophets, the same is now in the Pastors and
Doctors of the Church, whose duty it is so to tender the health of souls,
that they suffer not, by the disobedience and tyranny of a wicked King, people
of an infinite multitude to be forced and haled to schism and heresy.

That Elias anointed Asael King over Syria, and Iehu King over Israel, and
anointed Eliseus to be a Prophet for himself, that he that escaped the hands
of Asael, him should Iehu kill; and him that had escaped the hands of Iehu,
should Eliseus kill. By which figure, says he, what other thing was
signified, then that many Magistrates were for this end raised and set up in
the Church of God, that what was not executed by one of them, might be
executed by the other: of which powers, the last and most principal was in the
Prophets, that is, in the Pastors and Doctors of the Church of God? For as the
sword of Eliseus was reckoned in the last place, which none could avoid,
although he had escaped the sword of Asael and Iehu: so the censure of the
spiritual power can by no means be shunned, although a man escape the sword
of the secular power. For the spiritual power does not use a corporal or
visible sword, which may be hindered by certain means, but uses the sword of
the spirit, which passes through all places, and pierces even to the very
soul of him whom it strikes.

To these he knitteth afterward for an other argument the story of Elias, weary
much enterlaced with diverse observations and allegories, devised by himself,
to show that the material sword does obey the spiritual; and that not only
the Pope, but even other Pastors of the Church, have authority as well over
body and goods, as over the souls of all Christians; which no sober man before
him did ever so much as dream of. But with what vnhandsomnesse, and
incongruence he deduceth this out of the reasons laid before by him, I will
say open in the next Chapter.

But he applies to his purpose the Argument taken from the person of Elias,
and his actions in this manner. Elias by the sword of the spiri^e, that is to
say, by his prayers commanded the fire to fall from heaven, and to destroy
those fifty, who despising the authority of the Prophets, said unto him in the
name of an earthly power; Man of God, the King has commanded thee to descend,
4. Reg. 1.
etc. and in respect of the earthly power contemned that spiritual power,
which Elias was endued with all. And in scorn saluted him, Homo Dei, man of
God: And in this manner he goes forward thus. Could no^ Elias at whose call
fire deseended from heaven, and devoured the fifty men, say to some Prince and
Magistrate if he had been present: Sir, because these soldiers do contemn
me, and in me God, whose Prophet I am, run upon them, and kill them? or could
not an earthly sword have executed the same office, which the fire from heaven
did perform? If fire, qu^th he, be the more noble element, then the earth,
yea, or then the metals which are dug out of the earth, I see not but that
he who called fire from heaven, to satisfy his commandment, might not much
more have bidden the Magistrate, who bears the sword to draw out his sword
for him against any King in the world whatsoever For which opinion of his, this
firmament or strength only is set down by him: That it skils not much amongst
wise men, what is done by those things which are alike in moment and weight. I
will not here add the fourth and fifth argument, which he uses out of the
sacred histories, touching Ozia, (...) ^eg. 15. 2. Patal. ^6.
and Athalia, 4. Reg. 1^. 2. Patal. 23.
because Bellarmine has referred the^ among the examples whereon we must
deal in their place. But these are those Paraleipomena, to which Bellarmine
does remit us, and which it is no wonder that he (who is both a subtle and
sharp disputer, and a vehement Orator) did only lightly report, but did not
transfer into his own work: seeing they do abound with so many and
notorious faults, that a man would think they were written not by a Divine,
and a man exercised in the Scriptures, but by some profane Smatterer, abusing
intemperately Divinity and the Scriptures: so very little is there in those
things, which he assumeth in them for argument, which is consonant and agreeing
with the subject in question.

CHAP. XXXVI.
First then, Sanders is mistaken, and is very far wide in this, that he
imagines that the Synagogue had any stroke in the abdication of Saul. For it
is most manifest, that the whole business was commanded, denounced, and in the
issue accomplished and executed by the extraordinary judgment and
commandment of God, from whom is all reign and power, without any ordinary
jurisdiction of the Priests, or of the Synagogue: whereby it is clear, that
the comparison of the Church of Christ and the Synagogue, or of Samuel and the
Pope, is very impertinently and ignorantly made by him in this point. For
although we confess that which is the truth, that the spiritual power of the
Church of Christ is no less, yea that it is fair more, then of the Synagogue:
yet therefore, I mean out of the comparison of the power and authority of each
Church, it does not follow, that the Pope may deprive a King neglecting or
contemning the Commandments of God, of the right of his Kingdom, and instal
another in his place, because the Synagogue was never endued with that power.
For it is no where read in the Old Testament, that the Synagogue of the Jews,
or the H^^^ Priest thereof for the time, did abrogate the Kingdom from any
lawful King of Israel of Iudaea, being never so wicke^, distnate, and ciuell;
or deprived him of the ^ight o^ the Kingdom, as he says, and substituted
another in his place. Whence it falls out, that no argument from thence, nor
no example may be drawn in the new Law.

I let pass, that Samuel, although he were a great Prophet, yet he was not
the chief Priest, nay not a Priest at all, but only a Leuite, (...).
who therefore could do nothing against Saul by an ordinary power of
spiritual jurisdiction, much less by the authority of a secular judgment,
because he had publicly laid that down before, when the people demanded a
King. Therefore Samuel in the execution of this business, did only perform a
bare ministry, almost against his will, and striving both with prayers and
tears against the same: and having received a special charge, he discharged
an extraordinary embassy, being sent from the Lord as the Messenger of his
divine judgment. And that appears by this, that when he came to the King, he
said, Give me leave, and I will tell thee what the Lord has spoken to me by
night. Therefore he may forbear this argument, which is to small purpose
drawn from the extraordinary ministry of Samuel and the reiection of Saul,
in regard that the ordinary authority of the Christian Church or Pope, has
no comparison or proportion, no conueniencie or similitude with the same. God
presently rejected Saul, and took the Kingdom from his posterity: but he
suffered other Kings, who seemed to be much more wicked then Saul, to reign
over his people, and to convey the Kingdom to their children. So has it
seemed good in his eyes. God the Lord of revenge has done freely, (...).
and he has done all whatsoever he would: (...).
neither is any other reason to belong it. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will be hardneth Neither may any man say unto him, (...).
Why have thou made me thus? Must we believe the same of the Church, or of the
Pope? They haueth it certain limits and bounds, which they cannot pass. The
Church is governed or ought to be governed by Laws says Ioh de (...). (...)
And therefore it is not permitted neither to the Church, nor to the Ruler
thereof the Pope, by an absolute liberty, and after the manner of God to
determine of all kingdoms and businesses, and to dispose of all things at
their pleasure. That only is lawful for them, which is comprehended in the
holy writings or traditions of the Apostles, teaching their authority. Which
seeing it is so, there is none that has any skill in reasoning, but may
plainly see, that the argument derived from those things which Samuel did, can
by no means be concluded to establish the Popes authority: unless it be
deduced either from the ordinary power of the Synagogue (wherein
notwithstanding Samuel was not the chief) to the ordinary authority of the
Christian Church, or from the extraordinary ministry of Samuel, to the
extraordinary ministry likewise of the Pope: whereof the former, from the
Synagogue to the Church, although it may be rightly concluded in form as they
say, yet it comes short for the purpose, because it offends in matter;
because the Synagogue has never had any temporal power over Kings. And the
latter is not of force, but in that case, that the same may befall to the Pope
now, which befell to Samuel in those times: viz. that as the Lord spoke to
Samuel touching Saul, so he should speak to the Pope by name, about the
abdication of some certain King, and of substituting an other in his place.
For in this case it cannot be denied, but that the authority of the Pope is
equal to Samuels, and his Ministry alike in executing the Commandment of
God. But if not, I mean if the Lord has not expressly spoken to the Pope in
his ear, I pray you how can it be, that when he desires by his own proper
authority to thrust any King out of his Throne, that he should maintain, that
he does it by the example of Samuel, whom God did delegate by a special
charge, and an extraordinary mission, to signify his decree touching the
abdication of Saul? Samuel knew certainly, that God had rejected Saul and all
his race, that they should not reign; for the Lord told him so much. But the
Pope knows not, whether God have rejected that Prince whom he desires to
depose, unless God has specially revealed it to him. Seeing there is nothing
more certain by the Scriptures, then that God does for diverse causes tolerate
wicked Kings, and contemners of his word, and does cause them to reign for the
time, Job 34.
whom when it pleases him, he either conuerteth to him, or euerteth and
overthrows. And it happens often, that they whom the Pope, who judges
according to outward appearance, pronounces unworthy to reign by their
present conditions and state of life, those the Lord, to whom all things are
present, declares to be most worthy to reign, their minds being converted
to holiness and grace: whereof not ^ong agone we have seen a memorable example
now in our age. For who knows not (I speak it to the honor and glory of
this great King) that HENRY the IV. who now most happily governs the stern
of the Kingdom of France, and I pray God he may govern long, was not only
excommunicate by Gregory and Sixtus Popes, but also was so rejected, and
abandoned, and deprived of all right of Kingdom, that by their censures they
declared him incapable of any kingdom or government whatsoever; whose
judgment the Lord indeed did laugh to scorn, and demonstrated that the King,
which was reproved by them, was most worthy of a worthy Kingdom. Seeing then
these things stand thus, and are altered and changed at the pleasure of God,
how can the Pope know and understand the pleasure and will of God, unless like
unto Samuel he be advertised before? Therefore that which Sanders says, That
King who shall refuse to hear the Lord speaking by the mouth of the Pope, etc.
is true in the case wherein the Pope is supposed to excute those things which
the Lord shall command him by special revelation. For otherwise what shall we
say? Philip the Fair, did he therefore disdain to hear the Lord speaking by
the mouth of the Pope, because he would not hear Boniface, swelling with a
most proud ambition? that it should be thought that he might be by Boniface
deprived of the right of his crown, and an other to be substituted in his
place? What say you to Jews the XII because he would not hear Julius the II.
being complete armed, and playing the soldier rather then the Pope? did he
seem to have contemned God, speaking by the mouth of the Pope, so far, is
both he and his fauoure^s should deserve to be condemned and turned out of
their Kingdoms, at the pleasure of man, that boiled inwardly with a private
hatred against him? To believe such matters, good Lord, should I term it
ignorance, or madness? But this is enough touching the first argument of
Sanders propounded by us.

His second argument, (to confess plainly the weakness of my wit) I do
not well understand to what purpose it aims. For that it may have some
strength and force to prove the point which is in hand, and to be consequent
and agreeable to that which is concluded, we must of force admit two most false
suppositions as true and necessary. Whereof one is, That they who either did
foretell any thing that should come to pass by revelation from God, or by his
commandment, willed any thing to be done, might by their own right, I mean,
by their proper authority, and ordinary virtue of then office, without any
special revelation, or commandment from God, command the same, whatsoever
it was to be done, or otherwise might execute and discharge the same by
themselves. As though Ahias the Silonite, whom God had sent to Jeroboam with a
special charge, that he should tell him, that he will give him ten Tribes out
of the Kingdom of Solomon, in these words, Thus says the Lord the God of
Israel: Behold I will rent the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give theeten Tribes. As though, I say, Ahias without any such express
commandment of God, and without any special revelation, might have called
Jeroboam or any other into Salomons Kingdom, or into part thereof. Then which
nothing can be said more falsely, or foolishly. And the other supposition is,
that all Priests and Prophets of the old law, had authority to bestow and to
take away kingdoms, so far forth as they thought it expedient for the safety
of the people, which also is most false, neither is there to be found in all
the scriptures any example, or step, or taken of the same. Seeing then the
whole force of this second argument is so grounded on these two false
suppositions, that it cannot be rightly concluded, except they be granted, and
that it is evident enough, that there is no firm consequence, apotestate
delegatia Principe, ad potestatem ordi(...), that is, from the authority of a
Committee from a Prince, to the authority of an ordinary officer, who does not
see by his own judgment, without much Logic, that all this business which he
has drawn from the prediction of Ahias, is as far as may be from that which
he has undertaken to prove?

The third argument also is even of the same stuff; for what relation has the
extraordinary mission of Elias, for the special execution of certain business
to the ordinary office of the Pope? or what coherence and connection of these
two Propositions can there be? Elias, at the Lords commandment by name; (for
that Sanders omitted, which notwithstanding could not be omitted without
blame,) anointed Asael King over Syria, and Iehu King over Israel, and Eliseus
a Prophet for him: Ergo the Pope may take away and give kingdoms and
principalities as he shall think good? For these cannot be joined together,
unless this medium be set down and granted; That the Pope may do as much by
the authority of his ordinary jurisdiction, without the express commandment
of God, as the Prophets could when the Lord commanded specially and expressly,
which cannot be said without great injury to God.

But as touching the sword of Elizeus, whereof he speaks: First, he does
with much learning and piety discourse of the same. That it may be understood
of the same. That it may be understood of the spiritual sword, which is in the
Church, and in the hand of the Pope, whom no man whatsoever he be, either
King or Emperor can avoid: and which is placed by the Lord in the last place;
both for that it is inevitable, and therefore the more to be feared then the
other; as also for that the bodies only are killed by them, but the souls by
this. But afterward, when he proceeds after his manner, and by
interpretation transferreth that place of scripture, and an other of the
revenge of Elias upon the two companies of 50. and their soldiers, to the
temporal authority of the Pope, he slideth into that shameful error which
we noted before, which is, that Prophets without special commission, or divine
revelation, might by their own authority and pleasure chastise even with
capital punishments all those whom God had decreed by a secret dispensation
to take revenge upon either by miracle, or otherwise, either to manifest the
glory of his majesty, or to vindicate the injuries of his servants; and that
which God had commanded to be done only by one mean, that they may execute
by other ways, and means as please them; that hereby he may prove as by a
necessary consequence, that the Pope (whose authority is no less, yea greater
in the new law then was the authority of the Prophets and Priests in the old)
may do full as much by his Apostolic authority.

But who does not know, that God has granted many things to the prayers of his
servants, and for their takes has wrought many things wonderfully, even
without their prayers, which it was not lawful for them by any way or mean to
attempt, much less to execute, if he did not command it first? The reason
whereof is plain and evident in the persons of the Prophets. For it is clear
amongst all men, that none of the Pro phets had any authority and government
over the Hebrews, besides a very few, who were both Prophets and Princes of
the people and Judges together, as Moses, Iosue, Samuel, David. But the rest,
although they were inspired from God, yet they lived privately without any
temporal government, declaring and executing those things only, whereof they
were advertised by the spirit of God; and all their prescience and fore
knowledge was so tempered and moderated from heaven, that they might know and
foretell neither all things, for at all times, but so far as was imparted
unto them by the spirit of God; whereof the Prophet Iadon is a witness, who
being deceived by the false Prophet, affirming that the Angel of the Lord had
spoken with him, did not understand that he lied, and thereby was cra^t^ly
abused and brought to destruction ^. Reg. 13.
, Eliseus also is witness, who when the poor Sunamite lay at his feet, said
to Giezi that desired to remove her, 4. Reg. 4.
Lether alone, for her soul is in bitterness, and the Lord bath bidit from
me, and has not told me.

Therefore, whereas Sanders asks, whether Elias could not say to some
principal man or magistrate, if he had been present; run upon these
Soldiers and kill them? and if so be that Prince bad offended, if upon Elias
his word, he had slain the Kings subjects; that cannot be resolved but by the
tenor of Gods pleasure known in every business. And therefore as concerning
Elias in this case; if God did give him commission to punish such offenders,
either specially by the sword, or generally by any mean whatsoever: no man
doubts, but that he might without sin commit to any man the authority and
execution of the sword, and any man without offense might undertake to execute
that commandment. But if, as it is likely, the Lord had only revealed so much
to him, that he would destroy with fire from heaven those wicked desiders and
scoffers: he was only to expect that, and to practice nothing else against
them, after the guise and fashion of men, or give order at his pleasure to
execute any civil punishments upon them, which he might not do without
impiety, because he had received neither from God nor man any ordinary, nor
warranted and delegated jurisdiction to do it. And for that cause he had sinned
grievously, if he had willed or persuaded any Prince or Magistrate any such
thing; and these also had sinned, if undertaking his commandment, they had
slain the Kings subjects L. non solum. 11.. semanda to. D. de iniur. lib.
reprehendenda. C. de instit. and substi.
. Nothing can be propounded more certainly and plainly then this distinction,
that it is a wonder, that so absurd an opinion should fall from Sanders, as to
think that Elias might simply, and without the express commandment of God,
execute death upon the Kings soldiers, in what manner he listed. Now the
reasons he uses for the strengthening of this opinion of his, are frivolous,
and utterly unworthy to be brought by a man of a sharp judgment, especially
a Divine for the dicision of such a question. That service, which the sire from
heaven did, says he, could not the earthly sword have performed the same? Yes
surely could it, and not only a sword, but also any other weapon, if it had
been used by Gods commandment; neither did any ever doubt of that. But
because the Lord prepared that revenge by fire only against the fifty, and
acquainted the Prophet in the spirit with his purpose Liran in illum locum.
; Elias neither ought nor could take his revenge by any other instrument or
mean, unless the same had likewise been declared to him by the same spirit,
because in matters not revealed he was neither ordinary or extraordinary Judge.
Moreover, if that which the laws of men do ordain and enact: When any man is
condemned to be punished with the sword, he ought to be punished with the
sword, not with an axe or bill, or club, or halter, or by any other way Aut.
da^^^ 8.. 1. de p^n.
, Who is so auerse from truth, and from all reason to believe, that one
certain and particular manner of execunon, being prescribed by the Lord, may
be changed by man into an other form and kind of punishment? For as in all
businesses (...).
the ends of the commandment are to be kept diligently, so chiefly in the
divine commandments, (...). 18.
God has charged that his commandments be kept euerely.

Hereby it appears, that it is very slight and slender which he lays down
for a strength of his conceit, That with wise men it makes no matter, what is
made of those things which are of the same momient and weight. And herein his
error is double: o^e because he draws that Maxim of his to universally and
generally, to all those things which are made by nature, or Art, or hand:
whereas notwithstanding, as touching humane actions it is certain, that that
sentence has place only in those things, which men do of their own accord,
or upon a commission received with free liberty of execution: as for example,
that he is called a murderer, who by villainy has been the cause of any man's
death by any mean or instrument, because in such a crime it skilleth not what
is made by those things, quae eiusdem ponderis and momenti sunt. But in the
case wherein any thing is commended strictly, and by name to any man's trust to
be performed in a certain manner, and after a certain form, the laws do
not allow the Committee to execute the same any other way, as appears
plainly, by the place which I related above, and infinite others of the Civil
and Pontificiall law.

His other error is, that he thinks there is no ods nor difference, if
wicked men be strooken with a divine thunderbolt from God, or with force of
weapons by the power of men: because he says, that they have both one weight;
for although there be one effect of all extreme punishments, that is, the death
and destruction of the condemned, yet there is much consideration to be had,
by what manner and mean the same is executed upon the guilty, because there
be degrees as of crimes, so of pains: and hereby it comes to pass, that by
the kind of the vltion, and griceousnesse or lightness of the punishment, we
judge of the heinousness of the offense, by the proportion and resemblance of
the punishment with the fault (...).
. For the distribution of punishments and rewards does require a Geometrical
proportion. The Poet says pretily Hora lib. 1. Sa^y. 3.
.

-- adsit
Regula. peccatis quae poenas ^roget ae quas:
Nescutica dignum horribili sectere fligello.
But Where greater punishments do follow, let him be corrected with greater
punishment G^eg. lib 7. epist 53. (...). did. 50.
Excellently says S. Augustine (...). 24. q. 1.
. As al other things: Who doubts, but that this is the more heinous offense
which is punished more severely? Therefore does he very vndiscreetelie
determine that all punishments being taken by sword, by fire, by famine, and by
other means, are of the same weight and heaviness, that he might conclude, that
the Prophet had discharged his duty, if he had procured to have them flame
with the earthly sword, whom the Lord said he would strike with a thunderbolt
from heaven. Who does not know that the anger and revenge of almighty God does
shine much more brightlie in punishments, not which are inflicted after the
ordinary manner of men, but are sent strangely and miraculously from heaven?
or who can weigh matters so unevenly in his judgment, as to say, that they
perished by punishments, equal for grieuousnesse, who being swallowed up by
the gaping earth, descended alive into hell, as well as those who are taken
away by the ordinary or extraordinary punishments of man's laws? And hitherto
I think I have said enough of these reasons of Sanders which were omitted by
Bellarmine, not without cause Now let us return out of this by-path to
Bellarmine again.

CHAP. XXXVII.
HItherto have I bent the sharpness of my best understanding, to enquire with
diligence into all the reasons, which Bellarmine or Sanders have touching the
temporal authority of the Pope. Therefore now it remains that with the like
care and endeavor I convert my mind and hand to examine the examples
propounded by Bellarmine, which truly is but a poor and a weak kind of
proof. For he pretends that his opinion is proved two manner of ways, by
reasons and by examples; I could have wished with all my heart that he had
brought forth stronger reasons: the affection which I bear to the Sea
Apostolic, does so affect and possess me, that I do very earnestly desire
that all the authority which this author does attribute unto her, may be also
allowed by the best right that can be. But we have heard his reasons already,
now let us hear his examples.

The first is, says he, 2. Paralip. 26. Where we read that Ozia the King when
he usurped the Priests office, was by the high Priest cast out of the temple
and being stroke by God with a leprosy for the same offense, was forced to go
out of the City, and to leave his kingdom to his Son. For it is plain, that
he was put out of the City and government of the Kingdom, not of his own
accord, but by the sentence of the Priest. For we read in the 13. of Leuit.
Whosoever says the Law, shall be desiled with the leprosy and is separated
by the judgment of the Priest, he shall dwell alone without the Camp. Seeing
then this was a law in Israel. and withal we read, 2 Paralip. 26. that the
King dwelled without the City in a solitary house, and that his son did judge
within the City the people of the land; we are constrained to say, that he was
separated by the judgment of the Priest, and consequently deprived of the
authority of reigning. If therefore a Priest could in times past judge a King
for a corporal leprosy, and deprive him of his Kingdom; why may not he do
it now for a spiritual leprosy, that is, for heresy, which was figured by
the leprosy, as Augustine teach^th, in quaest. Euangel lib. 2. quaest. 40.
especially seeing 1. Cor. 10. Paul does say, that all happened to the Jews in
figures? Thus he.

I have often wondered, and yet cannot leave wondering, that men famous for the
opinion of learning, should commit their thoughts to writing in so slight and
homely a fashion, that a man would think they had not read the Authors which
they commend, or have not fully understood those they have read, or that of set
purpose they would corrupt their meaning; which fault is very common in our
age: wherein most of the Writers following the credit of other men, do draw
the testimonies and authorities of their assertions, not from the Fountains
themselves, but from the Rivers and Pipes, being corruptly derived by the
negligence and fault of other men; so as look what the first have either
maliciously or negligently detorted and wrested to another sense, that others
trusting to their search and judgment, do transcribe into their books, for
certain and undoubted testimonies. Which although it be very seldom found in
Bellarmine, being a faithful and a clear Author, yet it cannot be denied, but
that he following unadvisedly Sanders and others, has not erred a little in
the three Chapters of the affirming the Popes temporal authority, especially
in propounding the former example, and this following.

I proved long ago, in my books contra Monarchomachos, that it was most
false, That Ozia was deprived of the authority of his government by the
judgment of the Priest. For in very truth, there is nothing more expressly
delivered in the whole history of the Kings, then that ^zias, from the
sixteenth year of his age, wherein he began his reign, remained King
continually unto the 68. year, which was the end of his life; and that he was
not any time deprived of the authority of his government. Indeed it is true,
he dwelt apart in a house by it self; and therefore, by reason of his
sickness, he could not execute those duties of a King, which consist in
action: but that took not from him his interest in his kingdom, nor
authority of government. Otherwise we must deny, that children being
inaugurated and crowned, as in time, past^ Ioas, and Josias, and men of sawfull
(...) 11. (...) 22.
age, are any Kings, if once they fall into any grievous disease of mind or
body; seeing they are hindered by their youth these by their sickness, from
the procuration and government of the Kingdom, which consists in action. For
the Scripture says, In the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel, reigned
Azarias (who was called both Ozias and ^acharias) the son of Amasias King of
Judah: he was sixteen years of age when he began to reign, and reigned 52.
years in Jerusalem. And again in the same Chapter: In the 52 year of Azariah
King of Judah reigned Pha^ee the son of Romelias over Israel in Samaria. And
Josephus (...) that this Izariah or Oziah died in the 68 yeer^ of his age, and
the 52. of his reign. 'If therefore (...) 11.
Ozias began to reign being 16. years of age, and reigned 52. years as the
Scripture witnesses, and died in the 68. year, what space, I pray you, in his
life can be ^ound, wherein he was judged and deprived of his right in his
Kingdom? In the mean time his son was Curator or Regent to him, as they are
wont to have, ^ qui in ea causasunt, vt superesse rebus suis non possint. For
it is added (...)
in that story; Ioatham the son of the King governed the palace, and ruled
the house of the King, and judged the people of the Land. Mark, I pray you,
that Ioatham is called the son of the King, in the life and sickness of his
Father, and Governor of the Palace, and Ruler of the House of the King. Now
he judged the people, because judgments could not come to the King, through
the force of his disease, and the separation by the prescript of the Law of
God: as Lyranus teaches in that place. To be short, the Scripture says: And
Ozias slept with his Fathers, and they buried him in the Field of the Kings
Sepulchers, because he was leprous; and Ioatham his son reigned in his stead.
Mark again, that Ioatham begins not to reign, but after the death of his
Father. Therefore although it be true, that Ozias, by reason of his leprosy,
was separate by the judgment of the Priest, because it was expressly provided
by the Law of God: yet it is not true, that he was deprived of the authority
of reigning or enforced to renounce his Kingdom to his son, as these men
falsely do auerre. The authority of reigning, and the administration of a
Kingdom, do differ very much, and no less then in the civil Law, propriety
and possession. The authority is always in the person of the King, and is
joined with the right of the Crown: but the government and procuration, or
administration, may fall into other men's hands; so as one may be King, and
another the Governor. Whence they who in the minority or diseases of Kings,
do bear the highest place of government in the Kingdom, are honored with
the title of Governor, Regent, Tutor, Protector, or some such like; and they
propound nor handle any public affair in their own name, but in the name and
authority of the King, being either infant, or sickly.

Therefore this example of Ozias is so far from helping anything to this
temporal authority of the Pope over Kings, as it makes very much for to
impugn and overthrow the same. For if (as he reports out of the Apostle, and
we confess) that all things befell to the Jews in figures, and if the
corporal leprosy, for which a man was separated from the multitude of the
children of Israel, and dwelt alone without the camp, was a figure of the
spiritual leprosy, that is, of heresy, by Augustine his testimony; to be
short, if the Priesthood of Aaroa was a figure of the Priesthood of the new
Law; out of these figures two arguments are appositely drawn to this question:
whereof the former does notably confirm the spiritual authority of the Pope
over Christian Kings and Princes; the other proves, that this temporal
authority of his, whereof we speak, is altogether commentitious, and forged,
usurped, and contrary to the Law of God.

The former argument is framed thus: As the Priests in times past banished out
of the Temple King Ozias, being struck with the leprosy, that he might dwell
without the City; so at this day the Pope may judge, and by excommunication
separate from the communion of the faithful, a King infected with heresy,
which is a spiritual leprosy, and so constrain him to dwell without the
City, that is, without the Church Catholic, until he be cleansed from his
leprosy, that is, until he have absured his heresy. But if such a leprosy
stick by him till death, he is not to be buried in the Sepulchers of the
Kings, that is, in the Church, but in the field, because he is leprous, that
is to say, an heretic. Now that I said, that the Pope might separate an
heretic King by excommunication from the communion of the faithful, it must
be understood of the spiritual separation of souls, and not of bodies. For
subjects ought not to deny their obedience to an excommunicate King.

The second argument may rightly be concluded in this form: As the judgment
of the Priest of a corporal leprosy, in the old Law, wrought nothing but the
separation of the leprous, and relegation without the Camp or City; and as
the judgment of the Priest touching the leprosy of Azaria or Ozia, could not
take from him the right of his Kingdom, but only imposed on him a necessity
to dwell by himself without the City, (for in that he did not actually, as
they say, govern the Kingdom, that fell out, not through the sentence of the
Priest, who judged of the leprosy, but the force of the continual disease of
his body) so also at this day the censure and sentence of the Pope, whereby
he judges and declares a King to be an heretic, although it cause a King
to remain without the City of God, that is, without the Catholic Church, as
has been said; yet it cannot take from him the right and authority to reign:
and so the figure does very fitly conuene with the figured. For in these
figures of the old Testament, the image of the authority of the Pope over
Kings is not only drawn in lineaments, but fully expressed to the life; that
if any fit argument may be drawn from the shadow to the body, from the figure
to the figured, none can more evidently or assuredly be fitted then these,
from the constitution of the old Law, to the observation of the new. But if the
adversaries out of all the figures of the old Law, can shape any one like to
this for the strengthening of their opinion, they shall have my voice for the
bell: surely they shall never find me against them. Therefore now let us see
the second example.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THe second, says he, is out of 2. Paralip. 23. whereas when Athalia had
^yrannously usurped the Kingdom, and maintained the worship of Baal, Ioiada
the high Priest called the Centurions and the Soldiers, and commanded them to
kill Athalia, and in her place did choose Ioas King. Now that the high Priest
did not counsel, but command, it appears by those words, 4 Reg. 11. And the
Centurions did according to all which Ioiada the Priest commanded them: also by
these words, 2. Paralip. 23. But Ioiada the oigh Priest going out to the
Centurions and Captains of the Army, said unto them, Bring her out, meaning
Athalia the Queen, without the doors of the Temple, and let her be slain
without by the sword. And that the cause of this deposition and execution of
Athalia, was not only her tyranny, but also, for that she maintained the
worship of Baal, is plain out of those words which follow immediately after
her death: Therefore, says the Scripture, all the people went into the house
of Baal, and destroyed it, and brake down the Altars and Images thereof. They
slew also Mathan the Priest of Baal.

Surely I do not know what moved Bellarmine to thrust upon us this example,
so remote and far off from the matter and controversy: unless because he
had observed that it was propounded by others before him, fearing peradventure,
lest if he had omitted it, he should be accused by some emulous adversaries,
of negligence and preuarication to Pope Sixtus V. who being beyond all measure
imperious and haughty, and not greatly favoring the society of the Jesuits,
determined to reduce that whole Order to a straighter rule and habit of life,
which should be distinguished from the Secular Priests in color, form, or
some other outward mark. Therefore I do muse with my self, how they obtained
of him that Bull, that they might occupy the perpetual Dictature of the
University of Pontimussa, that is, that they should for ever be Rectors, or
Presidents, against the form and statutes of that foundation, made by Gregory
the XIII. There be that think, that the Bull was supposititious, that is,
devised and counterfeit. Surely although it were true and granted by Sixtus,
yet it ought not to be of force, because it was obtained presently after his
creation: at which time, whatsoever the Popes do grant, is judged not so much
to be obtained of them, as to be extorted from them. Glos. in pro^^m. reg.
Cancel. Neuisa. in syl. nuptial. Reb^st. in tract. vt beneficia aut. vacat.
nu. 9. and 10.
But to the matter.

That the example touching Ioiada and Athalia belong nothing to this
disputation, it appears by this, that all our controversy stands in this:
Whether the Pope be endued with so great authority over lawful Kings and
Princes Secular, that he may for certain causes cast them down from their
Throne, and deprive them of the right of their Kingdom, and anoint and
inaugurate others in their places. But the example of Athalia, is of a woman
which held the Kingdom by no right, but by most cruel and savage tyranny, by
force and villainy, and by the bloody murder of the Kings house; who stood
therefore in that case, that she might justly be slain of any private person,
without the commandment of the Priest Ioiada. But for that such a matter
seemed dangerous to attempt, and hard to compass against her, who was mother
to Ochozias the King deceased: therefore there was great need of the counsel
and help of Ioiada the high Priest, or surely of some other, who likewise
either by the greatness of his authority, or the opinion of holiness, might
assemble, and even stir up the Soldiers and the people to undertake so noble
and worthy an action.

And that this was done, not so much by the commandment, as advice of Ioiada,
it is plain by that which is said: Ioiada the high Priest sent, and taking to
him the Centurions and Soldiers, caused them to be brought into him into the
Temple of the Lord, and he struck a Covenant with them. And that the
Interpreters do note in that place, but the words iubere, or praecipere, are
wont to be spoken of every man, who has the chief place in a Faction or
Society. Therefore there is nothing found in this example, which has any the
least similitude or agreement with the assertion which is undertaken by the
adversaries to prove. The assertion is, that lawful Princes, that is to say,
they who obtain Kingdoms and Principalities, by right either of Election or
Succession, may for certain causes be deposed from their government by the
Pope. And then what does it help for the proof of this proposition, to
propound an example of a Tyrant, or the killing of a Tyrant? Do they think
that there is no difference between the true Lords and lawful possessors, and
the spoilers and inuaders of possessions which belong not to them? Now whether
there were or no any other cause or reason to depose and slay her, besides her
tyranny, it makes no matter: it is sufficient that she was a Tyrant, and a
violent usurper of the Kingdom, insomuch as there was of her part no hindrance
nor bar in Law, but that she might be cast headlong out of the seat, and be
slain by any of the people. Which cannot in like manner be said of a lawful
King; whose person, although it be wicked, the Law of a kingdom, and the
authority of rule, ought always to protect and defend, from all injury and
humane punishment; as we have proved otherwhere, out of the writings of the
holy Fathers. Now the third follows.

CHAP. XXXIX.
THe third example, says he, is of S Ambrose, who being Bishop of Millan, and
by that the spiritual Pastor and Father of Theodosius the Emperor, who
ordinarily did reside at Millan, did first excommunicate him for the slaughter
which by his commandment was done at Thessalonica: secondly, he enioined him
to make a Law, that the sentence given of the slaughter and of the publication
of goods, of them who were slain, should not stand good, till after thirty
days from the pronouncing of the sentence, to the end that if he had through
anger and precipitation of mind, commanded any thing, he might revoke it
within the space of so many days. But Ambrose could not excommunicate
Theodosius for that slaughter, unless he had first understood and judged of
that cause, although it were Criminal, and belonged to an external Court: but
he could not understand and judge a cause of that nature, unless also he had
been a lawful Judge of Theodosius in an external Court. Besides, to
constrain the Emperor to make a civil Law, and to prescribe unto him a form
of a Law, does it not manifestly declare, that a Bishop sometimes does use a
temporal authority even over them who have received authority over others?
And if any Bishop may do that, much more the Prince of Bishops. Thus he.

And this example also is very far from the matter in question, wherein
appears neither mention, nor so much as any token of a temporal authority of
a Bishop over an Emperor, or any thing else, whereby it may be concluded by
any probable argument, that such an authority does belong to a Bishop: but
wholly belongs to that spiritual authority of a Bishop which we both in heart
acknowledge, and confess with the mouth, that the pope has over all
Christians, of what order or place so ever they be. Ambrose excommunicated the
Emperor for an offense committed by the iniust slaughter of many men: does not
this belong to the spiritual jurisdiction of the Church, which at this time
Ambrose did exercise by his Episcopal authority? But he could not
excommunicate, says he, unless he had understood and judged of that cause
before, although it were criminal, and belonged to the external Court. Yes,
he might de facto (as unadvised Priests do, whom I have seen sometimes send
out an excommunication, without tendering of the cause;) but de iure he ought
not, otherwise he should have been an iniust judge, if he had punished the
delinquent, party without hearing of the cause. But let it be so: he understood
the cause, and judged him worthy of censure, and therefore did excommunicate
the Emperor; what then? But he could not understand and judge of such a cause,
(says he) unless also he had been a lawful Judge of Theodosius in an
External Court. Alas, we are catched in a snare, unless we beware this
piece of sophistry: there lurketh in this assertion, an exceeding cunning
deceit, by these words, In an External Court. A Court is twofold, Politic or
Civil: and Ecclesiasticke or Spiritual. The civil Court is wholly external,
the Ecclesiasticke is subdivided into external and internal. The external
Court Ecclesiasticke is, wherein the causes belonging to the notice of the
Church, are openly handled and judged; and if they be criminal, punishment is
taken of them by Excommunication, interdiction, suspension, depositio^, or by
other means, and oftentimes both the temporal and spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Judge do hear the same crime, even in the external Court:
but each of them in his proper Court, and to impose diverse penalties, as the
civil Judge takes knowledge of adultery, vt sacrilegi nuptiarum gladio
feriantur. L. quamnis. 30. C. ad l. Iul. de adul.
The Judge Eclesiastique also takes knowledge, who has the care of the soul,
to admonish the offender of his fault, and if he persist in offending, to
chastise him with spiritualll punishments. But the internal Court of the
Church, (which is called the Court of the soul, the Court of Poenitencie, the
Court of Conscience) is that wherein the Priest takes notice and judges of the
sins revealed to him by the conscience, and in his discretion does enioine him
Poenitency according to the quality of the sin. For now the common opinion
is, that Poenitential constitutions are arbitrary, that not only the Bishop,
but also any discreet Confessor, may regularly moderate, and Can. de his vbi
glos. vlt. did. 50 glos. in can. Mensuram ad ver. Sacer. do^^ de ponit. did ^.
mitigate them in the Court of the soul. If therefore Bellarmine by forum
externum do understand the Ecclesiastical Court, which is content with
spiritual pains only, we grant all which he says. For Ambrose was the
lawful Judge of Theodosius in that Court, and that he openly declared in deed,
and in effect, when as he did excommunicate him. But when this is set down and
granted, there can nothing be gathered from hence to confirm the temporal
authority of Bishop or Pope: because as well the judgment, as the punishment
was spiritual. But if Bellarmine by forum externum, understand the civil
Court, it is most false which he propoundes; for as the powers ecclesiasticke
and civil are distinguished of God, so are their Courts dictinct, their
judgments distinct. For the same Mediator of God and men, Christ Jesus, has
severed the offices of each power Can. cum ad verum. 96. did.
by their proper actions, and distinct dignitus. Surely he does Ambrose great
wrong, if he think that after he had obtained the Bishopric, he heard and
judged criminal causes in a civil Court. Ambrose then was no lawful Judge of
Theodosius, in an external civil Court, which is enough to prove, that he
could not judge or punish the Emperor with any temporal punishment. But you
will say, Ambrose heard and judged of the slaughter. It is true, but not as a
civil and temporal Judge; J say, I did not take knowledge of the crime for
the same end, for which the secular Judge does: that place out of Aristotle is
very good, that Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Ethic.
many may take knowledge of one and the same subject diversely, and after a
diverse manner, end and intention. It is the same right angle which the
Geometrician searches to understand, and the handicrafts man to work by it.
So it is the same crime whereof the Laicke Judge takes notice, that he may
punish the offender by death, banishment, the purse, or by some other temporal
punishment; and which the ecclesiastical Judge knows, that for the quality
of the offense, he may enioine spiritual punishment and Penitence.

At coegit Imperatorem adlegem politicum ferendam, viz. he constrained the
Emperor to make a civil law; and therefore he used a temporal authority
over him. A ^est. If he constrained him, by what power, by fear of what did
he constrain him? The sum of the story will teach us that, which is thus.
Ambrose had cast on Theodosius the band of excommunication, from whence when
the Emperor desired to be delivered, the grave Prelate denies to do it,
before such time as he see in him some fruit of repentance; what paenitence,
says he, have you showed after so heinous a crime, or with what medicine have
you cured your grieuons wound? The Emperor answered, that it is the office of
the Bishop, to temper, and lay a medicine to the wound, that is to say, to
enioine poenitencie to the sinner: but of the Poenitent, to use those medicines
which are given him, that is to say, to perform the poenitency enioined unto
him. Ambrose hearing this, for poenitence and satisfaction, he imposed upon the
Emperor the necessity to make this law whereof we speak: which being made and
enacted, (for presently the Emperor commanded the law to be ordained)
Ambrose did loose him fram his bonds of excommunication.

Therefore in this case Ambrose used no temporal authority against
Theodosius; but whatsoever it was he commanded by virtue and power of his
spiritual jurisdiction; neither did the Emperor obey this Prelate for fear
of any temporal punishment: for if he would not have obeyed, but (as wicked
Princes sometimes do,) had contemned both the excommunication and the
absolution, Ambrose could go no further at all Cap. cum non ab homine. de iud.
. But because the godly Prince was careful for his soul, lest he being
bound too long with this spiritual chain, might through the long imprisonment
gather filthiness and uncleanness, he obeyed the will of the Bishop, and
that he might obtain of him the benefit of absolution, he performed at the
admonition of the Bishop, a temporal office, which seemed to be profitable
for the common wealth. Upon which occasion the Author of the history says; For
this so great virtue both the Emperor and the Bishop were famous. For I admire
both; the liberty of the one, the obedience of the other. Again, the burning
of the zeal of the one, and the purity of faith in the other.

Ambrose then constrained Theodosius, just as our Confessaries at this day do
constrain their Poenitents, to whom they often deny absolution of their
crime, where they seriously promise that they will perform that office or
burden, which in place of Poenitence they lay on them: when as yet they have no
temporal jurisdiction over them. He forced him likewise, even as any of us
uses to force his neighbor, or fellow Burgess, when we deny that to him,
which he desires to be done or given him by us, unless he first do that
which we desire for our friends sake or our own. To be short, it is a common
thing that a man is constrained or enforced by reason, by love, by grief, by
anger, and by other affections and passions of the mind, without any authority
of temporal and spiritual jurisdiction.

These things standing thus, it is worth the observation in this example, that
the Ecclesiastical power does often with fear of spiritual punishment
enforce men to perform temporal duties, as in this place, Ambrose did the
Emperor; and of the contrary, that the civil power does many times, by fear
of temporal pains, drive others to perform spiritual offices, as when a
Prince compels heretics or schismatics to return to the Church, for
fear of bodily punishment, or loss of goods: and yet neither can the one
impose temporal punishment, nor the other spiritual, but by accident, as they
say. The fourth follows.

The fourth, says he, is of Gregory the first, in the Privilege which he
granted to the Monastery of S. Medardus, and is to be seen in the end of the
Epistles. If (says he) any King, Prelate, Bishop, or person whatsoever, shall
violate the decrees of this Apostolic authority, and of our commandment of
what dignity or honor soever he be, let him be deprived of his honor.

If Bishop Gregory should live at this day, and understand that these words of
his are taken in that sense, as though he had authority to deprive Kings of
their honor and dignity, he would surely cry out, that it is a calumnious,
and a wrested interpretation, and that he never so much as dreamed of any such
matter; and indeed those things which in other places are left written by him,
do utterly discredit this exposition. These then are the words, not of a
commander, but of a curser, whereby he charge and adiureth all kind of men,
that they do not violate the privilege granted by him, which if they shall
do, that God will be the revenger to deprive them of honor: which kind of
admonition and imprecation is at this day wont to be added to the ends of the
Popes Bulls, and constitutions, in this manner. Therefore it may be lawful
for no man to in fringe this page, etc. or of presumption to contrary the same:
but of any shall presume to attempt it let him incur the indidgnation of
Almighty God, and of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul; (or that which is
the same) let him know that he shall incur.

CHAP. XL.
BY that which has been said, the Reader will easily see, that it is true,
which before I set down; that there cannot be found, either in the holy
Scriptures, or writings of holy Fathers, any printe or example of the temporal
authority of the Pope: and therefore that they do not well, nay, that they
offend very grievously, who labor to strengthen an opinion most false in it
self, by arguments and examples so remote and impertinent. By these means
they deceive the unlearned, and are derided by the learned. I have already
proved very plainly, that there is no force in the former examples, to prove
that, which the adversaries affirm. And for the examples following, I take
less thought to answer: For although some of them do fit the purpose of the
aduersaris, and show that Popes did sometimes use temporal authority, in the
last ages of the Church; notwithstanding because they contain nothing but the
singular actions of Popes, who, no man denies but that they were men, and
might commit faults and slippes, after the manner of men, (in so much as it is
now celebrated by a common Proverb, which we remembered before out of Sotus:
Factum Pontificum non facit fidei articulum; (that is, The act of the Popes
does not make an article of faith:) therefore touching their acts, wherein they
have endeavored to exercise such an authority, the question and disputation is
behind, touching the lawfulness thereof, whether they were done lawfully, yea
or no? Neither ought that to move us at all, the writers of the stories, who
have in their writings recorded the acts of the Popes, have added no note or
touch of reprehension, but rather have allowed and commended them. For I see
that there were many reasons for that. First, because all the writers of that
time were either Monks, or at the least Clergy men, who took most care, to
increase and amplify the dignity of the Popes: and therefore they were very
wary and heedfull; not to reprehend, or check any actions of the Popes, and to
accuse them of injustice. Secondly, for that in those times so great was the
opinion of the Pope, that the multitude received and embraced in estimation all
his actions, as if they had been done by God himself, in which respect John
Gerson said not without reason, That the common people does imagine the Pope as
a God, who has all authority in heaven and in earth. My self have seen above
fifty years agone in Scotland, when as that Kingdom did as yet stand sound in
faith and religion, that the name of the Pope of Rome, (for so they spoke
Scotishly, the Pape of Rome,) was had in such reverence with the multitude,
that whatsoever was told them to have been said or done by him, was esteemed
of all men as an oracle, and as a thing done by God himself. Lastly, for that
a present danger did hang over their heads, which danger to this day binds
the hands, and mussles the mouths of many, lest, if they should write any
thing which was harsh and unpleasing to the Pope, or should tax and find fault
with his actions, as well the writer as his writing, should forth with be
stricken with the Popes curses; which cannot seem strange to those, who do
know that the anger and arrogancy of Pope Sixtus V. did burn so far, that
as I touched before, he had determined to destroy, and quite extinguish the
trim and goodly disputations of Bellarmine, because he thought that that
excellent Divine, had not sufficiently enough satisfied his ambition, when as
notwithstanding he had given him a great deal more then he should have done.
Besides all these reasons, this is somewhat, that the chief duty of a story
writer, consists in reporting, not in judging, in which regard, many who
excelled more in remembrance of things done, then in judgment of them, applied
their thoughts to the historical narration, and contenting themselves with the
paked and simple relation only of all occurrents, did leave indifferent the
equity thereof to all men's censures.

Therefore although we owe to those men the true knowledge, and faithful
report of matters passed, which they in their writings reserved and conuaied to
posterity: yet we apprehend and receive the equity and justice of those
actions, not from the commendation of the writers, but either from the
authority of the scriptures, or traditions of the Apostles, or the ancient
decrees of the Church, or lastly from the right rule of natural reason. And so
here will be the point always to enquire and examine the equity of every
action, and to search diligently, not what the author of a story has praised
or dispraised, but what ought to be praised or dispraised by good right and
desert L. Sed l^cet 12. D. de off. p^asid.
. Therefore I stand not much upon examples, which neither are found and
commended in the Scriptures nor are not proved to be worthy commendation, by
some of those ways at the least, which we have set down. For assuredly, it is
a very dangerous matter, for a man to propound to himself examples to imitate,
being not before weighed in this balance, and by these waights, seeing that
they that apply themselves to read monuments of antiquity shall more often
light upon more evil examples then good and virtuous. For which cause the
Emperor does gravely admonish all Judges, non exemplis sed legibus esse
iudicandum, and that in all businesses, they ought not to follow that which
has been by great Magistrates before them (...) iud^^. 1^. C. de sent. and
(...).
, sed veritatem, legum and iustitiae vestigia.

These considerations advise me, not to dwell very long upon the prolixe and
exquisite discussion and examination of the rest of the Examples, produced by
Bellarmine, unless I shall observe peradventure, that there is somewhat
couched in them, whereby the unwary Reader may be ensnared, under a pretense
and opinion of a truth. Therefore for some of them let us see which, and what
they be.

The fifth is of Gregory the II. says he, who forbad tribute to be paid by the
Italians to the Emperor Leo the Imagebreaker, being excommunicate by him, and
by that means cut a part of his Empire from him.

Surely I think in this example the truth of the business as it passed is not
set down, although I know it is so reported by certain Writers of story. And
that which induces me to think so, is both the excellent learning of that
Pope, joined with a special integrity of life, and also the testimony of
Platina in this matter; who amongst all the worthy actions of that Pope,
reports this, that by his own authority he withstood the Italians, being
willing to fall away from that impious Prince, and to choose another Emperor
over them. For so writes Platina. But then the Emperor Leo the Third, when
he could not openly inueigh against the Pope, publishes an Edict, that all
they who were under the Roman Empire, should dispatch and carry clean away
out of the Churches, the Statues and Images of all Saints, Martyrs, and Angels,
to take away Idolatry, as he said: and he that did otherwise, he would hold
him for a public enemy, or Traitor But Gregory does not only not obey so
great impiety, but also admonishes all Catholics, that they would not in any
sort commit so great an error, through the fear, or Edict of the Prince. With
which cohortation the people of Italy was so encouraged, that they went very
near to choose another Emperor: but Gregory labored with all the power he
could, that it should not be.

And Platina adds, that this Pope, as a most holy man, often admonished the
Emperor by Letters, that he would let go the errors of some ill disposed
persons about him, and embrace the true faith at the length; and that he would
forbeart to destroy the Images of the Saints, by whose memory and example men
might be stirred up to the imitation of virtue.

I do give credit to this Author in this point above other more ancient
Writers, especially strangers: the rather, for that he by the Commandment of
Sixtus Quintus a Pope, has written the Popes lives, and that at Rome, where he
was furnished with many helps of ancient Monuments, to find out the truth of
matters that passed in the City, and in Italy: which others wanting, as
appears, did receive nothing but uncertain reports, and scattered rumors of
men, (who many times report that to be done, which they would feign have done)
for a certain and clear truth. If Platina had in silence passed over the
former part of the story, surely he had confirmed as it were by a secret
consent, the opinion of these men, who have otherwise written of Gregory. But
seeing that he was not ignorant that they had written so, (being a man much
conversant in those stories) and yet notwithstanding does with a plain
contradiction impugn their opinion, it is very probable, that he had far
better and more assured testimonies in the relation of those things which were
done by this Pope. Wherefore it seems more reasonable, and more agreeable to
the truth, to follow Platina in this matter, and to note a lie in the writings
of Zonaras, (seeing it is proved in experience, that they are deceived many
times, who from the relation of others do commit to writing the sayings and
doings of people that lived far from them) then to blot the innocent life of
an excellent Pope, with a filthy spot of injustice and rebellion. For albeit
it be true, that according to his spiritual authority over all, he might
worthily excommunicate this Emperor; yet he might not prohibit, that the
people, being subject to the Roman Empire, should not give tribute to Caesar,
or pay their customs to the Emperor, so long as he continued Emperor,
without the manifest breach of the Law of God, and of the Doctrine of the
Gospel. And it is certain that this Leo, although impious, continued Caesar
unto his death, not deposed from his Empire either by the people, or by the
Pope. Therefore I say, that it is false which the Magdeburgers Centuriators do
write, that this Pope, who was famous both for Doctrine and life, was a
Traitor to his Country. I say also, that it is false which Bellarmine
propounds in the former example, that the Pope did set a Fine or Mulct upon Leo
Isaurus Iconumachus, to a part of his Empire: for he practiced no mischief,
as appears by this story of Platina, neither against the Country, nor
against the Prince. Now follows the sixth.

CHAP. XLI.
THe sixth is of Zachary, says he, who being desired by the Nobility of
France, deposed Childerique, and caused Pipine the Father of Carolus Magnus, to
be created King in his place.

Before I speak any thing of this example, it is worth my pains, to unfold
the dark story touching the same, and briefly to describe the whole action of
Zachary, ioining the circumstances on both sides, together with the opinion,
for proof whereof it is brought: and by this mean it may more easily appear
to the Reader, how small strength it has to confirm the proposition of the
adversaries.

First of all therefore, in that story it is worthy the observation, that
Childerique and diverse other Meroningians, that were Kings before him, reigning
without any authority at all in their Kingdoms, had nothing but the vain and
idle name of a King. For the treasure and power of the State were in the hands
of the Officers, who were called the Majors of the Palace, and who indeed
swaied the whole government of the Kingdom: who were so much above the Kings,
and ordered and governed them, as the King possessed nothing of his own,
besides the idle name of the King, and some allowance assigned him for his
maintenance during life, which the Mayor of the Palace made him in his
discretion, but one poor Lordship in the Country, of a small reuenew, and in
that a house, where he kept a few servants to attend him for his necessary
services, and to wait upon him: as Eginhartus writes in the life of
Charlemaine.

If any then do look more nearly into the matter, he shall find, that in
those times there were after a sort two Kings in France: one, who like the King
in the ^hesse, had only the name of a King, but no kingly authority, as
Atmoinus speaks: but the other, who was called the Mayor of the Palace, in
whom consisted the whole authority of the kingdom. He in name only was under
the King, but in authority and power over the King; so as he wanted nothing
but the name, for the full and absolute Majesty of ruling and reigning, which
also at the last was given him by the people, that the sovereign government
which he swaied, might be signified by the title of a sovereign honor.
Therefore Atmoinus speaking of Charles Martel, father of Pipine, who overthrew a
huge Army of Saracens, rushing into France out of Spain: King Charles says
he, having beaten and overcome the armies of his enemies, under Christ the
Author and Head of Peace and Victory, returned home in safety into France,
the seat of his government. Mark how he calls the Mayor of the palace a King,
by reason of that royal authority which he bare.

Secondly, in that story is to be observed, that the Nobility of France,
being weary of the slothfulness of their idle Kings, did with a wonderful
consent convert their eyes and hearts to Pipine Mayor of the Palace, son to
Charles; which did so animate him to the hope of the Kingdom, that he openly,
without niceness, affected the name of a King: which that he might more
easily compass, without mislike and displeasure of the Commons, he resolved,
that the Pope was first to be dealt withal by an Ambassador, and his assent
to be required; judging indeed, as the truth was, that if the Pope should give
his assent, that the Commons would easily rest in his judgment, by reason of
the holiness and reverend opinion of the Sea Apostolic.

Thirdly, we must understand, that Zachary the Pope was generally advised
withal in the cause of the Kings, which reigned at that time in France,
whether ought to be called King, he who had only the name of a King, and no
royal authority, or he who by his industry and wisdom did manage and
govern all the affairs of the State: and that he the same Pope answered
generally again, that it were better that he should be called King, in whom
the sovereign authority did reside; by which answer the Nobility being
induced, do elect Pipine King. There is no question, but that the Pope was
truly acquainted in hypothesi, that is, in particular, that Childerique was to
be abandoned, who carried only the false name of a King, and that Pipine was
in his place to be advanced to the Crown. But I suppose that he answered so
generally, for that the proposition being delivered in general terms,
carried no note of any certain person, and left to the Nobility of France
their judgment entire and free, to collect from thence that which they desired
And so the Pope did not simply depose Childerique, but gave his assent with the
Deposers. But because his consent was especially regarded, therefore certain
Historians do precisely say, that he deposed Childerique.

Lastly, in that story it must be seriously and diligently weighed, that
Zachary the Pope, having heard Pipinus his Ambassadors, touching the change
of the Kingdom, and deposition of Childerique, judged it to be a matter of
such novelty, and difficulty also, as at the first he durst not entertain
the thought of so great an enterprise, although that by this time he had
understood sufficiently, that the sloth and idleness of the Merouingians did
greatly endammage the Church and Christian Commonwealth, until such time as
he was certainly persuaded and saw, that the whole nobility of France did
favor Pipin, and desire him for their King, and moreover, that Childericque
was the last of the race of the Merouingians without children, so dull and
blockish, That he could not tell how to grieve for the loss of his kingdom,
as was fit for him, neither was there any that would moan his case. These were
the inducements, which being joined with a special love and affection, which
the Pope did bear to Pipine (for that he and his father Charles, had with many
good offices deserved well of the Church of Rome and Apostolic Sea,) did move
Zachary to essent to the French, who desired this change of their Kings.

These things although they be in this manner written touching this business,
yet have we great cause to doubt of the justice of that fact. I know that
Bellarmine in other places out of too much good opinion of the equity of this
fact of Zachary, does boldly affirm, that no sober man will deny that that Act
was just. But he alleges nothing, but that the wisest man living may affirm
for all that, that it was iniust. I say he brings no probable and forcible
reason, whereby a wise man may persuade himself, that the Pope did justly
assent to the French men in the deposition of Childericke, since that in no
case, we ought to do ill, that good although it be very great may come
thereof. Now we have sufficienly declared, that for a lawful King to be
deposed by his own subjects, or to consent to the deposers, seeing he has
God only above him, to whom only he is bound to yield account of his
actions, is by it self, and simply evil. And the two reasons which he uses
to justify the justice of that deposition, are so uncertain and frivolous,
that I wonder that they were over propounded by him. For first, in that he
measures the equity of this fact of Zachary by the event of the business, as
though the action must be accounted just, because that change of the Kingdom
had prosperous and happy success, (especially, says he, since the event does
teach, that that change was most happy.) it is so triuiall and childish, that
it was not to be conceived, much less alleged in writing by such a man,

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab euentu facta not anda putes.
For what I pray you? Was not afterward in the same Kingdom of France the
change from the Carolouingi^ to the Capeuingii made with great injustice? For
Hugo Capet a man of a great mind, and might in the state, when none was able to
repress or encounter his practices, usurped the Kingdom by force and arms, and
obtained the crown, taking the true heir, and casting him into prison. For
which fact Gaguinus calls him an usurper of the Kingdom. And yet all the
world does know that that change was most happy, and as some think, done by
the secret judgment of God, that Pipine who had wrongfully taken the Kingdom
from the Merouingij, should at the last suffer the like wrong in his posterity.
Therefore the Carolouingians did not so long hold the Kingdom, if they be
compared with the Capeuingians. And the Capeuingians have the government much
longer established in their house, and as J hope will have for ever.

The second reason also, is no whit stronger which he draws from the
holiness of Boniface the Bishop, who at the commandment of Zachary
anointed and crowned Pipine King. Add, says he, to these, that he who
anointed and crowned King Pipine by the Popes commandment, was a most holy
man, viz. B. Boniface Bishop and Martyr, who surely would never have been
the auther of injustice, and of a public offense. This I say is a very light
argument, and of no weight. For in that business Boniface was only a Minister
of the Apostolic commandment, and therefore it was no prejudice to his
holiness, which he executed at the Popes commandment: for he was bound to
execute the Popes sentence, Cap. Pastoral. quia vero de off. tud. del g.
although he knew it to be iniust: and therefore although the injustice of the
commandment had made Zachary guilty, yet Boniface had been declared to be
innocent by the order of serving, and necessity of obedience Can quid ^ulpatur.
23. q. 1. can. miles. 23 q. 5.
Therefore Boniface might with a safe conscience fulfill the commandment of
Zachary, though it were iniust. But this Zachary was a good Pope. It may be
so, we deny it not, so was David a good King, and holy, and Theodosius a good
Emperor: Marcellinus and Liberius were both good Popes, and yet not one of
these but committed some things worthy of blame. Why then might not Zachary
also serve his own malice or love, and after the manner of men in some part
violate justice? It is well known that Zachary in those times did stand in
extreme need of Pipines aid, against the injuries of Aistulphus and the
Longobardes; and was not that a strong engine to batter justice, think you?
love, hatred, and a proper gain, make that a Judge many times does not know
A^^^tot. lib. ^. R^et. ad Theode^en. Cap. 1.
the truth.

But to strive no longer about the equity of this act of Zachary, let it be
as they would have it, let us grant that that Act was most just: what strength
do they win by this, to make good the temporal authority which they give to
the Pope over Princes? is it any more, then that by the pattern of that
action, the Pope may now do, as then Zachary did? which is, that he may give
his consent to a people for the like causes and respects to put down their
king? that is to say, if he be a King, that has only the Name, and not the
authority or power of a King, who also has no issue, like to die in orbitie,
and of mind so slothful and so blockish, that he may be deposed without any
bloodshed, and of a Prince may be made a private person, no man moaning his
fortune, no man following his party. For an argument from an example is
nothing, unless the cases and causes be alike in each respect. Therefore this
example of Zachary, What makes it to establish that infinite authority,
whereon the Popes relying in the following ages, have attempted, and sometimes
gloried that they could undertake mighty Kings, abounding in all manner of
wealth, excelling in strength both of mind and body, not at the request of the
people, nor by consent only, but of their proper motion, by wars, by
murder, by Schisms, by great miseries of the Christian commonwealth, to
deprive them of their Kingdoms, and to spoil them of their crowns and
scepters? Will any wise man judge that this is lawful for them to do, by the
example of Zacharias his Act? But of this matter enough.

CHAP. XLII.
THe death of the Author envied us this last part of the Book.

FINIS.

