GOD, AND MY RIGHT JN MY DEFENSE. THE ACT ANENT THE SETTLING of Measures and
Weghts, concluded at Edinburgh the 19 day of Februar 1618 years. by the
Commisioners having power to do the same by Act of Parliament made the
twenty eight day of June 1617
For So Much as in Our Sovereign Lords laite Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the
xxviij day of June last bypast his Highness and Estates conveined therein,
Moved by the general complaint of all his loving Subjects: and in respect of
their sensible praejudice seen and felt through many parts of this Kingdom by
reason of the diversity of Measures and Weghts used within the same.

Therefore Our said Sovereign Lord, with advise of his said Estates; For
removing of all abuses which may ensue in any time to come, thereby has found
expedient and by Decree and Statute of the said Parliament; Decerned, Statut,
and Ordained, That there shall be but one just Measure and Weght, through all
the parts of this Kingdom; which shall Universallie serve all his Highness
Leiges by the which they shall buy, sell, receive, and give out, in all time to
come. Which Measure his Majesty with advise foresaid, Fand; should be that
Measure of Linlithgo, which is now commonly used and which has beine used
most customablie through the greatest part of this Kingdom these fifty or
thriescore years bypast. And for settling of a perfyte order whereby all the
Measures that are now used may be reduced to the conformity of the said
measure now authorized, and for making of proportion answerable betwix the
Lesser Measurs and Weghts, and the Greatest.

His MAJESTY with advise foresaid, granted full power and Commission, To Sr
James Weemes of Bogie knight. Sr George Auchinlek of Balmanno knight. Sr James
Fowls of Colingtoun knight. Sr Robert Stewart of Shillinglaw knight. Sr Ihone
Waws of Barnbarro knight. Sr William Greirson of Lag knight. And to James
Nisbet Bailyie and burges of Edinburgh, Mr Allext Wedderburne Clerk of Dondie.
Sr Thomas Menzeis Provest of Aberdeine. James Hamilton Provest of Glasgow. John
Oisburne burges of Air and Sr George Bruce of Carnok knight. burges of Culros.
Whom or any eight of them, His Majesty with advise foresaid, Ordained to meet
and conveine together, at such time and place as they should think expedient.
And to consult and advise together, and to appoint and determine upon the most
convenient means how the said Measures and Weghts, might be reduced to the
conformity foresaid. As in the said laite Act of Parliament at more length is
contained.

Which whole Commissioners foresaids, having met and conveined within the
Burgh of Edinburgh upon the twenty ane day of Januar last bypast and the most
part of them upon diverse and sunrie others days thereafter in the said month
of Januar and Februar instant. And having read and considered the foresaid Act
of Parliamet, anent the said measures and Weghts and finding that It is
Ordained that their shall be only Ane just Measure and Weght, through all the
parts of this Realm which shall universally serve all his Majesty's Leiges
(by the which and no other) they shall buy and sell, in all time coming. And
that it is declared by the said Act that the foresaid Measure and Firlot of
Linlithgo which is now commonly used and which has been most customablie used
through the greatest part of this Kingdom these fifty or thrie score years
bygone, shall be the foresaid just Measur and Firlot which shall be received and
used by all his Majesty's Lieges in all time coming. And that Commission is
given be virtue of the said Act to the said Commissioners for settling of a
perfect order whereby all the said Measures that are now used, may be reduced
to the conformity of the said measure of Linlithgo. And for making of a
proportion betwixt the lesser measures and weghts and the greatest. Have first
thought it meit and expedient that the Provest and Baillyes of Linlithgo who are
keepers of the said measure should produce before them the said measure which
has been given out be them to the Burrows and all others his Majesty's Leiges
these fifty or thrie-score years bygone, with their Jedges and warrands which
they have for the same. Who being cited for that effect, Produced before the
said Commisioners their said Measure and Firlot with the Jedge which is their
warrant thereof. And the same measure and firlot being fund agreeable with the
said Jedge, the said Commissioners caused praesentlie fill the same with water
which being full, they fand that the same coteined Twenty ane pincts and ane
mutchkin of just Sterline Jug and measure, and that the foresaid jug contains
within the same Thrie punds and seven ounces of frensh Troys weght, of clear
running water of the water of Leith. And because the said Commisioners could
find out no other mean whereby they might try the warra^d of the Quantity of
the said measure and firlot of Linlithgo which has been in use these fifty or
thrie-score years bygone. But be taking of the oaths of the said Provest and
Baillyes thereanent. They took the oaths of Andro Milne Provest of the said
Burgh of Linlithgo Andro Bell and James Glen Baillyes thereof who being with
all requisite Solemnity Sworn: Deponed upon their consciences; That the
foresaid Firlot and Measure produced by them, was the very true and Just
measure which has been given out to his Majesty's Leiges by them and their
praedicessors these fifty or thrie-score years by gone, and that the same by
their knowledge has never been altered in any sort during the time foresaid,
and siklike declared upon their consciences, that so far as they could try by
the most ancient and aged persons of their Burgh, that the foresaids Jedges are
of great antiquity and have never been altered or changed in any time bygone:
And that they never had, nor hes, any other Measure, or Iedge to their
knowledge.

Which Firlot, the said Commissioners Have Fund, and Declared, Statute and
Ordeided, to be the Just and only Firlot which shall be received and used, by
all his Majesty's Lieges in all time coming: For metting of Wheat, Rye,
Beines, Peace, Meal, Whyt Salt, and such other stuff and Victual as before this
time has beine in Use to be measured by straik Met, within this Kingdom.
The wydnes, and Breadnes, of the which Firlot under and above even over within
the buirds, shall contein nyneteen Inches, and sext part inche; and the
deipnes, seven Inches, and ane third part of ane inche: and the Peck, half
Peck, and fourt part Peck to be made effeirand thereto; And the steps of the
said Firlot to be in thiknes one Inche at the least: That the Bottom thereof
be crossed with Iron nailed to the same, and to the Ring of the Firlot; and
the edge of the bottom entering within the lagene be pared outwith toward the
nether-syde, and to be made in with plain and just reul-right; That the mouth
be ringed about with ane croce or girth of Iron inwith and outwith, having a
croce Iron bar passing over from the one side to the other thrie squared, and
edge down, and a plain side up, which shall go reul-right with the edge of
the Firlot, and every square shall be ane just Inche of breadth. And that
there be ane prick of Iron one Inche in roundnes, with ane shoulder under and
above and rising upright out of the Center or midst of the bottom of the
Firlot, and passing through the midst of the said over croce-barre, rooved both
under and above.

And that the said Cowpar cause the ring-straik of the said Firlot, pass from
the one end of the said over Iron bar to the other: And the same to be brunt
and sealled, with the mark of four Crowns, upon both the sides of the
bottom, with fyve impressions of the letter L upon the lips thereof. And for
eschuing of fraud in all time coming; The said Commissioners all in one voice
but discrepance or variance, Have thought expedient Statut and Ordained, by
virtue of the foresaid Commission granted to them by the said laite Act of
Parliament, That all Victual and stuff shall be measured by straik, through
all the parts of this Kingdom, in all time coming. And by reason that Malt,
Bear, and Aites, have ever been used to be measured by heap; and that by
the meaning of several praeceiding Acts of Parliament, IT has beine thought,
that Heaps in proportion was the just third of the Firlot and Peck, So that
thrie straiked Firlots, for two heaped Firlots, Sex straiked Firlots for four
heaped Firlots, was thought to be a just proportion, the one agreeable to the
other. And the said Commissioners by trial and examination having found that
the Heap in proportion, IS not the just third part of the Firlot and Peck, but
that there is a great difference therein, and no small praejudice both to the
giver and receiver, of thrie straiked Firlots or Pecks, for two heaped firlots
or pecks, and consequently of sex for four, the Heap being always the less
measure as said is.

THEREFORE they have found it expedient to cause make ane particular Measure or
Firlot, for metting of Malt, Bear, and Aites, by straike, in all time
coming, which being made and produced in their presence, and after trial and
examination thereof, Have found the same in proportion neirest to the said
Heap, so that four straiked Measures or Firlots thereof, conteines in just
proportion (and to the less praejudice of all his Majesty's Lieges) four
heaped Firlots. Which the said Commissioners having caused fill with clear
running water of the water of Leith, They find the same to contain Thrittie
one Pincts, of the just Sterline Jugge and measure, ilk Pinct containing the
Weght foresaid. And the same to be in wydnes and breadnes aequall and conform
to the former Firlot, and in deipnes, Ten Inches and ane half inche.

Which they Find, Statute and Ordeins, To remain as ane just Measure and
Firlot, to be Used for metting and measuring of Malt, Bear, and Aittes, by
straike, in all time coming. And that the Pecks, half Pecks, and fourt part
Pecks thereof be made conform in proportione to the same last Firlot: Which
new Firlot in all other respects shall be agreeable in form with the old
straike Firlot above written, having one Iron girth more in the midst thereof
outwith, and marked with the impression of the letter H. on the outmost syds
thereof.

And the same with the foresaid other Firlot containing twenty ane pincts and
ane mutchkin, To be given out by the said Provest and Baillyes of Linlihgow,
to whose custody the same was committed of old, To the Burrowes and all others
his Majesty's Lieges for that effect, betwix the date hereof and the twenty
day of Apryle next-to come. And that four fulles of either of the foresaids
Firlots contain and be repute to be ane just BOLL, in all time coming
allenerlie. Siclyke the said Commissioners having considered the great
Praejudice sustained by all OUR Sovereign LORDS Lieges through the diversity
of Weghts, used within all the parts of this Realm.

THEREFORE and conform to their said Commission and Act of Parliament foresaid,
and for eschuing of all fraud, Have thought expedient, Statute, and Ordained,
That there shall be only one Just Weght through all the parts of this
Kingdom, which shall Universallie serve all his Majesty's Lieges (by the which
and no other) they shall buy and sell, all and whatsomever Wares accustomed to
be boght and sauld by Weght als weell Foraine, as Cuntrie-Wares; in all time
hereafter: to wit, The frensh Troys Stone Weght, containing Sexteine Troys
Pounds, in the Stone, and Sexteine Troys Unces in the Pound, and the lesser
Weghts and Measures to be made in proportion conform thereto: (And that Weght
called of old the Trone weght to be allvtterlie abolished and disharged, and
never hereafter to be received nor used.) And in respect that the keiping and
out-giuing of the Weghts of old to the Burrowes, and others his Majesty's
Lieges within this Kingdom; was committed to the Burgh, of Lanerk: Therefore
the said Commissioners have committed the keeping and out-giuing of the said
frensh Troys Stone Weght, now established, to the foresaid Burgh of Lanerk and
their Successors, to be given out by them and their said successors to the
Burrowes and others his Majesty's Lieges, betwix the date hereof and the First
day of Maij next to come, and in all time coming.

And lykewayes Statuts and Ordeins, that there be double Standards of the
foresaids Firlots and Measures, and Jedges thereof, and of the forsaids Weghts,
Two of every one of them to remain in the Register, within the Castle of
Edinburgh, and other two within the Castle of Dunbritane, therein to remain
as a warrant for the measures allenerlie. And the other in the Towns to whom
they have beine committed of old as said is, to be direct forth to the whole
Lieges to be used Universalie. And this without praejudice to any persons who
are founded infeft or addetted, by Tak or contract, of old or new fermes of
others Measures and Weghts; but that their Foundation, Infeftment, Tack, or
Contract, shall be proportioned to the Measure and Weght now established, so
that the same quantity shall remain with the giver and receiver, but
praeiudice to any of them. Sicklyke have found and declared, That the Elne and
Stand thereof committed to the keiping of the Burgh of Edinburgh, contains
Thrittie seven Inches. And the Pinct Stowp, committed to the keiping of ye
Burgh of Sterline, contains the weght of Thrie Pounds seven Unces of frensh
Troys weght clear running water of the watter of Leith. Which Elne, and Stowp,
They Statut and Ordain, to remain and abide in the same integrity as they
are now, and that no other Elne nor Stowp, or greater or less proportion
containing the said weght, shall be received by none of his Majesty's Leiges
in any time coming, to buy or sell with; in any part of this Kingdom. And the
half and quarter Elnes, and half quarters, and Nails: Quart, Chopin,
Mutchkin, and half mutchkine Stowps, be made in proportion conform thereto.
And the Burghes of Edinburgh, and Sterline, to whom the keiping thereof has
beine committed of old; have the out-giuing of the same to the rest of the
Burrous and all others his Majesty's Lieges to that effect, betwixt and the
First day of Apryle next to come: And that they have dowble Standards of the
said Elne, and Stowp, Two of every one of them, To remain in the Register
within the Castle of Edinburgh, and within the Castle of Dunbritane, for a
warrant as said is: and the other with themselfes and their successors, to
whom they have beine committed of old: And that the foresaids Measures, Mets,
and Weghts, with the which all and whatsomeuer persons shall be holden to buy,
sell, met, measure, wegh, and deliver, have course allenerlie within this
Realm; after the days resp^ after following viz. The Weghts after the First
day of May next to com and the Measures of Firlots and Pecks, and the rest of
that degrie, after the First day of June next thereafter, and no other Weghts,
Metts, nor Measures, to be received nor used in any time hereafter; in any
part of this Kingdom, under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament
made thereanent: and that all Firlots to be used in Markets both to burgh and
Land be brunt and sealed either with the marks and Sealls of Linlithgo in manner
foresaid, or with the burning Iron of the head burgh of the shyre wherein the
said markets are holden, And that the Provest and Baillyes of Royal Burrowes,
and Cities both Regalitie and Royalty, and als the Baillyes of Burrowes in
Baronnie, and Justices of Peace in whatsomeuer places where markets of Victual
are holden, or others Foraine or Cuntrie Wares shall be boght, sauld, and
weghed, met, and measured, shall be bound, That all measures and weghts to be
used shall be of one form and quantity, according to this present Act: And
if any different measures and weghts be found in any of the places above
mentioned. The said Provest and Baillyes of Royalties, Regalities, Baronies
and Justices of Peace; shall take order therewith and if need be shall be holden
to inform the Kings Majesty's Counsel thereof, that they may take order
thereanent as appertains.

Provyding always as is before provided, if any persons be founded or infeft,
and adetted by Tak, or contract, of old or new Ferme, of measures and weghts,
then are before written in manner foresaid. Their foundation Tack or Contract,
whether it be more or less, shall be proportioned to this measure and weght
which now is established, so that the same quantity shall remain with the
giver and receiver, but prejudice to any of them in manner particularly before
expressed. And because by the Provisions immediately before written, diverse
Pleyes and questions, may arise bewix parties, receivers and deliverers,
Masters and tenants Fewers and their Superiors, anent Fermes and Victual, and
siclyk ane^t other stuff and duties, adetted and bound to be paid and
delivered by weght, either by infeftments, Tacks, foundations, bands, or
contracts whatsomeuer, made before the date hereof anent the conforming and
proportionating of the measures and weghts contained in the said infeftme^ts
Tacks foundations and others Securities foresaids, with the measures and Weghts
now established, if sure notice and trial be not taken of the just measure and
quantity of the measures and weghts which have beine most customablie used and
received these fifty or thriescore years bygone, within the Shirefdomes
underwritten, viz. Lanerk, Wigtoun, Drumfreis, Roxburgh, and Bervik. In the
which the said Commissioners considering evidentlie the greatest diversity of
measures and weghts, from the measures and weghts now established, to be for
the most part: So that these fyve shyres being brought to the conformity
aforesaid, the rest of the Shyres within this Kingdom may be easily reduced
to the same, conform to this present Act.

THEREFORE the said Commissioners, Finds it meet and expedient, and by these
presents Statuts, Decernes, and Ordeins, That the Shiref of every one of the
foresaids fyve shyres of Lanerk, Wigtoun, Dru^freis, Roxburgh, and Bervik; or
their Deputs shall warn the Baillyes of Regalities within the same Shyres, and
Steuarts of Steuartries thereof, if any be, Justices of Peace, and Magistrates
of Burrowes, To convein ilk one them within the head Bourgh of the same Shyre
wherein they are Magistrates, within twenty days after the Counsels pleasure
shall be signified to them thereanent: and there not only to receive and
embrace the said measurs and weghts, from the Provest and baillyes of
Linlithgo and Lanerk, to whom the keiping thereof is concredit in manner
foresaid, and which are established by this present Act: But also to take
trial and cognition of the difference betwix the said old measures and
weghts, and the measures and weghts now established. And to appoint conclude
and determine, ilkone of them within their own bounds, what proportion less
or more shall be given and received in time coming, for conforming of their
Fermes and duties adetted by former infeftments, fondations, Tacks, contracts,
bands and Securities: to the foresaids Measures and Weghts now established, and
to insert the same in their Registers and Court books; To remain with them for
decisioun of such controversies as may arise in those bounds hereafter, anent
the disconformitie foresaid: and to report their diligence thereanent and
conclusion in writ authenticklie subscryved by the said Shirefs of Shyres,
Magistrates of Royal Burrowes, Baillyes of Regalities, Burghs of Baronnies, and
Justices of Peace; conveining within ilkane of the foresaids Shirrefdomes: And
to present the same to the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel and Session, before
the first day of Julie next-to come; To the effect the same may be delyvered
to the Clerk of Register to be insert in the books of Counsel (ad futuram
rei memoriam.) And that none of the foresaids fyve shyres, nor no others his
Majesty's Lieges within this Kingdom, praesume nor tak upon hand in time to
come; To buy, Sell, blok bargane, contract, or set in Tack, to, or with
others, for receipt or delyverie, with any other Weght, Met, or Measure, nor
the same which now by this present Act is approoved and established. And this
for report of the Commission above written, Requyring the Lords of Our
Sovereign LORDS Counsel and Session, That Letters may be direct for
publication of the praemisses by oppen Proclamation at the market Croces of the
head Burrowes of this Realm, and others places neidfull that none praetend
ignorance of the same, Commanding and charging, all and sundry the said
Provests and Baillyes of Burrowes and Cities, both of Royalty and Regalitie,
and also the Baillyes of Burrowes in Baronnies, Justices of Peace, and others
whatsomeuer, in places where markets are holden; To put in execution this
praesent Act and every part thereof in so far as concerns them, so that
the same may take full effect after the days respue foresaids: With
certification to them and they faillye, they shall be called and accused, and
the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament, shall be execute upon them in
all rigor in example of others. In witnessing of the which the said
Cammissioners have subscryved these praesents with their hands, Day, Year, and
Place foresaids. And Ordeins these praesents to be delyvered to the Clerk of
Register, to the effect he may cause insert the same in the Register of
Parliament.

MEDIOCRIA * FIRMA


