A KEY OF HEAVEN: THE LORDS PRAYER opened, and so applied, that a Christian may
learn how to pray, and to procure all things which may make for the glory of
God, and the good of himself, and of his neighbor.

Containing likewise such Doctrines of faith and godliness, as may be very
useful to all that desire to live godly in Christ Jesus.

The second Edition enlarged by the Author.

MATTHEW. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given yeu: seek, and ye shall find:
knock, and it shall be opened unto you

Oration justi clavis coeli.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Ben^^^ in Fisher, and are to be sold at
the sign o^ the Talbot in Aldersgate Street 1633.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP-FVLL Sir THOMAS CREW, and to all his hopeful children,
all grace and peace in this life, all joy and glory in that which is to come,
be multiplied.
RIGHT Worshipful, custom does claim by prescription, that such books as
come under the Press to be made public, should be ushered forth with an
Epistle Dedicatory, which if it want, it calls into suspicion, that either
the Author has no friends of worth, or that the work is not worthy patronage.
Wherefore having suffered this Tract on the Lords Prayer, to come forth, I
tread the common path. The profit of him to whom dedication is made, or
testification of respect and thankfulness of him that dedicateth, or credit
and countenance to the book dedicated, is the mark that is aimed at in
dedications. All these respects have moved me to make choice of your self.
For though you be already furnished and fully established in the truths therein
delivered, yet it shall be profitable unto you, that with some variety you be
put in remembrance of the same things: your children likewise (who may reap
some good hereby) will be induced to read and make use of this book the
rather, because it comes through the hands and under the patronage of their
so loving and beloved father. These are likewise to acknowledge that dept of
thanks due to you for the many kindnesses you have showed me, for which I do
and shall for ever stand beholding unto you: also to signify my well wishing
to your children, and that for the well deservings of those which are come to
age, and for the sake of their mother, your dearly beloved wife, now with the
Lod, to whom my self and mine stood much indebted, whom I could not but admire
and affect while she lived, whose remembrance I shall always honor, and whose
name I desire to keep alive, for to quicken others now she is dead. For, to
speak within compass, without hyperbole, amongst the many gracious women that
I have known, a more complete Christian, to whom the Lord had bestowed such a
sweet concurrence of gifts of grace and nature, have I (...) known. Nam gau
deant been nati, modo renati. Gratier est ou^ch^o veniens e corpore vir^us.
And though birth, beauty, wit, a large heart, and good elocution (all which
were eminent in her) without grace are vanity; yet when these are accompanied
with love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned
(all which abounded in her) each does make other admirable. I would say more,
were it not that I should renew your grief in remembrance of your loss: but I
am assured you have learned to be thankful for the enjoyment of so rare an
helper so long, rather then to over-grieve or be impatient that you could
enjoy her no longer. If you shall please to suffer these my first fruits in
this kind to pass into the world through your hand, they will be the better
accepted of the good, and defended from those that are bad, and I shall remain
much bound to you. All that I can say, why I publish this book, is, I desire
by all means, according to my ability, to do good in the Church of God. I
acknowledge, many have written worthily upon this subject, whose helps I have
used, yet none that I know in this manner; and I find that variety in this
kind does much good. Now the God of heaven, whose glory I intend in this
work, give it favor in the sight of his Church, to the edifying thereof, to
whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen. Thus commending you and yours to the
protection and blessing of the Almighty, I humbly take my leave, this 26. of
May.

Yours to be commanded, in all Christian duties, HENRY SCUDDER.

To the Reader.
TO be much in persuading those that be favorites of some great person, to use
that interest for their best advantage, were an endeavor somewhat needless,
considering natural self-love inclines men in such cases to be sensible
enough of their own good. Yet so dull is our apprehension of matters that are
of an higher nature, that though we have the ear of God always open unto us,
and free access to the throne of grace through Christ who appears in heaven
for us, carrying our names in his breast, yet we need stirring up, to improve
this blessed liberty, though the whole world be not worth this one prerogative,
that we can boldly call God Father. This disproportion of our carriage arises
in part from Satan's malice, who labors to keep us in darkness, that we
believe not, or mind not our best privileges: which if we did, how glorious
would our lives appear? how comfortably and fruitfully should we walk? what
honor should God have by us? what sweet sacrifice from us? how should we
overlooke all opposite power? But now by reason we are prone to believe Satan,
and the lies of our own heart, and ready to call truth it self into question,
as if these things were too good to be true, no marvel if we pass our days
so deadly. For what use of an hidden and locked up treasure, if we use not this
key of prayer to fetch from thence for all our need? What benefit of all the
precious promises made in Christ unto us, unless we allege them unto God,
and with a reverent boldness bind him with his own word, which he can no
more deny, then cease to be God? If we took these things to heart, God
should hear oftener from us, we would be more in heaven than we are, seeing
we should bring as much grace and comfort from God as we could bring faith to
graspe and carry away.

Besides this forementioned mindlesnesse of our privileges, since the fall
the soul naturally loves to spend and scatter it self about these present
sensible things, and cannot without some strife gather it self together, and
fix upon heavenly things. Now this talking with God requires an actual bent
of the mind, and carries up the whole soul into heaven, and exercises as
all the parts, so all the graces of the soul, faith especially, prayer being
nothing else but the flame of faith. And Satan knowing that when we send up our
desires to God, it is to fetch supply against him, troubles the soul, weak
of it self, with a world of distractions. Where he cannot corrupt the doctrine
of prayer (as in Popery) with heresies and superstitious follies, there he
labors to hinder the exercise of it. Wherein we should be so far from
being discouraged, that we should reason rather that that must needs be an
excellent duty which is so irksome to the flesh, and which the devil so
eagerly sets against. This should encourage us to this exercise, wherein lies
all our strength, that if in spite of Satan's annoyance and our own
indisposition, we will set upon this duty, we shall find our selves by little
and little more raised up to heaven, and our hearts more and more enlarged, God
rewarding the use of that little grace we find at the first, with increase of
strength and comfort. To him that has (in the exercise of that he has) shall
be given more. We should labor not to be ignorant of Satan's enterprises, who
besides his diverting our minds from prayer, and disturbing us in it,
labors by all means to draw us to some sin, the conscience whereof will
stop our mouths, and stifle our prayers, and shake our confidence, and eclipse
our comfort: which he often aymeth more at then the sin it self unto which he
tempts us. We should labor therefore to preserve our selves in such a state
of soul, wherein we might have boldness with God, and wherein this gainful
trading with him might not be hindered.

To pass over many other causes of the neglect of this intercourse, and
dealing with God by prayer, we may well judge, as one of the chief, a
selfe-sufficiencie whereby men dwell too much in themselves. He that has
nothing at home will seek abroad. The poor man (says Solomon) speaks
supplications. If we were poor in spirit, and saw our own emptiness, it
would force us out of our selves. Alas what temptation can we resist, much
less overcome without fresh succor? What cross can we endure without
impatiencie, if we have not new support? What success can we look for, yea in
common affairs, without his blessing? What good can we do, nay think of,
without new strength? When we do any good by his power, do we not need pardon
for the blemishes of our best performances? What good blessing can we enjoy, so
as we defile not our selves in it, without a further blessing, giving us with
the thing the holy use of it? Yet we see most men content to receive blessings
as they come from Gods general providence, without regarding any sanctified
use by prayer, whereas holy men knowing that God will be sought unto even for
those things of which he has given a promise, Ezekiel 36.37.
in obedience to this his divine order, desire to receive all from him as a
fruit of their prayers. And Gods manner is to keep many blessings from his
children until they have begged them, as delighting to hear his children
speak. The consideration whereof moves those that have nearest communion with
God to acknowledge him in all their ways, depending on him for direction,
strength, success, whereupon he delights in showing himself more familiarly
unto them in the sweetest experiences of his love, guiding them by his counsel
whilst they abide here, and after bringing them to glory. Psalm. 37*24
As other graces grow in those that are in the state of grace: so this spirit
of prayer receives continual increase upon more inward acquaintance with God,
and their own estates. Whence they can never be miserable, having God to pour
forth their spirits and ease their hearts unto, who cannot but regard the voice
of his own Spirit in them. But of our selves, such is our case, that God who
knows us better than we know our selves, says, we know not what or how to
pray, Romans 8.26. This language of Canaan is strange unto us. Which our blessed
Savior in mercy considering, stirred up a desire in his Disciples to be
taught of him the Son, how to speak to the Father. Where thereupon he
teaches them a form, which for heavenly fullness of matter, and exactness of
order, shows that it could come from no other Author.

This holy pattern comprizing so much in so little, all things to be desired,
in six short petitions, it is needful for the guides of Gods people to lay
open the riches of it to the view of those that are less exercised. An
endeavor which his excellent Majesty thought not unbeseeming the greatness of
a King. For the use of a set form of prayer, and this in special, I will make
no question: yet in the use of this prayer, we may dwell more in the meditation
and enforcing such petitions as shall concern our present occasions: For
instance, if ever there were time of praying, Let thy kingdom come, let Christ
arise and his enemies be scattered, then certainly now is the time for us to
ascend up into heaven by our prayers, and awake Christ, that he would rebuke
the winds and waves, and cause a calm: that he would be strong for his
Church, in maintaining his own cause. It is Gods manner before any great work
for his Church, to stir up the spirits of his beloved ones to give him no
rest. How earnest was Daniel with the Lord immediately before the delivery out
of Babylon. Dan. 9.
And undoubtedly if we join the forces of our prays together, and set upon
God with an holy violence, he would set his power, his wisdom, his goodness,
on work for the exalting of his Church, and ruin of the enemies of it. Now is
the time for Moses his hands to be upheld whilst Amalech goes down.

As in the lives of David, Asa, Ezekia, Iehosaphat, etc.
The prevayling power of prayer with God in times of danger, appears not only
in the sacred history of the Bible, but has been recorded in all ages of the
Church. Eusebius. l. 5. Tertul. in Apologet.
In the primitive Church, An. Dom. 175. the army of Christians was called the
thundering legion, because upon their prayers God scattered their enemies with
thunder, and refreshed themselves with showers in a great drought.

After in the good Emperor Theodosius his time, An. Dom. 394. upon an earnest
prayer to Christ, the winds fought from heaven for him against his enemies, as
they did for us in 1588. And continually since, God never left the force of
faithful prayer without witness. If we would observe how God answers
prayers, we should see a blessed issue of all the holy desires he kindles in
our hearts: for he cannot but make good that title whereby he is styled, a God
hearing prayer, Psalm. 65.2. which should move us to sow more prayers into his
bosom, the fruit whereof we should reap in our greatest need. It would be a
strong evidence in these troublesome times, of the future good success of the
Church, if we were earnest in soliciting Christ with these words which
himself has taught us, Let thy kingdom come. For put him to it, and he will
never fail those that seek him. Psalm. 9.10. He loves importunity.

But to speak something of this Treatise of this godly and painful Minister
of Christ; which is written by him without affectation, as desirous to cloth
spiritual things with a spiritual manner of writing, the diligent and godly
Reader shall observe a sound, clear, substantial handling of the greatest
points that naturally fall within the discourse, and a more large and useful
unfolding of many things, than in former Treatises. It appears he sought the
good of all: so that besides the labors of other holy men, there will be just
cause of blessing God for his assistance in this work. To whose blessing I
commend both it and the whole Israel of God.

Grayes Inn. R. SIBBS.

A KEY OF HEAVEN: The Lords Prayer opened and applied.
MATH. 6. 9 After this manner therefore pray ye. Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy Name.

10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

11 Give us this day our daily bread.

12 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.


THese words are part of our Saviors Sermon in the Mount: they concern
Prayer, and do consist of a Precept, or exhortation to pray in a right manner.
Pattern, to exemplify the said manner.


The precept is: After this manner pray ye: The pattern is: Our Father, etc.

This Exhortation is inferred upon consideration of diverse abuses of prayer,
whereof our Savior had warned his Disciples, to wit, Hypocrisy, and vain
babbling of the Pharisees and Heathen. He reasons from the dissimilitude that
ought to be between hypocrites and heathen; and between true Christians and
faithful believers; saying, verse 8. Be not ye therefore like unto them: but
pray ye in an holy manner. And for that cause does propose unto them a perfect
form of prayer; intimating, that if they would pray according as he did
therein prescribe, they should neither play the Hypocrites, as did the
Pharisees, nor babble as the heathen, nor offend any other way in this holy
exercise of calling upon the name of the Lord.

The words of the exhortation contain these particulars.

1 The person exhorting, Christ Jesus; implied in his imperative speech, Pray.

2 The persons exhorted, Ye.

3 The inference whereupon it is grounded, Therefore.

4 The subject of the exhortation, Pray in this manner.

Pray: 1 Samuel 1.1^.15. P^ ^2.8. Is^ ^^
to pray does import an holy speech and pouring out of the soul unto God,
being a joint act of the mind and will, whereby the mind, by voice or
thought, does make known to God the desires of the heart: What it is to pray.
showing both what a man would have God to do for him, or to accept from him. A
bare desire is not to pray* for many wish and desire those things for which
they never speak, or pray unto God. Orare est appetere, and petere. Phil. 4 6.
Psalm. 38.9:
Neither are words without desires any prayer: but when the mind makes known
to God what the will desires, this is to pray. By what way soever of
expression a man does signify his desire, directing it to God; whether it be
by thought only, or also by sigh, Psalm. 38.9 Romans 8.26.
groan, or Psalm. 39.12.
tears, or by lifting up Ps. 28.2.
a hand, or Psalm. 123.1.
eyes toward God in the heavens, or by Psalm. 141.1.2.
voice, perfect, or Isai. 38.14.
unperfect, if it be but by Lam. 3.56.
breathing it out, (as it were) so be he intend, and understand what he
desires; this is to pray.

Desires are natural or spiritual.

Natural, when a man, Difference between natural and spiritual desires in
prayer.
out of a sense of that which he needs, and which may be for his natural
well being here, and for his happiness hereafter, from a mere well-wishing to
himself, does pray unto God to obtain it. Thus a natural man, a very Balaam
may pray. Number. 23.10.


A spiritual desire (be it of natural or spiritual good things) is from the
spirit and regenerate part of man, Rom 8.26 27.
put up to God with holy affections, in a spiritual manner, to a spiritual
end. Only the regenerate can thus pray.

Ye: first the Disciples, and under them he means all Christians. Act. 11.26.
For although Christ gave his Disciples some precepts that only did belong to
them as Apostles, yet he gave very many precepts to them as they were
Christians; as that in Mark 13.37. What I say to one, I say to all, Watch: so
here, what he says to them, he says to all, Pray.

Therefore, has a double reference, both to the sinful manner dehorted fom,
and to this holy manner exhorted to. He reasons thus, the manner of
hypocritical and heathenish praying is sinful: this manner here propounded is
most holy, therefore pray in this manner, and not as they do.

After this manner, or thus; the word rendered thus, or in this manner, is a
note of likeness, pointing unto the pattern following. As if he had said,
Say, Our Father, as it is Luke 11.2. or if you use other words, let them be
according unto this pattern here prescribed, to wit, to the same person, the
same matter, in the same kinds of prayer, whether it be in Petition for our
selves for that which is good, or in deprecation against that which is evil,
or in Intercessions for others, or in Thanksgiving both for our selves, and for
others; and with the same good disposition of heart, as is taught in this form
of prayer following. The words thus opened, the particulars therein offer
diverse profitable lessons.

Christ's diligence in teaching his servants and family this necessary
religious duty of prayer: both at this time, of his own accord, and at another
time at the request of one of his Disciples, is first to be observed. Luk* 11.1.


All the actions of Christ Jesus are observable, and of excellent use; but
only some of them bind Christians to imitation. That I may therefore clear
the foundation of the doctrine to be concluded from Christ's practice; let it be
considered, that the actions of Christ were of different natures. He did some
acts as he was God, and as Mediator between God and man; as his miracles, and
offering up of himself a sacrifice for sin, etc. These actions should work
in all men an holy admiration of him, and faith in him: but must not, nay
cannot be imitated.

How far Christ's example does bind to imitation.
He did other actions as he was man, some whereof were indifferent, being
neither commanded nor forbidden: others were necessary, being commanded. Those
actions which he did which were indifferent, do teach us Christian liberty,
showing what we may do: but do not lay a bond upon the conscience to tie us to
do the same. Christ did sometimes stand when he prayed, this was an
indifferent action: hence we may conclude, that we may stand when we pray: but
yet cannot conclude that we must stand always when we pray. And the like must
be understood of all other indifferent actions of his, except some true cause
come between, which to us, may take away the indifferency; as commandment of
the Magistrate, or offense of the godly, or stumbling block to the wicked, or
the like.

The necessary actions which he did, that came under some commandment, were
either ceremonial, which concerned him as he was a Jew, borne of the Virgin
Mary; or moral, which concerned him as he was a man, made under, and subject
to the moral Law, Gal. 4.4.
though not by nature, for so he is above all law; but by voluntary subjection,
as, in our stead, to which also he was designed.

The ceremonial actions which he did, are not to be followed, because he did
put an end unto them all, Col. 2.14.
when he nailed them on the cross. The Moral actions, viz. such as obedience
to his Parents, and love to his neighbor; patience in bearing and forgiving
injuries, etc. are all left us for examples, 1 Pet. 2, 21;
that we should follow his steps. Of this sort is his care to instruct his
people, and family under his charge.

All his actions in this kind are exemplary rules, and do add a double force
to a commandment, both showing what ought to be done, and what is possible to
be done: wherefore from his example of teaching his Disciples, who were as his
family, upon all occasions both publicly and privately, as he had
opportunity, I conclude:

All that have a family and charge of people belonging unto them, must teach
them necessary points of godliness, such as prayer, faith, repentance, new
obedience, etc. There is a like reason of all as of one. The Lord says of his
commandments, They shall be in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
and thou shall teach them diligently to thy children, etc. The Apostle does
charge fathers to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. Ephesians. 6* 4.
And masters have the same charge given them over their servants for matters of
religion, which Parents have over their children; for governors are charged to
have care of the man-servants and maidservants, as well as of sons and
daughters, Exodus 20.10. The examples of Abraham, Iosuah, Gen, 18.19. Josh.
24.16. Pro. 3^.1.
and Bathsheba, are recorded in Scripture for their commendation, and for the
good example of all that be called to the like condition.

1 For this is a means to convert, to confirm, 1 These. 5. 11.14.
and to edify their people in their most holy faith, and to propagate and
enlarge the Church of God, which will bring much glory to his name; for it is
the honor of a King to have many, and those both strong and loyal subjects.

2 Their people have need to be taught the grounds of religion, and to have
them often whetted upon them. It will do them more good then meat, drink,
apparel, physic, and all other necessaries of nature: by as much as the
soul is better then the body, and eternal life better then that which is but
for a moment; in compassion therefore and love unto them, they are bound to
teach them.

3 Sin is so abominable, and mischievous, and is a common enemy, that, as
we do with serpents, and ravenous beasts, every one must smite at it to kill
it wheresoever he does meet it: especially when it is poisoning, and worrying
the lambs of his own family.

4 Grace and godliness is so sweet and amiable, and so profitable whersoever
it grows, that it were an happiness if it grew every where; more especially
if it grew so near as in the family.

5 True respect to a man's self, does bind him to the duty of instructing,
and teaching his charge. For he is accountable to God, and must himself answer
for the sins of his family as one accessarie, if he by instruction and
admonition have not reclaimed, or restrained them. Besides, the sins of wife,
children, yea of servants also are infectious: a master may catch the plague
even of his servant. Also while the family remains wicked, it is a daily
vexation to a righteous soul to behold their ignorance, and to see their
ungodly deeds. As were the souls of Isaac and Rebecca with their uninstructed
daughters in law, Genesis 26.35
the wives of their profane son Esau. Genesis 37.46
And as was the soul of David, for the deeds of his too much cockered sons,
Ammon, Absolon, and Adonijah. And when guiltines of not teaching them when he
might have done them good, shall come daily to remembrance, this brings
bitter grief indeed. Wherefore to avoid these evils, every man in very
providence for himself should instruct his people. Which if he do, it will be
a good assurance to himself of his own conversion; he shall have benefit by
their goodness; it will rejoice his heart to see his children walk in the
faith; he shall taste the fruit of his own grafting in his own orchard; they
will pray for him, and give good example and good advice, whereof the strongest
Christians have sometimes need; his whole house shall be a blessing. If his
pains take no good effect, yet he shall have peace of conscience, and his
work is with the Lord.

Lastly, parents and governors have advantage above other men, by reason of
their domesticke authority, which will cause the inferiors either for fear
or love to regard instructions. Also their daily presence gives them often
opportunities to instill knowledge by drops, according as their narrow
capacities will receive: and they may often whet the same things upon their
dull understandings, which no other person (no, not a Minister) has
opportunity to do. In all these respects, he that is willing to imitate
Christ; may see, that if he have people under his charge, he must teach them
the needful points of religion, such as prayer, and the rest. I have been
large in the proof of this doctrine, because many will not be convinced, and
few are so convinced, as to be persuaded to put it in practice. The use
follows.

daily, they may not shame thee much more. Is it not a shame to parents when
the child neither knows what, nor how to speak unto God, either for them,
or for himself? Does common reason teach thee to train them up in some honest
trade of life, that they may live like men in their age? Let grace then teach
thee that there is an age wherein if in this life they be not taught to live
godly, they shall never shine like men and Angels; yea, like Christ, as all
godly men shall in the glorious heavens: but when they dye, and this age come
upon them, they must live basely and miserably, even as the devils in hell fire
for evermore.

Ob. It belongs to Ministers to teach and catechize.

Sol. It does: but not to Ministers only. For though women may not be
Ministers, Tit. 2.4.
yet the aged are commanded to teach the younger to be sober, etc. And
Ministers for the most part lose their labor in public, when governors of
families do not before prepare their people, and afterward whet upon the^ that
in private which they have been taught in public: when Ministers and masters
have done what they can, all is little enough. God has made every governor a
steward over his household, to minister unto them in his place all things
needful: know therefore thy office, else if thou be found negligent, thy lot
is to be cut in sunder, and to have thy portion with hipocrites, Matthew 24.51.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

how to teach, or have no leisure, or they teach them to say their prayers, the
Paternoster, Creed, and ten Commandments, what would we have more? To the
first I answer; art thou of years to be married, and to be a father or a
master, and do not know the chief points of religion? for shame make not
this excuse. Luke 12.47
That servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. To the second; thou will spare them time to eat and drink, and sleep and play; thou say they
cannot live else, nor hold out in thy work, and thou should be accounted
hard and cruel. It is true. But if they be not taught the Principles of
religion, they cannot live the life of grace, nor be able to do Gods work:
and, of the two, he is the cruellest master and father, which does starve the
souls of his family, and suffer them to dye for lack of knowledge. And
whereas they say, they teach them their prayers; I say, as good never a whit as
never the better, when they teach them only to say them by rote, but do not
teach them what they mean. Besides, they teach the^ the Creed, and ten
Commandments for prayers, whereas the Creed is a rule of faith, and the
Commandments a rule of obedience: and, of those three, only the Lords Prayer
is a prayer, and the rule of all other prayer. It shall be therefore their
safest course to acknowledge their negligence and reform it; for excuses will
not avail them at the day of reckoning.

if they be taught to their hand they unteach them, by disgracing of prayer,
hearing of the word, and all other exercises of religion: and by deriding of
all such as frequent them; and if wife, and children, or servants would learn
by repairing unto such means as may inform them, they do either expressly
forbid and threaten them; or by subtle allurements withdraw them. The Apostle
calls such persons children of the devil, enemies of all righteousness,
because they cease not to pervert the right ways of the Lord. For as Elimas
sought to keep Sergius Paulus, Act. 13.10:
so do these their people, from the faith. Our Savior denounces woe against
them, because they shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, Mat 23.13
they neither go in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering, to go in.

This concerns all such Ministers which are also masters of families; for if
the aforementioned faults be found in us, as they are too frequent in too many,
by how much our double calling requires it more at our hand, by so much our
sin is more aggravated, and our case more woeful.

Principles of religion, else they cannot teach others. And it will be a shame
unto them, when for time and calling men should be teachers, they have need
that one teach them again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.
Heb. 5.12.
Thirdly, let them in the fear of God take all occasions to teach such as
belong unto them, setting some time apart to call the family together for that
purpose, and, if need be, use the help of some short familiar Catechism: and,
at all times, as opportunity serves, be dropping in of knowledge, and
whetting of some good thing or other upon them, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
as you sit in the house, or when you walk by the way, when you lie down, and
when you rise up. In thus doing, you shall discharge your duty to God, Motives
why governors should teach their people to be religious.
you shall show true love to your family, love to goodness, and hatred of
sin; you shall make proof of your own conversion, you shall be freed
certainly from the infection of their sin, if you be not from the vexation:
you shall much increase your knowledge by teaching, though you teach but the
unlearned. For this instructing the family is a mean to come to the knowledge
of those secrets of God, of which yet you never heard. God will reveal his
will to such, he cannot hide it; as he says of Abraham, Genesis 18.17, 19.
Shall I hide from Abraham, etc. why not from Abraham? For I know him, says
God, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. Lastly, the teaching of our family is an
excellent means to further our own practice in godliness; for he that is
privy to himself that he knows his duty, yea that he has taught others
the same: his conscience hereupon will urge him to teach himself, be it to
pray, or to hear the word, etc. Thus the conscience has a sharper spur to
prick forward to goodness, and has a stronger bit or check to curb and
restrain from evil, then otherwise it could have. One half of these motives,
nay any one of them, might persuade any that is not obstinate to instruct his
wife, children and servants. Genesis 9.27.
But the Lord must persuade, else words are but wind.

It concerns all children servants to consider what charge God has laid upon
their Governors; learning thereby that it is as well Gods will that all under
household government should suffer themselves to be taught, as that any
householders should teach. You must therefore willingly be present at times
appointed to catechize, or to talk of good things: and being present, attend
and learn with all diligence, yea sometimes give the father or master occasion
to teach you, by asking some good question, as the Disciples did ask Christ,
saying, What might this parable be? Luke 8.9.
and by moving him, as the Disciple which said, Lord teach us to pray. Luke
11.1.
And when you have received instruction of father or mother, forsake it not,
for they will make you beautiful before God, Pro. 1.9.
being ornaments of grace to your heads, and chains about your necks. But if
you be stubborn, and will not be taught by them, then know, that as he that
will not eat, is a murderer of his body; so are ye that refuse instruction,
murderers of your souls: for the ear that hears the reproof of life,
abides among the wise: Pro. 15.31.32.
he that refuses instruction, despises his own soul.

Therefore: Our Savior infers this exhortation to pray aright, upon
consideration that many prayed amiss: whence learn,

The more subject any duty is to be performed amiss, there is the more cause
that Christians do learn and endeavor to perform it aright. The more ways
a good duty may be ill done, the more care should be had how it may be well
done. Upon this very ground, the Lord directs his Disciples to the right
manner of giving alms, verse 2. and of fasting, verse 16. etc. Our Savior
reasons in like manner for hearing the word aright, that because many heard
amiss, scil. some received the word as the high way does seed, not
understanding what they heard: some as the stony ground, the word took not
deep root: some as the thorny ground, they gave entertainment to worldly
cares and pleasures together with the word; and so all three sorts became
fruitless. Take heed therefore how you hear, says our Savior, Luke 8.18.

For to the pleasing of God, Bonum consistit ex causis integris.
and the end why, and all circumstances in the doing it must be good also, so
that failing but in one thing, does mar the action. Man is subject to fail
in prayer many ways. Now if there be many by-waies, man is in more danger of
going out of his way, then if there were but one. And as man's nature is prone
to err, and take the worst: so Satan is very cunning and diligent, by setting
goodly apparences upon by-waies, to cause man to mistake the right. Wherefore
the more subject man is to run out into by-waies, the more heed he should
take that he do not go aside out of the right way of serving the Lord.

as if there were no way but one, and that they could not do amiss, though
they never wash their hands from filthiness, nor hearts from wickedness; nor
yet so much as think before hand how they may be rightly performed: whereas
they may and do fail many ways. Thus these good works being ill done,
become so abominable unto God, that he says, Isa. 1.12.14.
Who requires this at your hands? my soul hates them: I am weary to bear
them.

It therefore behooves all Salomons counsel should always be sounding in our
ears, whenever we begin any service of God: Eccl 5*1.2.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, etc. Be not rash with thy
mouth: and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God.

That we may the better observe this counsel, since it concerns a preparing a
man's self before he speak unto God; I will show first, whether preperation be
needful. Secondly, what that preparation is.

Preparation to prayer needful. Job 11.13.
First, know that preparation to prayer is needful; according to that in Job:
If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him, etc. Thou will prepare their heart (says the Psalmist) and wilt cause thine ear to
hear. Psalm. 10.17
My heart is prepared O God, Psalm. 57.7.
my heart is prepared, (says he) I will sing and give praise. The very first
words of the Lords Prayer, teaching us to begin with Our Father which art in
heaven, do argue that we should have our spirits composed, and our whole man
rightly disposed unto this holy duty.

For first, God, before whom, Reason why a man should be p^epared before he
pray. Eccles. 5.2. H^b. 1.13
and to whom we speak, is a great God, of glorious majesty: and God, (as
Solomon reasons) is in heaven, we on earth. He is most holy, of purer eyes
then to behold uncleanenesse. Levit. 10.3.
He will be sanctified in all that draw near unto him, to offer this sweet
incense of prayer. If we do not sanctify him by an holy performance of his
service; he will be sanctified him self upon us in the just punishment of our
hypocrisy, superstition, or profaneness. Besides, God to whom we pray, is
privy to all our behavior, yea, to the most secret intentions and dispositions
of our hearts. It concerns us therefore, that we be prepared to come before
him in sort as beseems the presence of his holy Majesty. Were we admitted to
speak to an e^^thly King, we would before (...) prepare both what, and how
(...) speak, and how to demean our selves in his presence; much more then
ought we; the King of Kings (not only admitting, but) graciously inviting us
to pray unto him.



I come now to the second case, to show what this preparation unto prayer is.

This preparation is twofold:

A twofold preparation to prayer.
The one general, to be made before hand, inabling and fitting a man to pray in
an instant, whenever he shall be moved to pray.

The other preparation is particular, and to be made immediately before prayer,
that it may the better be performed.

Unto that general preparation, is required that a man be endued with the
spirit of adoption, and be a believer, that he know God in Christ, being
converted, having repented, Romans 10.14.
and is in that state of grace, that he can call God Father.

Secondly, Prou. 19*2 Ioh. 4.22.
he must be endued with competent knowledge of those things which are required
in an acceptable prayer. A Catalogue whereof here follows. The discussing of
all which, or of most of them, you shall find scattered in this Tract, as the
Text of the Lords Prayer does minister occasion.

1 Prayer is to be made to God only. Requisites in prayer.


2 In prayer, God is to be represented to the mind, as an incomprehensible
Spirit, Majesty and Deity, therefore without the use of any Image; conceiving
also to be omnipotent and gracious, able and willing to reward them that come
unto him.

3 Prayer is to be made to God in the name of Christ Jesus our only Mediator
and Advocate.

4. The matter of all Petitions must be lawful, according to Gods will,
warranted by precept, president, or promise.

5 A man must pray with understanding, he himself knowing what he does ask.

6 Prayer must be made with a sincere and holy intention of the heart,
intending it as an holy worship of God, as well as a means to procure good to
a man's self from God.

7 Prayer must be made with a sense of what we want, and with a sensible desire
of that which we pray for.

8 In prayer there must be a diligent and (in endeavor) a constant attention,
first to God, keeping the heart lift up toward him; as also to the things
uttered in prayer, that the mind be upon them: Likewise that he attend, and
take heed to himself, with what disposition and affection he do pray. He
should look to himself that his spirits be composed, and his thoughts
gathered in, and, as much as may be, kept in from wandering and distraction.
This is to be watchful in prayer.

9 There must be an holy earnestness and fervency, and importunatenesse in
prayer, more or less, according as the matter of prayer does more or less
concern Gods glory, and man's good.

10 Prayer must be made with holy devotion, and religious adoration; expressed
in humble and reverent gestures, and carrying of the body beseeming the
greatness and holiness of God to whom we pray.

11 In prayer a man must propound a right end to himself; namely, that he
may, of Gods free grace, obtain the thing desired, that therewith he might
honor God, and do him more service; but not for vain glory, to be seen of
men, not for charms, not that he may have wherewithal to spend upon his
lusts, nor yet to merit thereby; as Hypocrites, Wizards, profane persons, and
some Papists do.

12 Prayer must be void of superstition, whether in respect of place, or
number, as in needless and vain repetitions upon Beads, as Papists do; or
any other ways.

13 He that prays aright, must pray in faith, he must believe that God does
hear him, and that for Christ's sake he will grant him all the petitions which
he has thus endeavored to make according to his will, waiting confidently
until God do fulfill them.

Lastly, unto petitions must be joined praise and thanksgiving.

This general preparation must be always ready, through an habitual
knowledge of those things which are required in an acceptable prayer.

A particular and immediate preparation is this. When a man intends to pray,
he must sequester himself from all other business and thoughts, that he may
apply himself to meditation. Wherein he enters into consideration of what he
is going about, what is required in prayer, how things stand between God and
him, what his sins are, that are then to be repented, confessed, and prayed
against, and how they are and may be aggravated, also what special graces and
good things he is now to pray for, what evils to pray against; likewise he is
to consider what favors God has showed him, and what good things he has
bestowed upon him, for which he is to praise God, and give him thanks; also he
must consider the grounds and warrant which he has to approach to the throne
of grace in prayer. These things prosecuted, and well digested, a man shall be
much the fitter to pray.

To what prayers particular preparation belongs.
Prayers are either continued, or only ejaculatory, uttered in a secret and
sudden lifting up of the desire to God. Immediate and special preparation
belongs only to continued prayer.

A man's occasions allow him sometimes more time, sometimes less; and he is
better disposed to meditation at one time then at another, he may accordingly
be longer or shorter in preparation.

But in every continued and set prayer there must be at least this preparation.
A man must take himself off from all other business, and thoughts, and in
that instant consider, and set before the eye of his faith, the majesty,
holiness, all-sufficiencie, and goodness of God, and so (with an heart humble
in the sense of his own unworthiness, but lift up to God in hope of his
mercy) he is to power out the desires of his soul unto him in the name of
Christ Jesus, according unto the requisites of prayer before mentioned.

Pray after this manner In that the Lord does here exhort to the right manner
of prayer, and not to the duty it self; it was because he took it for a
thing granted by all men, that they must pray: for not the Pharisees only, but
the heathen did pray; wherefore it must be granted of all, that

It is the duty of all men to pray. There were never any, but if they held
there was a God, they held also that he was to be prayed unto.

Ask, seek, knock, says Christ. Mat. 7.7. Pray without ceassing: in every
thing give thanks, 1. Thessal. 5.17, 18. In every thing by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God,
Phil. 4.6.

glorify him. Psalm. ^0.23
For in prayer the Lord is acknowledged to be God, to be good, gracious,
merciful, omnipotent, omniscient. Unto whom any man prays, in him he
believes, on him he trusts. In confession of sin, Gods law is
acknowledged to be holy, and God to be just. In praying aright in the name of
Christ by the Spirit, the distinction of persons is acknowledged. These and
many other things concerning God, are really professed in making requests, and
are particularly expressed to the honor of Gods name, in praises and
thanksgiving.

Prayer is very beneficial unto Ion. 3.8.10
either it does prevent it, as in the case of the Ninivites; or removes it,
Psalm. 107.
They cry to the Lord in their trouble, and he saves them out of their
distresses. Or if the affliction abide, prayer does ease the heart, and procure
patience and strength to bear it: and it does sanctify the cross, causing
it, like good physic, to work for the good of the inward man. As for eternal
punishment, prayer is the means of forgiveness: Psalm. 32.5.
I said I will confess my sin, says David, and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin.

As for evils of sin and temptation, Christ Jesus has prescribed prayer for a
remedy against it, Mat. 26.41
saying, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. An hearty prayer
has always strength either to remove the temptation, or to draw from God
sufficiency of grace to resist it, as it did for the Apostle, who had this
answer of his prayer, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12*9


Prayer is a mean to obtain all good things temporal; therefore we are bid to
say, Give us this day our daily bread: 1. Tim. 4.5.
it sanctifies and makes good things to be good to them that have them.

As for spiritual good things, the Lord says, Iam. 1.5.
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not. The Spirit of grace is obtained by prayer: Your
heavenly Father (says Christ) shall give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him. Luke 11.13


There is a necessity of prayer, Ask, Mat. 7.
and ye shall have. Though God can help if we never ask him, yet usually he
will not if men ask not: You have not, says James, Iam. 4.2.
because ye ask not. And though a man have never so much means, these without
prayer can do him no good. For to the making of a thing good, the word and
prayer is required; it being Gods ordinance, 1. Tim. 4.5
that what means soever be used, prayer must be one, and that of the quorum
(as we speak) for in all things prayer must be made. Philip. 4.6.

Ob.
The Lord knows what every one n^edeth, and he says, that Isa. 65.24.
before they call, I will answer: therefore prayer may seem to be needless.

Sol.
The end of prayer is not to inform God of any thing which he knows not, The
use of prayer though God need not thereby to be informed.
or to persuade God to do any thing whereto he is not of himself most willing;
neither is it a means only to procure good things for a man's self; but a
chief end of prayer is, that man might express his obedience in performance
of his duty, it being a part of his holy worship, wherein a man professes his
own frailty, and nothingnesse, without God, and that he holds God to be the
fountain of all goodness, even the giver of every good and perfect gift, and
that he is persuaded of his goodness, power and truth toward him; also he
professes that he is sensible of his wants, and that he does depend on him,
and will be thankful to him when he shall please to supply them. For prayer
makes way for praise and thanks. Besides, prayer to God does fit men to use
those things, which they obtained by prayer, for God, and according to his
will, considering that upon their suit to him they do enjoy them. What though
God know what we need? our Savior does not from thence conclude, we must not
pray at all; Mat. 6.8.9.
but therefore take heed how you pray. And Gods readiness to answer before
they call, is an argument why they should pray. For if God be so gracious,
that so soon as a man does in heart desire his help, he begins to answer
before he call; and as he says, Whiles they are speaking, I will hear* then we
should not say, therefore we need not pray; but therefore we will pray and
speak to him, because such is his readiness to hear, that we shall be sure
to speed.

Ob.
God has long since decreed what men shall have, whether much or little;
therefore prayer is needles: for God cannot alter his purpose* Mal. 3.6.
I am God, says he, and change not.

Sol.
I grant, God has decreed before all worlds what to give, and what not: but at
that time also he decreed the means that should come between his decree and
the execution thereof, one of which means is prayer, without which he never
intended ordinarily, after he has given the first grace, to give any thing
with a blessing in mercy to any man. For, to whom he gives saving grace, he
always gives the spirit of supplication, Zach. 12.10.
and looks that they should, upon all occasions, stir it up in them, and
improve it for the obtaining of those good things which God has intended, and
promised to them. God had decreed to give the Gentiles to Christ, yet God said
to him, Ask of me, Psalm. 2.8.
and I will give the heathen for thine inheritance. Daniel knew certainly the
time that God had decreed to deliver his people out of captivity; Dan. 9.2.3
but this did not cause him to forbear prayer, but it quickened him to fast
and pray, that they might be delivered. For God who had made known his decree
by the Prophet, that after seventie years he would cause the Jews to return
out of Babylon, and that he had thoughts of peace toward them to give them an
expected end; he said also to them, Ier. 29.10.11.12.13.
then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search for
me with all your heart. And I will turn away your captivity, etc. The Prophet
David, though it was revealed to him that God would establish his house and
kingdom upon his seed; yet the rather prays, saying, Thou O Lord of hoasts,
2 Sa. 7.27.
God of Israel, have revealed unto thy servant, saying, I will build thee an
house; therefore has thy servant found in his heart to make this prayer unto
thee.

God had not only decreed, but had promised to his people that he would give
them a new heart, and a new spirit, etc. and that he would cause them to walk
in his statutes; and, outwardly also, to bless them so that their land should
be to them as the Garden of Eden; yet (says he) for this will I be inquired
of by the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 36.37.
It is granted that prayer cannot, neither does it change Gods purpose, when
yet without prayer he will not give; for his purpose was to give when they
should pray, but not before; prayer makes the change, not in God, but in him
that prays, fitting him, and making him capable of the gift, who, till then,
was not sufficiently qualified for it.

Many have more then heart can wish, yet pray not at all.

They are only outward things, and common gifts, Psalm. 36.6. Psalm. 145.9.
(God knowing what employments he has for them amongst men) and not as fruits
of his special love, promise, and mercy. God gives them ofttimes in wrath
with a curse, Tit. 1.15.
they are impure unto them; they make lean souls, increasing their sin; Psalm.
92.7.
fatting them, but it is to the slaughter, it is that they may be destroyed
for ever: whereas on the contrary, all that pray aright shall, in the best
time, have what is best for them, with Gods blessing, as a token of his
special love unto them.

charms, to the devil, to any thing rather then unto God. If they be in want,
then they betake them to their friends, to their hands, to their wits, yea to
c^asening and shifting, but never look up to God; and the like in all other
cases. The same course they take for their souls. If the coming to Church,
and formal hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, and the prayers of
others will save them, they will not always be wanting in these external
devotions: but as for prayer (any more then a little lip-labor, which indeed
is no prayer) they are mere strangers to it. Causes why men call not upon God
This neglect of prayer comes from profaneness, and pride of heart; from
confidence in the creature, and from selfe-dependance; which causes them to be
unwilling to come into the presence of the holy God, or to be beholding to him.
For this cause God in justice casts them into want: They have not, Iam. 4.2.
because they ask not: or if he give unto them without asking, he gives it
with a curse, it is impure unto them, Tit. 1.15.
as before you heard.

There are some so profane, that they omit prayer in contempt, and with
deriding all which conscionably perform it. But as for those which have got
into the scorners chair, and have made themselves unworthy the pearl of a
reproof, I leave them to the considerations following. They carry in their
faces the very brand of an Atheist: for it is his guise, not to pray himself,
but would shame him which makes God his refuge. Psalm. 14 4 6.
And how can they be called Christians, to whom the description of the heathen
does so properly agree? Ier. 10 25.
The Prophet Jeremy describes the heathen by this, that they were families
that call not on Gods Name; and these he holds to be meet persons upon whom
God should pour out his fury, and fierceness of his indignation.

But I leave these, and come in the arm of flesh, and means here below; and
from poring too much upon the prosperity of those, Psalm. 73.7.
who without prayer have more then heart could wish: and by laying their own
crosses (in which they lie, notwithstanding they have prayed) too close unto
themselves. From these and the like causes (as lying in some sin unrepented
of, or the like) it is, that you are unwilling to pray; and when you do pray,
your edge of prayer is quite taken off. But enter, I pray you, into Gods
sanctuary, that you may see, confess, and bewail your folly, and learn with
that Psalmist to say, Psalm. 73.28
It is good to draw near to God, and to put your trust only in the Lord.

been proved in the Doctrine. Are any afflicted, Iam. 5.13.
let them pray. Are any in prosperity, let them pray, and praise God. In what
condition or state soever ye are, pray. For, besides that it is Gods command,
and his immediate worship; Manifold motives unto prayer.
we by prayer enjoy an holy communion with God, taking sanctuary under his
wings: We edify our selves also in our most holy faith, and in all other the
saving graces of Gods spirit, when we pray in the Holy Ghost, for, by it all
the weapons of our Christian warfare, all the good gifts of God, and means of
our salvation, become useful and good unto us. By prayer either we shall
prevent Gods judgments and corrections, or be made able to bear them, and be
made much better by them. By prayer we shall obtain pardon and repentance of
sins past, and strength to resist temptations of sins to come. In thus doing,
we shall have all such good things as be needful for us, with a blessing upon
them, or with contentedness without them, grace and peace in this life,
perfection of grace and glory in the life to come. Would we do good to our
enemies, and to our friends? and would we do our selves good? would we be
beneficial to the Commonweal and Church? then let us pray. 2 Chronicles. 30.20.
Genesis 25.21. Mark. 9.25 Mat 15.28 Mat. 8.13. Genesis 24.12.
For Kings have prayed for their subjects, husbands for their wives, fathers
for their sons, mothers for their daughters, masters for servants, servants
for masters, and all have been heard in that which they prayed. Prayer,
because it is ordained by God, and has his promise, calls in, and ingageth
Gods power and truth for him that makes it, and so through God becomes
omnipotent. What has been, or can be too hard for Prayer? Exodus 14.15.16.
It has caused the Sea to divide it self, and become an high way to Gods
people; also, together with the Whale, Jonah 2: 1.1.10. Josh. 10.12
to give up Jonas alive, and set him ashore. It caused the Sun to stand
still, yea to go back. It has loosed chains, and unlocked Prisons, Act.
1^.5.7.11.
and iron gates, and delivered the prisoners. What has not prayer done, what
will it not do in the behalf of the Church, or of any of Gods chosen? Nothing
so deep, but with this bucket we may draw it up; nothing so high above us, or
so far from us, but with this hand we may reach it to us. He that wrastleth
by the strength of prayer, though he wrestle with the strong God, shall
prevail, as did Jacob, of whom it is said, He had power over the Angel, and
prevailed, he wept and made supplication, Hos. 12.4. Of all helps prayer is
readiest at hand in all places, and at all times: if we be not without our
hearts, we need not be without help. It is the most universal help; it is
good for all persons, at all times, in all things. It is a most certain help,
no faithful prayer was ever made in vain. It is a key to open heaven; all
that have skill to handle it, may from thence fetch all things that may do
themselves or their neighbor good.

Moreover, when we have made our requests known to GOD, and have commended
our cause to him by prayer, this will comfort; quiet, and rejoice our hearts,
so that we need be no more sad, with Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18.
nor need we be careful in any thing, but may go on in our calling in peace,
Phil.4.6.7.
and may lie down in peace, being assured that now God cares for us, knowing
that his wisdom, truth, and power are all set a work for us. And, which is
more then all which yet has been said; Prayer is most pleasing to God, he
delights to hear the voice of his children. It is a more sweet smelling
sacrifice, then that of incense. It makes way to thanksgiving. It is a
glorifying of his great name.

Since it is the will of God that Ahashuereth, yet any man might come being
called, nay, the Queen was deposed from her place, because she came not at his
commandment. So that it is not presumption to come, but rebellion if you come
not: since God every where in his word calls you: So that whatsoever thy case
be, thou may come with good comfort to God, and be helped, as they say to
the blind man, Mark 10.49. Be of good comfort, he calls thee. God calls
you to this duty, fear not therefore to go to God in prayer at any time.
Objections against prayer answered.
To this end you must be able and willing to answer and resist all such
objections and discouragements that Satan and your own heart shall raise
against it.

You may learn how to answer to those objections against the necessity of
prayer, (namely, God knows what we need, and he has already decreed what we
shall have; and many that make no conscience of prayer, have more then heart
could wish) by that which is written before in this doctrine in the third
reason taken from the necessity of prayer. And for your help I will propound
and answer other objections, as follows.

I am not assured that I am converted,

You are by profession a convert, Ier. 31.18.
and turn unto him? and finding your inability to turn, you should with
Ephraim pray, saying, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, And do you find
the want of the Spirit? you should the rather pray for it, that God, according
to his promise may give it. Luke 11.13.
Do not say, I cannot pray, until God have given me grace and ability to
pray; but, having an express commandment of God to pray, you must set about
it, assay to pray as well as you can, desiring and expecting grace from him to
enable you to pray; For God does not usually let us feel the strength of his
grace requisite to the performance of a good duty, till that out of conscience
of obeying of the command, we craving his help, do set about the doing of it.

God again to pray unto him.

your sins are, the more need you have to come unto God; whom, by them, you
have offended, to ask of him pardon of them. And, since God is only able to
cure and heal your soul, there is the more cause that by prayer you should
seek unto him to cleanse you of your sins, and to give you power against
them. David does not say, because his sin was great, therefore I dare not
pray, but therefore prays thus: Psalm. 25.11.
For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. And, is not
forgiveness of sins one of the petitions which Christ has bid you to make
daily when you pray? To be ashamed for your sin, when you come before God,
is good, and argues that you are the fitter for prayer, Ier. 31.19.20.
and that you are now a meet object of Gods mercy and compassion; but to be
ashamed to pray, and not to dare to come into Gods presence, being by him
commanded, is a great sin, to be repented of. Indeed we should not sin at
all; 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
but if any man sin (be his sins many or few, small or great) we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation, who has made satisfaction for, and has covered and done away
all our sins. When you come before God to pray in the name and mediation of
Christ, God looks upon your sins which you confess unto him as satisfied
for, and done away in Christ. Why then should you be afraid and ashamed to pray
unto him?

to the end, for that I am pestred with so many wandering, impertinent, and
sometimes evil thoughts. I cannot remember all the sins which I should
confess, nor yet all the needful good things which I should ask. I cannot
pray in faith, but am so full of wavering, and doubting that God is not well
pleased with my prayer: I often feel my self worse rather then better after I
have prayed. I rise up often times from prayers heavy and discomforted, and I
offend so many ways in prayer, that I often times am ready to think that I had
better not pray at all.

That you feel these defects, is well, this argues that you have some life,
and some good disposition to the work; but here is no ground of discouragement
or cause why you should forbear to pray. The best of Gods children sometimes
have been in your case, David himself had his spirit overwhelmed, Psalm.
77.3.4.
and was so troubled that he could not speak. Ezekiah said that he did chatter
like a crane, Isa. 38.14:
he did rather stutter, and stammer out his desires to God in a broken sort,
then by distinct and apt words to express them. As for wandering thoughts, who
is free? or, who can be free, so long as sin dwells in him, and Satan is
always ready to cast them in? As for faith, it may be that you pray in faith,
though you conceive otherwise, because you feel so much doubting, but, would
you pray in faith? do you grieve that you cannot believe? and can you say, with
him in the Gospel, I do believe, Mar. 9.24.
Lord help my unbeleefe? then you pray in faith though you feel it not. If
you feel your self worse after prayer, this is a misconceit of yours, or a
suggestion of Satan. But if it be so indeed in your feeling, this does not
argue that you are worse for your prayer, but better; for that evil which was
in you before, unseene, is now discovered, that you may reform it. The flesh
and Satan sometimes may be more stirring with their tentations; but prayer
gains always a secret help of God, if you would but improve it. But know
whatsoever your feeling be; if failings in prayer be not allowed, but resisted
and and prayed against, God passes them by, and does not account them unto
you. If you endeavor to pray aright, and do pray as well as you can, though
you fail very much, this unallowed failing is only a sin of infirmity, for
which God does pity you, and will spare you as a father does his son that
serves him. But not to pray at all is a gross sin, of wilful negligence,
which God hates, and will severely punish. Wherefore whatsoever your
indisposition be, and whatsoever your former failings and discouragements have
been, you must break through all lets, and know that you have the more need
to pray, setting about it in the power of Gods might, since that you have no
power of your own. Psalm. 119.88. Psalm 119.32. Psalm. 86.9.
Do as David did, pray to be quickened, and to have your heart enlarged, and
that God would unite your heart to fear his name. If there be truth of desire
in your prayer, then know that you are heard and accepted, not for the
goodness and worth of your prayer, but for the goodness and merits of Christ
Jesus, by whom you offer up your prayers. What though you know not how to pray,
Romans 8.26.27.
the Spirit of him who has commanded you to pray, will help your infirmity,
and enable you to pray in such sort as God shall accept thereof in Christ
Jesus. And if you be so heavy and comfortless after prayer, it is your fault,
proceeding from groundless doubts, and false fears, but yet no argument that
you did not pray aright, or that you were not heard; much less that you should
think you pray in vain, or that you had better not pray at all.

But so long as a doubt and scruple remains in my mind,

Romans 14.5.23.
and he must not do a thing indifferent, though lawful in it self to be done,
so long as he doubts, and does make scruple of conscience thereabout whether
it may be done or no, and therefore he must with all singleness of heart use
means by the truth of Gods word to inform his conscience. But in things
expressly commanded, such as is this duty of prayer, in this case a man is not
to hearken to any scruple which shall rise concerning the not performing of it;
but is violently to resist that scruple, and to break through it, and to
address himself to the duty of prayer notwithstanding. For whenever
scruples, under pretense of conscience, shall arise to trouble and hinder a man
from performing a necessary duty, When a man may do contrary to scruple of
conscience.
such as prayer, and the like, it is lawful to do contrary to such scruples;
for a scruple is nothing else but a groundless fear; wherefore to do a thing
commanded by God, though it be done contrary to this scruple, is not to do it
against conscience, for there can be no tie of conscience against any of Gods
Commandments. Wherefore laying aside all carnal reasoning, and objecting, as
also all scruples and doubting, be you encouraged to be frequent in prayer,
and that, not only because unspeakable good shall redound to your self
thereby, but, out of conscience of duty; because it is the will of God that you
should pray unto him.

Pray in this manner, or as Luke 11.1. Say, Our Father, etc.

Note hence, that,

The Lords prayer is a prayer, and may be used in this very form of words for
a prayer. Our Savior else would not have said, Say Our Father. Luke 11.1.



Lords Prayer is a pattern of prayer, therefore hold it unlawful to use it
for a prayer. As if it might not be both a prayer and a pattern, as indeed it
is. And why may it not, as well as a Kings standard weights and measures which
are patterns of all sorts of weights and measures of the kingdom, by which
all both small and great are to be made and examined? yet no wise man will say
those standards are not weights, or will not use them, but of all weights, if
he may, will use them, because they be perfect, and by them he may make others
of his own.

If the Lords Prayer be a Set prayers are lawful.
then without question set prayers are lawful, and no man should make scruple
thereat: yea in private, for this prayer may be said in the closet. Mat. 6.6.
Besides we have good warrant from Moses, teaching the Priests to bless the
people in a set form, saying, Number. 6.24.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, etc. Also when the Ark set forward they
had a set form, Numb. 10.35.
Rise up Lord, etc. David penned his Psalms to be used in the Church, and
Psalm. 92. for every Sabbath. And Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sing praises
unto the Lord, with the words of David, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
and of Asaph, It is said of our Savior Christ, whose example we may be bold
to follow, That he prayed the third time, saying the same words, Mat. 26.44.





Order and edification in the Church, requires set forms of prayers and
praises, to be used in public: as it has been the custom of all
established true Churches, there being common sins to be deprecated, common
graces to be prayed for, and common mercies to thank God for. And in more
private prayer, the ignorance forgetfulness, and bashfulnesse of some persons
before their family, or others, causes that for a time it is needful to use
the help of a set form, which he may read, or repeat, so that he join
understanding, and assent of heart thereto. Yet it must be remembered that
Christians must not always be such novices and weaklings in religion, to use
set forms of prayer in private (which like crutches and bladders serve to
initiate and minister to them help, until they have gotten strength) as if
they never intended to pray without them.

But let this here be observed. It must not on the other side be held, that
only premeditated, studied and set prayers are lawful. He is not meet for
the place of a Minister, nor worthy the name of a strong Christian, that has
so tied his devotion to a set form, that he will not, or cannot vary his
petitions for his people, or himself, as particular occasions vary, and new
necessities require. It is impossible that any prayer book should meet with
all occasions, either of prayer or thanksgiving, which fall out daily. And
conceived prayer is not so defective and imperfect, but, if it be pertinent,
and in truth, God likes it, Exo 14.15.
though it had no set form to bring it forth. Such were the prayers of Moses
at the Red Sea, 1. Sam. 1.13.
and of Hannah at the Tabernacle, their prayers were conceived, and brought
forth without set form or voice.

I conclude this point therefore, affirming that it is an error to hold set
prayer to be unlawful: and it is no less error, to hold that no prayer but a
set form of prayer is lawful.

In this manner. If our Savior would have us use only this form, S. Luke
would not have varied from this of Saint Matthew, saying, Sins for debts, and
far, for as, in the fifth petition: neither would he have left out the form of
thanksgiving, nor yet would the Apostles have prayed in any other form All
which show that (In this manner) signifies according to it, and not only to
use those words: whence learn, that

All prayers must be made according If made according to this, they are
acceptable, if not, they are faulty. The best confirmation of this point
(besides Christ's express exhortation, which is authenticke) is to compare this
prayer with the prayers of the Saints recorded in holy writ, both before and
after this prayer; and it will be found, that they all may without wresting, be
referred unto some branches of this prayer, even as all the precepts scattered
in the Bible, may be referred unto the ten commandments.



take heed that you do not with the Papists, turn the use of it into abuse
through superstition.

Let all men use this prayer How to frame all prayers by the pattern of the
Lords prayer.
may be made, two things must be learned. First learn the plain meaning of
the words, and the sense and meaning of Christ in them. Secondly, learn how
this pattern may be applied.

As for the first, because such exceeding brevity does cause some obscurity,
the more pains must be taken, that by the light of other Scripture, and help
of those men which have faithfully traveled in the interpretation of this
prayer, the true meaning may be found out. And until you meet with better
directions, use these following.

First, two things in general, one contrary to the other, are to be understood
in every petition, namely, petition, and deprecation, praying for some thing
that is good, and praying against the contrary evil. And it is a sure rule,
that in the same petition where the good thing is desired, the contrary evil
is prayed against, as in the four former petitions. Also where the evil
prayed against is expressed in the petition, the contrary good thing to be
desired, is to be understood in the same petition, as in the two last
petitions. As it is in the commandments, in the same commandment that any
vice is forbidden, the contrary duty is commanded.

A second rule is: If one kind or part of any thing be expressed in any
petition, all kinds and parts of the same thing are to be understood.

A third rule is, where any one thing is prayed for in any petition, the causes
and effects thereof, and whatsoever properly belongs unto the said thing, is
understood to be prayed for in the same petition: except they fall out to be
the express subject of some other petition.

The second thing to be learned, is how application of this prayer may be made,
to the framing of all other prayers by it: which that ye may do, take notice
that this prayer directs us unto three things obseruable in all prayers.
First the person to whom only we must pray, concerning whom this is the rule.
That person only who is God and Lord of heaven and earth, is to be prayed
unto: thus much you learn both in the invocation, in the beginning, and in the
form of praise in the end of the Lords Prayer. The second thing to be
observed, is, what we must ask, the rule thereof is; whatsoever may lawfully
be asked, may without wresting be referred to one of the six petitions. If
they can refer their request to any petition, they may be bold to make it. It
shall be needful therefore, to observe the particulars under every petition,
both what is prayed for, and what is prayed against, the most whereof shall
appear in the handling of each several petition, to which I do send you. And
when you have learned what you may lawfully pray, ye may be longer or shorter
in any one petition, as your present need, or the particular occasion does
require: which liberty may be observed in those prayers of the Apostles which
are recorded for our use in the holy Scriptures. The third thing to be
observed, is, with what disposition of heart and affection we must pray. Which
is fully expressed and employed in that word, Amen: which requires that prayer
be made with understanding, in truth, in fervencie, and in faith, as will
manifestly appear, when we come to treat of that word.

Here yet some question may be made touching the order here set down: whether
it must be precisely kept? I answer, in the general, it must; that is, Gods
glory must be first in our aim; but touching the particular manner of
expressing it, that is left to the liberty of him that prays, whether he
begin with praise, or with confession of sins, and asking forgiveness,
thereby making way to the other petitions with more confidence. There is no
rule to be given hereof, because we see the Apostles, after they were taught
this form, did take this liberty.

Our Father, etc. Here begins the pattern of prayer, which because Christ
Jesus our Lord gave it to his Disciples, is therefore called the Lords Prayer.
It consists of two parts:

The first is an expressing of a man's desire unto God.

The second is a manifestation of the assent, and right disposition of his
heart in putting up the aforesaid desires, in the word Amen, which though it be
but one word, yet is full of excellent matter.

The first part does branch it self into three members:

1 Invocation upon God. Our Father which art in heaven.

2 Petition. Hallowed by thy Name. Thy kingdom come, etc.

3 A form of praise and than^es, containing reasons why the former petitions
should be made unto God. For thine is kingdom, power, and glory for ever.

Invocation, or calling upon God is here taken in the proper and strictest
sense; not for the whole exercise of prayer, but for appellation, in which a
man calls upon him whom he would have to hear him. This invocation
consists of a description of God, who only is to be called upon in prayer.
He is described by two arguments. First by the relation that is between him
and his elect in Christ: Our Father. Secondly, by a sign of his soveraigntie,
and majesty, that is, by his being in heaven, which is the Court of his
majesty, the place from whence he shows his infinite power, goodness, and
glory: Which art in heaven.

The description of God by these two arguments (the one arguing his
graciousnesse and readiness of will, the other arguing his greatness and
fullness of power to help all that come unto him) is placed of purpose in the
very entrance into prayer, to strengthen the petitioners faith, that he need
not doubtingly say as he did, If thou will thou can help me. Mat 8.2.
For he is his father, therefore will do whatsoever, in his holy wisdom, he
judges fit to be done. Neither need he say as that other, If thou can do
any thing, help us. Mark. 9.22
For his God, and father in the heavens, is almighty, and can do whatsoever he
pleases, Psalm. 115.3.
and would have to be done.

This description of God to whom prayer is made, by his relation to them that
are to pray, consists of the appropriating possessive particle (Our) and of
that gracious title of God, (Father.) In this one description, two things are
signified, both the condition of them that pray, and of him that is prayed unto.

These words as they look toward the persons who may pray, they intimate a
double condition. First, that they have a right and interest in God; they can
call him theirs, for they are the children of God. Secondly, (Our) imports
that common interest and fatherhood in God, which the rest of the faithful
have in him; from which there grows a communion of one Christian with
another, so that they become brethren. These two qualities therefore, faith in
God, and love to our brethren, are here required in every one that is qualified
for prayer.

(Our) is not only here a note of the joining together of many in prayer, when
one man is the mouth of the rest, because this form of words is to be uttered
by one in the closet, Mat. 6.6.
as well as by many in public: but it notes that relation and respect of God
to them, which is common unto their brethren. 2 King. 19.19.
Thus Hezekiah uses it, saying: O Lord our God, I beseech thee, etc. Daniel
praying alone, Dan. 9.17.18.
faith, Now therefore O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant. Not but that
when we would express our particular faith and dependence upon God, Mat. 26.39
Ier. 3.19. 1 Cor. 4.18.
we may say, My Father, or My God. But our Savior makes choice of this form
of speech, because it is full of instruction, and is best agreeing to all sorts
of prayer, both in private, as well as public. Thus we see, what this
description of God intimates, as it looks toward those that pray. As it
looks toward him to whom prayer is made, he is first called Father.

Father, spoken of God is a word of relation to Christ the second person in
Trinity, Psalm 2.7. Ioh. 1.14.
and so is proper to the first person in Trinity: Secondly, in relation to the
creature, in a more common respect to all, as he is the Author of their being,
and subsisting in nature; thus all Deuteronomy. 32.6.
three persons are called Father. God is also a Father in a special respect to
his elect in Christ, as he is the Author of their spiritual being and
subsisting in state of grace, 1 Ioh. 5.^. Isa. 9 6. Ioh 3.5.
Thus in special sort the three persons are, and may be called Father by all
believers. And, as I conceive, in this place this word Father directs us to
God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; yet so as it points,
in an order, to that person in the Deity to whom Fatherhood, and the beginning
of all things is ascribed, without excluding, but necessarily including the
other two; namely, to God the Father, the first person in Trinity, the
natural and eternal Father of Christ Jesus; who by adopting us in Christ, and
by begetting us again by regeneration through the Spirit Ioh. 20.17.
is our Father. Thus the Apostle Paul conceived of God when he prayed: first he
conceived of God as Father of Christ, saying; Ephesians. 3.14.15.
I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; then he shows how he
conceived God as the father of the elect, when he says, Of whom the whole
family in heaven and earth are named. So did the Apostle Peter conceive of God,
1 Pet 1.3
when he gave him thanks, saying, Blessed be God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Which art in heaven: Heaven signifies the heaven of heavens, the third
heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of his Father. By the
excellency of this place above others, is set forth the majesty and
excellency of him that sits therein. God does not so inhabit the high and
holy place, but that he dwells also with him that is of a contrite spirit.
Isa. 57.15. 1 Kin. 8.27 Mat. 5.34.35. Psalm. 11.4.
And the Heaven of heavens cannot contain him. But because heaven is Gods
Palace and throne, in comparison of earth, which is but his footstool; and
because from thence he does manifest his glory more remarkeably then from any
other place; revealing his will, power, Iam. 1.17.
and Godhead in his works of mercy, as David says, Psalm. 57.3. Psalm.
102.19.10. Romans 1.18.
He shall send from heaven, and save me; and in works of justice, as the
Apostle says, The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness; therefore he will, that his being in heaven, should, as by a
sign, set forth his glorious Majesty. Also his being in heaven does
distinguish him from earthly fathers, Luke 31, 13.
and puts difference between him and false Psalm 136.26. Ion. 1.9.
gods. This description of God by his place, is all one with that which the
Apostle sets down at large, calls him, 1. Tim 6.15.16.
Only Potentate, King of kings, Lord of Lords, who only has immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, etc. If this short
description be well weighed, it will appear, that there could not possibly be
a a more brief and more apt description of God, meet to be represented to the
mind of him that is to pray, then this, which in more words may be thus
expressed: O Lord God, which art Father of Christ Jesus, and through him Father
of me and of all believers; we coming to thee in the name of Christ, and being
moved hereunto by thy spirit of Adoption, whereby we call, Abba, Father, we are
well assured that thou will accept of our prayers, praying for our selves and
for our brethren: and since thou only art God, which dwell in the high and
holy place, from whence comes every good gift, and art Almighty, as thou art
God; to answer thy willingness, as thou art Father; wherefore we call upon
thee, and do thou vouchsafe to hear us.

Our: Note here, that a man must have faith, and be in state to call God his
Father, else he is not sufficiently qualified for prayer. Learn therefore,

Whosoever would make an acceptable Therefore David when he prays, approves
himself to be Gods child, saying, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight, says Solomon, Prove.
15.8. It was a true speech of him which said, We know that God hears not
sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears. Ioh. 9.31.

Mat. 7 18.
the fruit cannot be good. Thorns cannot send forth grapes, Mat. 7 16
neither can thistles bear figs.

scil. believers, according to his prayer, I pray not for the world, etc. Ioh.
17.9.

have the spirit of prayer, Zac. 12.10.
to cause him to mourn kindly for his sin, and to call, Abba, Father; which
spirit God sends to none but to his sons, Gal. 4.6.

Every one that comes to Heb. 11.6.
They must have faith, How shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? Romans 10.14.

The promise of acceptance Psalm 32 6. Psalm. 34.15.17.18. Iam. 5.16.
and to the righteous, whose prayers are said to be prevailing.

If a man have not good assurance pray, no objection of Satan can discourage
him.

Ioh. 3.10.
but of the devil) must understand, that if they continue in this their wicked
condition, and yet pray, they deal presumptuously; and to them God says, Psa.
^0.16.17.
What have ye to do to take my covenant in your mouth, seeing ye hate
instruction?

Secondly, they may learn what to judge of their prayers. God accepts them
not, for they be no better then either howlings or cries wrung from them by
pinching necessity, Hos. 7.14
or mere hypocritical mocking of God: abominable sacrifices, of which the
Lord says, Your incense is an abomination, Isa. 113.15
and when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. It is all one with him, as if
Isa. 66.3.
ye did bless an Idol, so long as ye choose your own ways, such as
ignorance, superstition, contempt of religion, profaneness, pride,
drunkenness, whoredom, deceit, lying, unbelief, impenitencie, and such like.
God abhors all service done to him, so long as their souls delight in their
abominations. Consider this, O ye that forget God, says the Lord, lest I
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

Thirdly, let all impenitent and ungodly persons take notice, in how miserable
a straight they are, and into what a labyrinth and maze their sin has
brought and left them in. God has commanded them to pray, and so he may do
justly, (for in Adam they were able to perform it) so that if they do not
pray, they incur Gods displeasure; and cannot look to receive any thing in
mercy, and with a blessing from the Lord, and if they do pray, their prayer is
abominable, because they have not Gods Spirit; neither can they offer their
prayers upon the Altar Christ Jesus, by whom only all prayers are accepted.
For all that are not endued with his spirit, Romans 8.9.
are not his. When these ask, God regards it not:







their table, whith may be to them a snare, and he can give them prosperity,
which will be their ruin. He gives it to them many times in wrath, as he
gave a King to the children of Israel. Thus they may see, Hos. 13.10
that whether they pray or not, their case is woeful, because they cannot in
faith say Our Father.

Are wicked men, then,

By no means,

Were it not better for wicked men not to pray at all,

No, for their not praying at all, faults concerning prayer, may, in a sort, be
charged upon him that prays not at all; for he neither prays to the true
God, nor prays good matter, nor in a good manner, etc. A wicked man though he
fail much in prayer, yet not so much as when he prays not at all. It is the
note of an Atheist not to pray at all. Psalm. 14.4.




Peter did counsel Simon Magus, Act. 8.22.
saying, repent of this thy wickedness, and pray; first repent, then pray.
Isai. 1.13.15.16.18.
Thus says God to those for whose wickedness he said that their incense was
an abomination, and that he would not hear their prayers; Wash you, make you
clean, etc. then come and let us reason together, etc. then come and pray. No
man, then, is put upon a necessity of sin. Let the most wicked man in the
world be convinced of his sin, let him repent thereof and confess it, let
him believe in Christ, who came into the world to save sinners, then he is
qualified for prayer, and shall be accepted of God when he does pray.

Are the prayers of men unregenerate of no use,

To this I answer: the Ravens when they cry, will much rather hear men when
they cry, though they be not his children. But as the prayers of a true child
of God differs from the prayers of him that is unregenerate, so is the
acceptance with God also different.

Their difference shall appear thus.

Difference between the prayers of the wicked, and godly, and of their
different acceptance.
First, a true child of God does in prayer call God Father with faith and holy
confidence, with the affections of a child. For when he asks forgiveness
of his sin, it is with grief, that he has by his sin offended his Father,
and it is with an hearty purpose not to offend him again. Also when he
prays for health, liberty, grace, or for any other good thing, it is with a
desire that in the enjoyment of them, he may the better please and honor his
heavenly Father.

But a wicked man calls God Father only for form, and in presumption; and
he does not pray unto him with a childelike, but either with a servile
affection, as a malefactor before a Judge, 1 King. 21.27.
as Ahab did; or with a carnal affection in his desire of the good gifts of
God, and the good things of this life, that therewith he may (like those
reproved by Saint James) employ them for the satisfying of some or other of his
lusts. Iam. 4.3.


Secondly, the child of God prays chiefly and most heartily for spiritual
things, as, for faith, for forgiveness of sins, for holiness, for Gods
favor, and for those things which concern Gods kingdom and glory.

But the unregenerate man prays chiefly and most heartily for Corn and Wine,
for temporal things, and it may be for heaven and happiness, (with Balaam) in
general wishes; Numb. 23.10.
but not particularly and unfainedly for graces, whereby he may forsake his
beloved sin, and may live holily unto the end of his days.

Thirdly, the prayers of the godly, when they are made in sincerity, are like
all other their good works, they have a supernatural goodness in them, being
the acts of the regenerate part through the spirit, and are performed to a
supernatural end.

But the prayers of the wicked, though in some things they are unfeigned, yet,
at best they are but natural desires, not intended as a service of God, but
only as a means to serve their own turns in those things which they know can
be obtained by no other means.

Now touching the acceptance of prayers with God. Those which his children
make, though they be not without much imperfection, yet, because they be the
prayers of men reconciled to God by Christ, and do proceed from hearts
purified by faith, and because they are put up in the name of Christ, they
become acceptable through him, so far as to procure, not only temporal good
things, but also such as are spiritual and eternal. And these things they
obtain of God as from a loving Father, and as a fruit of his special promise,
and out of his special grace and love to them in Christ Jesus.

As for the prayers of the wicked, because God, and his ordinance of prayer is
thereby in some part honored, they are in some part accepted, so far, that
many times they procure temporal good things; but it is only temporal good
things, such as are common to the elect and reprobate, which he gives to
them, not as a loving Father, but as a rich and bountiful Lord to his
creature, making his Sun to rise on the evil and good; Mat. 5.45.
and sending the rain as well upon the unjust, as upon the just. These things
God in his wise providence bestows upon wicked men, knowing how to make use
of them in humane society both in Church and Commonweal, winning thereby to
himself the glory of his patience and bounty; drawing some to an admiration of
his goodness, leading some to repentance, and leaving others without excuse at
the day of judgment.

they may be made the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26. Romans
10.14.17.
as, hearing the word preached, prayer, etc. then they must get good evidence
that they are in state of grace: and then be exhorted to come as children ought
to come into the presence of so holy a Father, putting off every sin that may
offend him, putting on every grace that may delight him, regard not iniquity in
your heart, cleanse your hearts, and wash your hands in innocence, lift up
pure hands without doubting, pray in humility, for with such sacrifice your
Father is well pleased, he will not despise such: for God has promised,
saying, If my people that are called by my Name, Psalm. 51*17
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways* then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land. 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

John says, Whatsoever we ask: we, that is, the children of God, receive of
him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight. 1 Ioh. 3.22.

Our, does note also that communion which Christians have one with another, in
one Father: therefore even when they were to pray to God in the closet, they
were to represent God to their minds in a notion which has reference to their
brethren, as well as to themselves; whence we may collect,

All that would pray acceptably, must hold a communion and good agreement with
their brethren, as those that have one common father to them all. If a man had
not been in charity with his brother, and held not good agreement with him he
was not to offer his sacrifice until he had reconciled himself to his
brother, Mat. 5.33. The Apostle requires, that men lift up holy hands, without
wrath, 1. Tim. 2.8. Therefore Peter would have all love exercised between man
and wife, that their prayers be not hindered, 1. Pet. 3.7.

For this common interest one Spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.

If men do not hold peace assurance that they themselves are Gods children; for
by their love to their brethren, they may know whether they be beloved of God
or no, and may assure their hearts that their prayers shall be heard: 1. Ioh 3
19.22.
If they love not their brethren, they remain in death. 1. John. 3.14.

Malachy reproves those which deal not well with their brethren, Mal. 2.10.
saying, Have we not all one Father? There are too many of this sort, which
will hypocritically say, Our Father, and yet scorn to have any communion with
his children. Yea the more they approve themselves to be Gods, by holiness of
life, the more they hate them, and reproachfully use them, and wish all evil
unto them. If these think they have God to their Father, they must know that
(as the Apostle John speaks) they are liers, 1. Ioh. 4.20
because they love not their brethren. What may be thought of those tongues,
that can bless God, and call him Father, and yet curse and rail upon those
which bear the true image of the same Father? These things ought not so to be,
my brethren, says James, 3.9, 10.

Hereby all that call God Father, the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. 4.3.4.5.6.
because the whole body is but one, the Spirit one, etc. and one Father of
all; we must endeavor therefore to be one in judgment, and one in affection,
that there be no schisms and divisions amongst us. Let us love heartily,
without putting difference in respect of persons: for which fault the Jews are
blamed by James, Iam. 2.4.1. Cor. 11.22.30.
and the Corinthians were severely punished by the Lord. Wherefore whenever
we come to God, let us come in love to our brethren. For how can we look our
Father in the face, and expect good things at his hand, when he knows that
there are jarres and falling out between us and his other children our
brethren?

Father which art in heaven. I will first consider the whole description of him
that is to be prayed unto, and then come to the several parts thereof. This
description can be true of none but of God. We have fathers on earth, and
friends in heaven: but no father in heaven, or heavenly father, but the true
God. It follows therefore,

Prayer is to be made to the And because prayer is a religious worship, which
must be given to none but God, I add this, Prayer is to be made only to God.
Offer to God thanksgiving: and Call upon me in the day of trouble, says God,
Psalm. 50.14, 15. The Angel which had the everlasting Gospel, to preach to
them that were on the earth, who went before the Angel which foretold the fall
of Popery, says, Fear God, etc. and worship him that made heaven and earth,
Revel. 14.7. Our Savior says expressly, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.10.

He to whom prayer may be made,

First, he must be able to hear all men; therefore James bids us ask of
God, Iam 1.5.
that gives to all men.

1. Ioh. 5.14.
If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

the Father of lights, Iam. 1.17.
from whom comes down every good and every perfect gift.

1. King. 18.21.27.
saying, Cry aloud, he is a god, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or
in a journey, he sleeps: whence he evinceth that he was no God, nor yet to
be worshipped, because he could not do many things at once.

He must be able to hear, and

He must be able to know the Romans 1.27.
Now God only knows the mind of the spirit, as well as the meaning of the
voice. Solomon speaking to him, says, 2 Chronicles. 6.30.
Thou only know the hearts of the children of men.

Again, he is only to be To. 10.14.
but we are to believe only in God.

Angels is forbidden. Col. 2.18.
It is against the wills of Angels and Saints: for the Angel said to John, Rev.
22.9.
See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, etc. worship God. When Cornelius
gave Peter too much honor, Peter refused it, Act. 10.26.
saying, Stand up, I my self also am a man. When the people would have
worshipped Paul and Barnabas, because of a miracle that Paul had wrought, they
forbad them with detestation, renting their clothes, Act 14.15
and said, Sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passion with
you, etc. These with the rest of the Saints have no less zeal for God now
they are more holy in heaven, then when they carried about with them many
imperfections on earth. These things considered, we may safely conclude, that
God only is to be prayed unto.

Whereas we read and hear, because I am persuaded, that when all Israel shall
be called, namely, Ezekiel. 37.16.
when the two sticks prophesied of by Ezekiel (Judah, and the children of
Israel his companions, and Ephraim, and the children of Israel his companions)
shall be joined into one stick: when, as the Apostle says, To. 11.26.
All Israel shall be saved, which state of theirs, verse 15. he calls a
receiving of life from the dead; when this shall come to pass, I doubt not but
many of those deceived souls, which yet never heard of the Gospel (except by
Papists, who make them who^ they convert thrice more the children of the devil
then before) shall have part in the same resurrection: let us therefore pray
for them.

Mary, and the rest: which practice of theirs has neither precept nor
president in the Canon of Scripture. I refer them unto the truth before
proved, which does as well discover the contrary falsehood, as declare it self;
so that I will forbear answering their weak and frivolous allegations. We do
them to understand, that the Saints do not hear their vocal prayers, much
less their sighs and groans. Isa. 63.1^.
For Abraham is ignorant of us, says the Prophet, therefore the Church cleaves
only to God; saying, Thou, O Lord, art our Father, and does rely only on
him. And the Psalmist knew none in heaven to rely on, but God; saying, Whom
have I in heaven but thee. Psalm. 73.25. Ier. 17.5.
But cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
whose heart departs from the Lord. They provide il for themselves, which
forsake God the fountain of living water, and hew out to themselves broken
cisternes that can hold no water: Ier. 2.17.
into both which evils the Papists fall into, by praying to Saints. If the
Saints did know what they do unto them, they would abhor it, as much, nay
more then Paul and Barnabas did the peoples offering to do sacrifice to them,
Act. 14.14.
when they were upon the earth.



hears prayer, Psalm 65.2.
who can hear all men, in all things, at all times, though they do but sigh
out their requests: for it is God only in whom they may believe. If we had but
as true and ardent zeal against idolaters for setting up many gods, as the
Princes of Darius had hatred against Daniel, for serving the true God only:
and were as forward to advance God to the highest honor, as they were to
deifie their King Darius, Dan. 6.7.
we should wish there were a firm decree: That whosoever should ask any
petition of any person save of our Father which is in heaven (not for the space
of thirty days only) but at any time, might be made a public example by no
less punishment then to be cast into a den of Lions.

Our Father which art in heaven. If we consider the parts of this description
jointly, we may observe that our Savior does represent God unto the
understanding of him that is to pray, under such titles and names, as were
aptest to induce him to pray, and might best help his faith in prayer. Whence
learn,

In the entrance into prayer, God should be represented to the mind, and
should be called upon by such names, titles, or descriptions, as are most apt
to enkindle the desires, and help the faith of them that do pray. If many and
general requests be to be put up, then such titles and names must be used
that may persuade them they shall be heard in all. If some particular petition
be to be pressed, then such names and descriptions of God are to be used, as
may help the heart in that particular. Abraham's servant being to pray for
success in his masters business, says, Ge^ 24 12.
O Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day,
and show kindness unto my m^^t^er Abraham. When Peter did intricate God to
make choice of an Apostle to supply the place of Judas, he says, Thou Lord,
Act. 1.24.
which know the hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have
chosen. When David prays against the enemies of God and his children, he
says, O Lord God to whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.1.
O God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self. And when he does magnify
Gods name, and would incire all people to pray unto him, and praise him: he
speaks to him in this description of God: O thou that hear prayer, Psalm.
65.2.
unto thee shall all flesh come.

For a wise choice of apt names

The representing of God to the mind in convenient and meet names and notions,
is very needful, for it will set the heart and keep it in good plight,
working aw, and reverence, fervencie, uprightness, and confidence, all which
are requisite in prayer.

much of the whole description of God being considered jointly: now follows
the consideration of each part of the description.

Father, has relation first to Christ the second person in Trinity, whereby
our Savior directs us unto a consideration of the three persons in Trinity,
and to the order of directing of prayers ordinarily, viz. to the Father: whence
the doctrine is,

In prayer, God is to be known, scil. to the Father, by the Son, through the
help of the holy Ghost. Christ says, Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask my Father in my Name, he will give it you. The
Apostle gives thanks to God, and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Ephe. 5.20
We call God Abba Father by the Spirit which makes our intercessions for us,
Romans 8.15.27.

For such is the divine dispensation of God the Father, Ad extra
yet they sustain different persons and offices (that I may so speak) and do
the same things in a different and distinct order, yet so as the naming of one
does not exclude, but necessarily include the other. In prayer the Father
sustaineth the person and place of him that is offended by sin, that must be
appeased, and does hear and grant requests. If we sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father. Which shows plainly that the Father in especial sort must
be appeased and sought unto. The Son supplieth the place of a Mediator, and
intercessour, by whom requests ascend, and become acceptable to the Father. He
is that golden altar, Ioh. 16.23.
upon which the prayers of all Saints are offered, and caused to ascend as
incense, Revel. 8.3. No man can come to the Father but by him. Ioh. 1^.6.
He is appointed of God to be a Mediator, and being God and man, is both a
fit, and all-sufficient Mediator between God and man. Without him no man's
person or best actions can be acceptable, because of the many imperfections.
Wherefore all prayers must be offered up by Christ Jesus.

The holy Ghost does supply the office of a teacher, and of one that helps
our infirmities, and, in us, Romans 8.26.
to make our intercessions and requests for us, that they may be offered to the
Father by the intercession of the Son. For we know not what we should pray
for, as we ought: and if the Spirit do not work together in our prayers, there
would be no goodness at all in them, no not so much as truth and uprightness,
without which Christ Jesus will not offer them to his Father for us. Therefore
prayers must be made in the Spirit, through the help of the Spirit. Now
because of this order of persons in the Deity, the Father being first: and
because of the different places they sustain in the work of our salvation,
the counsel and will of all three is, that the Father should be prayed unto,
and worshipped, in the only mediation of the Son, through the Spirit: and
therefore it is that the Father is here named, not the Son, or holy Ghost.
But because of the indivisible essence of the Godhead, the naming of the Father
does necessarily imply the calling upon both Son and holy Ghost also.

If God must be known and

The Papists that come to room in which they might place the mediation of
Saints: but this is to sever what God has joined. For the Scripture knows no
Advocate or Intercessour, but him who is the Redeemer, 1. Ioh. 2.12.
scil. Christ Jesus the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins. And
it is as proper to the Mediatourship that Christ only should make intercession
at the right hand of God, as to die and rise again for the elect. Romans 8.34.



the dead do not; and in using the living, we do not make them mediators
between the Father and us, that he should help us for their worth and merit;
thus Christ only is Mediator: but we only request them to entreat the Father
for Christ's sake to help us. Lastly, Iam. 5.14.
the Scripture does warrant men to request the prayers of the living, and does
acknowledge only one Mediator between God and man, even there where it
requires that living Saints should make prayers and intercessions for all
sorts of men. 1. Tim. 2.1.5.

All which think they know help they pray in the spirit; if they do not
express or imply thus much in prayer, they do (notwithstanding they profess
the true God) turn him into an Idol. For in all true worship, the unity is
worshipped in Trinity, and Trinity in unity, without dividing the Godhead, or
confounding the Persons.

of the distinction of persons, take heed of two extremities: first, we must
not conceive that there is an essential difference between them, as if all
the three had not one and the same nature. Secondly, we must not imagine that
there is only a rational or imaginary distinction: whereas their different
order and manner of subsisting, and different manner of working declares that
there is a real or true difference between them. So that the Father, as
Father, is in no respect the Son; and the Son as Son, is in no respect
the holy Ghost; and the holy Ghost as holy Ghost, is in no respect either the
Father or the Son. When God is thus conceived of, and known aright, then in
the same order as he does subsist, he must ordinarily be worshipped according
to the direction of our Savior in this pattern. Stephens directing of his
prayer to Christ, was upon the beholding of Christ Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, Act. 7 ^^.
it being a special and extraordinary occasion. This argues, that it is not
unlawful to direct prayer to the second Person or third Person upon especial
cause: but yet ordinarily this rule and order in worshipping GOD must be
observed.

First, we must direct prayer unto the Father of lights, the giver of every
good and perfect gift.

Secondly, we must offer up prayer and praise by Christ Jesus, who offers up
incense with the prayers of all Saints, Rev. 8.3.
by whom we have access to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.15.16.
to find grace and help in time of need.

Thirdly, we must use all means to obtain the holy Spirit of grace and
supplications. We must pray for it, and hear the Gospel (which is the
ministry of the Spirit) preached. Then we must cherish and stir up the good
motions thereof, taking heed that we do not grieve it or quench it by any
evil conversation. Let us get an holy acquaintance with it, that it may make
hearty requests for us. For prayers cannot be sweet incense, if they be not
mingled and anointed with holy oil, which is the anointing of the Spirit,
which as it teaches all things, 1 Ioh 2.27
as John speaks, so especially it must teach us to pray aright. Wherefore
whenever you pray, enter into consultation with the inward man, what you
should ask, and how; consult with the word, deny carnal reason, and
presumption of your own abilities in prayer; then shall the Spirit make your
requests for you, which by you must be seconded, and (...) and truth put up to
the Father by Christ. Whosoever shall in this manner direct his prayer to the
Father, by the Son, through the Spirit, albeit I cannot promise him, that his
heart shall be so enlarged, that he shall satisfy himself in prayer, yet I
can assure him he shall always be able to offer up such sighs and desires as
shall please God, and prevail more with him, then shall the prayers of others,
who without the spirit of prayer, by the mere help of nature and art, can
command both words and variety of matter at their pleasure.

multitude of sins in man, nor any unworthiness of his person, nor yet his
insufficiency to think a good thought, nor yet the feeling of himself, that
many times he knows not, either what or how to pray, can dishearten him, if
he do but consider that he prays to God, who is God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, and that he may pray in this order, namely, he prays to the
Father of Christ, who is his Father; he prays in the name of Jesus Christ who
has satisfied his Father for all his sins, and daily does make intercession
for him; and he prays in the Spirit, who helps his infirmities, and makes
requests for him, though it be sometimes but with sighs and groans which are
not distinctly uttered. Romans 8.26
By this means there is life and spirit in our prayers, and God does and will
accept them: for he knows the meaning of his Spirit, and will accept the
work of his Spirit in us through Christ, though we bewray our many
imperfections.

Father, in the second place, has through Christ relation to all the members
of Christ, who are here willed to say, Our Father: whence note,

All true Christians have the Lord of heaven and earth to their Father. J
ascend to my Father and your Father, says Christ, Ioh. 20.17. I will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18.

the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.5. and are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26.

in righteousness and true holiness; and so are become his children by the
regeneration of his Spirit, wherewith he has sealed them for his own.

Whereas the men of the Ioh. 8.44.
nay of the devil (for herein they do his lusts) shall account of and use the
children of the freewoman, yea of the everliving God, as the filth of the
world, and the of-scouring of all things? 1. Cor. 4.13
How do these men, by defaming the children, therein despise God their Father?
But let them take heed how they despise or misuse the least of those little
ones that have indeed given their names to Christ Jesus. It is hard kicking
against pricks. Act. 9.5:
It is not safe touching the Lords anointed, Psalm. 105.15. Zach. 2.8.
the very apple of his eye. And know, as base as they be, Their Angels and
ministering spirits do always behold the face of their Father which is in
heaven, Mat. 18.10.

David calls, The Saints that be upon the earth, Psalm 16.3.
and the excellent: and well he might, for they have the God of excellency to
their Father.

If true Christians have God John does admire such love in God, and such
advancement of men, that men should be called the sons of God, 1 Ioh. 3.1.

All Christians should be like Holy as he is holy; for it becomes children to
be like their father. They should honor and obey him. If I be a Father, where
is mine honor, says God, Mal. 1.6. As obedient children they must not fashion
themselves according to the former lusts of their ignorance; but as he which
has called them is holy, 1 Pet 1.14.15.
so they should be holy, in all manner of conversation. Disobedience of
children to their Parents, was in the law of the Jews punishable with death,
disobedience therefore unto our heavenly Father, is much more dangerous. They
should likewise submit themselves unto his fatherly chastisements; Heb.
12.5.7.10.
they must neither despise them, nor faint under them: but must endure them
patiently, because God therein deals with them, as with sons for their
profit, that they might be partakers of his holiness. They need not carke and
care, but in all things they may and must with boldness and assurance of help
repair to God, being assured of his fatherly affection toward them: for to
whom do children fly in their need, but to their Parents? We have seen those
that be evil, give good gifts unto their children, how much more will our
heavenly Father give good things, even his holy Spirit, Luke 11.13
to them that ask him?

Lastly, it is the joy and comfort John, 1 Ioh. 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God? That we, the sons of men, of
mean men, of mortal men, of sinful men; yea the very children of the devil,
should be advanced to be the sons and daughters of God Almighty? While
vainglorious foolish men vaunt and brag of their gentry and earthly Parentage,
let us with an holy exultation of spirit, rejoice in this, that we have God to
our Father. This does comfort the heart in poverty, sickness, pain,
disgrace, and in all distresses; when we know we have a Father that will not
forsake us, though our natural Parents should: Psalm. 27.10.
that though tender mothers may forget their sucking children, and sons of
their womb, yet God will not forget his: Isa. 49.15.
he is wise, and almighty, and will help in the best time: he always
knows what we have need of. If we be children, then heirs of God, and joint
heirs with Christ. Romans 8.17
When we duly think of this, no afflictions can dismay us, for we hold them
not worthy the glory that shall be revealed in us: Romans 8.18.
we shall by this help our selves against heart-eating cares, for we have a
father, and we know it belongs to Parents to provide and lay up for their
children. 2 Cor. 12 13.
When we think of this, that we are Gods heirs, it will keep us from grieving
at, and envying the prosperity of the wicked; we will be well content God
should give his movables where he please, so long as the birthright and
inheritance is ours: for we are begotten to a lively hope of an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the heavens for
us. 1. Pet. 1.3.4. Whatsoever our estate be in the world, we may and ought to
comfort our selves with these thoughts.

Which art in heaven. God is described by his being in heaven, not only to
show where he is, for he is a God at hand, and a far off, Ier. 23.23, 24.
and fills heaven and earth: but as the majesty of Kings may be set out by
their glorious palaces and thrones; so heaven Gods most glorious throne does
here set forth his majectie, and the perfection of all his infinite
excellencies. Whence learn,

God to whom prayer is made, who is Father to all true believers, is an
heavenly majesty, invisible, perfect, and infinite in power, goodness, and
all other heavenly excellencies; one whose dwelling is in the heavens. When God
would set forth his own greatness and goodness at once, Isa 57.15.
he says, Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose
name is holy. I dwell in the holy place, with him also, that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble etc. The Church does
help her faith by casting her thoughts upon heaven, the habitation of Gods
holiness, and of his glory; and thereby gathers arguments of Gods perfect
love to them, and power for them, when she says, Where is thy zeal, and thy
strength, etc. and from the same consideration, does prefer Gods knowledge
and care of them, above the knowledge and care that Abraham could have of them,
saying, Isa: 63.15.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, etc. Thou o
Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. The Apostle
calls him, King eternal, 1. Tim. 1.17.
immortal, invisible, and only wise God. And he does call Christ, who is one
with the Father, Blessed, and only Potentate, the King of kings, Lord of
lords, 1. Tim: 6.15.16.
who only has immortality; dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto, that is, in heaven, to whom be glory, and power everlasting. These places
show plainly that Gods being in heaven, does set out his pureness of being,
his soveraigntie, his infinite power, goodness, omniscience, truth, mercy,
justice, and all other his infinite excellencies.

His dwelling in heaven, declaration of his power from thence, both by his word
and works of creation, preservation, and redemption of man, do prove that he is
God, and in these works, his majesty, power, and all other excellencies of God,
are written in such great letters, that any one may run and read them.

How can any think of this mindedness, and putting on of heavenlinesse,
lifting up our hearts to God in the highest heavens.

How does this discover the Psalm. 94.7.
The Lord shall not see, etc. And as those that said, Psalm 78.19
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? etc. Can he give bread? Can he
provide flesh for his people? The Psalmist calls these brutish men, and
foolish: and the Lord did show that he could send them bread and flesh, Psa.
105.15 Number. 11.33.
and withal leanness into their souls: so that they were not better, but
worse by it. And he could furnish a table, and also while the meat was in their
mouths, he could in his wrath smite the fattest of them. Psalm. 78.31
Make no question therefore what God can do, for he can do any thing, but this
one, to deny himself, and cease to be infinite, this he cannot do.

Mat. 16.27
who shall come in flaming fire to execute vengeance upon all those that know
not God, 2. These. 1.8
and obey not the Gospel: Mat. 10.28
who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell fire.



First, that we should not be rash with our mouths, or our hearts hasty to
utter any thing before God; Eccles. 5.2
For God is in heaven, we upon earth, says Solomon, A man therefore must be
considerate and well prepared before he speak unto him; according as I have
showed at large, page 30.

Secondly, this invisibility and incomprehensiblenesse of God our heavenly
Father, does teach us that he is not imaginable, so as to be likened to any
visible thing. Wherefore he that prays, must not represent God, not so much
as in his thought and fantasy, much less to his eye, in the likeness of a
man, or of any other creature.

The Orthodoxe Christians in all times have been opposite to the making of any
image of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, either severally, or of the
Trinity jointly; but especially to the setting up of any image of God in any
place where God was to be worshipped; knowing that the beholding of the image
does readily and unavoidably beget a false and carnal conceit of God,
misleading the imagination, turning God into an idol; Romans 1.23.
changing the glory of the incomprehensible, and incorruptible God into the
image of a finite and corruptible man. For indeed, by reason of man's pronenesse
to idolatry, and of Satan's deceiveable and cunning suggestions and
instigations; as also for that an image cannot possibly set forth the
incomprehensible Being and glory of God, but yet leaves a strong impression
that God is present in the image, and that he is like unto it, therefore it is
impossible for any man to represent God to himself by an image (though it be
but to put him in remembrance of God) but that he shall quickly become an
idolater. According to the doctrine of our Church, namely; Idolatry is to
images, Hom. Tom. 2. page 4^.
especially in Churches, an inseparable accident.

God says that the children of Israel saw no manner of similitude on the day
that he spoke to them in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. etc.
out of the midst of the fire. Isa. 40.18.
And to whom will you liken God, or what likeness will you compare unto him?
says the Spirit, by the Prophet Isaiah. Wherefore when we pray we must not
conceive of him in the likeness of any thing, but as an incomprehensible
Spirit, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, from whom, by who^, through whom, and to
whom are all things, God blessed for ever, one always to be admired, and
adored; but not possible to be delineated, or comprehended by any imagination
of man.

What though God did sometimes manifest his presence by things visible, as to
Moses in the burning bush, Exodus 3.2. Exodus 24.15.16.17.
and to the children of Israel in the cloud, and in the likeness of devouring
fire: Genesis 3.8. 1. Sam. 3.4 1 Kin. 19.12.
as also he did to Adam, to Samuel, and to Eliah by the sound of a voice? And
what though in a mental vision God appear as a majesticke 1. King. 22.19.
judge sitting upon a throne in such appearances, as might set forth, to
Micaiah, Dan. 7.9.
to Daniel, and to John, Rev. 4.2, 3
the soveraigntie, eternity, purity, severitie, and all-sufficiencie of God?
And what though the holy Ghost descended upon Christ like a Mat. 3.16. Act. 2.3.
dove, and upon the disciples in cloven tongues like fire. These were only
acts of particular dispensation, useful for the present occasions; but not to
be patterns, to set forth God thereby, for our imitation. For notwithstanding
that God appeared in diverse fashions, to the Patriarchs before the Law; yea,
the second person in Trinity appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18.1.3.22. Genesis 32:24.
and to Jacob in shape of a man; yet, in the Deu. 4.16.
law, God expressly forbids the representing of him by any similitude,
whether of man or of any other thing. Wherefore neither can any act of Gods
particular dispensation in his apparitions to man since the Law, be a
dispensation to us who are bound to keep the Law. For it is our duty to obey
Gods Law, and not to follow the examples of Gods own particular dispensation,
he being a Law to himself, and under no Law.

It is true Christ Jesus was a very man in all things like to us (sin only
excepted) and was crucified upon a material cross capable of portraiture; yet
no image can set forth Christ as he is our Savior, and as he is to be
worshipped; For an image can only set forth his bodily shape, and his outward
state of humiliation. These images therefore debase Christ who now is
glorified. And who so shall now represent Christ to his mind according to the
likeness of an ordinary man, or in the likeness of Christ's manhood as it was
in his state of debasement, the same turns Christ into an idol. For he is to
be conceived of in the mind, and to be worshipped, not as a mere man (whose
body only the image can but uncertainly represent) but as God and man, and as
man now glorified subsisting, not as other men do, but in the second person of
the Deity. Faith apprehends more of Christ than the eye can represent; or,
if an image could represent more than it does, yet we have not Gods institution
for it, but against it.

Thirdly, since God is in heaven, we learn that we must not needlessly multiply
words before him when we pray; but that our words be few. This same thing the
Holy Ghost infers, saying, God is in heaven, and thou upon the earth,
therefore let thy words be few. Eccl. 5.2.
The meaning is, be not rash and inconsiderate, but ponder as well your words,
that you may know how to utter your mind to God, as to consider the matter
what to speak unto him; namely, you must use such words, and so many as may
aptly and sufficiently express your desires to God, without superfluity of
speech, and without needless and heartlesse repetitions, and unnecessary
digressions. This vain repetition of words, and babbling, Mat. 6.7.
our Savior forbids.

Against this rule Papists do grossly offend, in measuring out their prayers
not by weight, but by number, as, they will say so many Pater-nosters, so many
Avie-maries, so many Dirges, etc. to obtain their desires of God, according as
they are prescribed in their Rosaries; and they presume to be heard by the
merit of their much babbling. In like manner do offend all those which utter
their mind to God with affectation of fine words, as if they would court God;
or, on the other side, in a loose and careless expression; or, though using
apt words, yet they utter them without understanding, or affection.



The case touching long prayer.
When there is cause, we may use long prayers, we may use repetitions, and
therefore many words in some prayers; namely when the matter of our prayer is
large, and when in repetition of the same things we do indeed renew and double
our desires, and do withal express a farther degree of seriousness and
earnestness of our heart in putting up the said desires. The examples of the
prayers of David, of Solomon, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 119. 1 Kings 8.22. to 53. Dan. 9.
Luke 6.12
of Daniel, and of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, who spent whole nights in
prayer, and therefore must needs use many words, do give us a sufficient
warrant.

But words in prayer without matter, many words and repetitions without
understanding, and without new affections; Mat. 6.7.
and when men think they shall the rather be heard for their Oratory, or much
speaking; or when men make long prayers that they may be thought to have a
large gift in prayer, or when they do it under any colorable pretense to serve
their base ends; Mat. 23.14.
in these and in like cases, long prayers, and many words in prayer are
unlawful.

Fourthly, the consideration of this infinite heavenly Majesty and goodness of
our God and father does teach us, that, when we pray unto him, we must
perform it with holy adoration and devotion, with all holy reverence, always
inwardly in our hearts, as also outwardly (when time, place, and ability
serves) with reverent and apt gestures of the body.

1 Co. 6.20.
which are Gods.

not moved with bare bodily gestures; Use of befitting gestures in prayer.
yet befitting gestures are of special use in prayer, as, partly to help the
inward man, making the spirit more apt and lively, and the mind to be more
attentive to what we are about; and partly to express the inward devotion and
affection of the heart.

But how far is a man bound in conscience to use outward gestures?

The worship of God consists not in outward gestures, The case touching
gestures in prayer.
and, when a gesture is not by him commanded, it is not properly any part of
Gods worship. And the Scripture has not commanded any particular gesture to
be used always in prayer; therefore the conscience is not bound to any thing
certain thereabout; but left free to observe what in Christian discretion is
fittest to be done.

In Scripture we read of variety of gestures in prayer, as, bowing the knees,
Ephesians. 3.14. Psalm. 95.6. John 17.1. 1 Timothy 2.8. 2 Chr. 6.13 Mar. 11 25 Luke 18 13
and prostrating the body, this is most usual, and (when we can conveniently)
is fittest to be used; also lifting up the eyes, and hands, stretching out of
the hands, knocking the breast, looking down to the earth, standing, Luke 24
30 Isa. 38.2.
sitting at meat, and lying in the bed; all these postures of the body have
been used indifferently.

Rules touching gestures.
Yet some rules consonant to Scripture may be given for our better direction.

Neh 2.4
or on his way in his journey, or the like, in these cases bodily gestures are
neither fit nor useful.

humbleness and submission of mind, or grief and contrition of heart for
sin, or fervency, or joy, hope and confidence in God, or the like. The knees
are bowed, and the body prostrate to show humble submission; a sad countenance
and tears serve to show contrition; lifting up eyes and hands express the
lifting up the heart to God in the heavens, in hope and confidence of a
gracious hearing: Solomon stretched out his hands to express his earnestness
and fervency; and the publican smote his breast, and would not look up to
heaven, that he might signify his sorrow, and the sense of his unworthiness.

In public prayers a man he does live, they being free from superstition.
The not observing this rule, is the mother and nurse of much variance, and
sometimes of schisms in the Church of God.



or means, such as is in use, and may be joined with sitting.

I will end the answer to this case about gesture in prayer, with these
cautions.

That no man please himself Cautions concerning^ gestures in prayer.
when it is severed from inward truth and devotion of the heart, as if God were
well pleased with it; for that is gross hypocrisy.

When a man is disabled pain to the body, or to the endangering of health, or
distraction of the mind in prayer, God requires it not; for gestures are then
to be used when they do further, Mat. 12.7.
and not hinder the heart and spirit in Gods service. And in this case God
prefers mercy before sacrifice.

The case touching the place of prayer.
Fifthly, the consideration of Gods heavenly majesty, and specialty of glorious
residence in heaven does teach us, that prayer may be made to God in all
places; all places here below are alike distant from heaven; and God can hear
as well in one place as in another. Wherefore our Savior, breaking down the
partition wall which stood between Jew and Gentile, says, John 4.21.23.
Neither in Jerusalem, nor in that Mount (as if they should be more holy
places than other) should men worship the Father; but the hour comes, and now
is, that the true worshippers should (namely in all places) worship him in
spirit and in truth. According to that of the Apostle, I will that men pray
every where, 1 Timothy 2.8.
lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting.

But is not the Church a better place to pray in?

I answer, Gods public worship, was a public place, though it were a
chamber in a private man's house: for, for a long time Christians had no other
Churches, Tertul. Apol. cap 39.
but common houses. But when the Church was at peace, houses were built of
purpose, and dedicated to God for his public worship; which therefore both in
borrowed, and in proper speech, were well called Temples, houses of God, or
Churches. Places public or private are in themselves alike holy, and alike
fit for prayer respectively; namely, the public place for public, and the
private place for private prayer. For since the death of Christ, all religious
difference of place is taken away. And Gods presence is not tied to one place
more than to another. Yet because Churches are set apart for Gods service, in
that respect they are to be had in special esteem, and reverence, so as to
be well and sufficiently maintained and repaired, and kept comely with all such
outward beauty and ornaments as are beseeming the pure worship of God. Also
they are to be resorted unto by all sorts diligently, at times appointed, for
the public worship of God, where all are to behave themselves reverently
before the Lord; And (out of the case of necessity) these Churches are to be
employed only for religious uses.

Touching esteem of Churches, a mean must be kept between two extremes, we
must not profane them, with Atheists, nor yet superstitiously idolize them,
with the Papists.

When men are not necessarily hindered, Churches are to be frequented; where
public prayers may be best made, and are like to be best heard, not because
the place it self has more holiness than any other; but because God has in
special sort placed his name in those his holy ordinances which there are
performed, and is there present, Mat. 18.20.
according to his promise in special sort, all the while that the congregation
and people of God, with whom we join in the Church, are in the act of
performance thereof. The Apostle had the Church in such esteem, that from the
holiness thereof he endeavors to convince the Corinthians of the greater
sin, 1. Cor. 11.22.
saying, Despise ye the Church of God? but by Church he means not the place
of assembling, but the congregation assembled. Also it is better to pray in the
assembly of the Church, because there we have the help of the Minister, and
the examples of others devotions, besides that there is an uniting of the
desires of many, unto God, who delights in the joint prayer of many in such
assemblies.

As for private prayer, private places, not the public, are fittest for them.
Therefore our Savior warned his disciples that they should not (like the
Pharisees) make their private prayers in public places, Mat 6.5.6.
as in the Synagogues or corners of the streets; but in private, as in the
closet, etc.

If any object. Isa 56.7.
and the Saints in the old Testament made their private prayers at the
Tabernacle, and afterward at the Temple.

I answer. house of prayer to all people; for the converted Act. 21.28.
Gentiles were never suffered so much as to come into their material Temple at
Jerusalem. But it is called an house of prayer to them by way of type, or
shadow, Zeph. 2.11 Mal 1.11.
because it did typically import, that in the Church of Christ, as well
Gentiles as Jews (the veil of the Temple being rent) should have access to
God by Christ, who was the true Temple, and that in all places to pray unto
him. We must not attribute like holiness to our Churches (which are only as
the Jews Synagogues) as the Jews did to the Sanctuary, and Temple. For God
had in them placed visible representations of his presence, namely, the Arc
and the Propitiatory, or Mercie-seat, and had by Moses said, Exo. 10.24
that he would be present in every place where he should place his Name;
wherefore he dwelt in special sort between the Cherubims over the Mercie-seat.
And that place was so holy by reason of the Altar, Mercy-seat, and other
things, which typified Christ, that no sacrifice was to be offered ordinarily
but at the Temple. Wherefore it was a place not only of public, 2 Chronicles.
7.15.16.
but also of private prayer, and that by particular institution. Therefore
those which could not come to Jerusalem were, when they prayed, to look
toward the Temple; 2 Chronicles. 6.38.
and those that could come to the Temple were to look toward the propitiatory
in the Sanctum sanctorum; Psalm 28.2.
Thereby typifying, that they were to look unto, and to look for Christ Jesus
the Messiah the true Temple, Altar, and Propitiatory to come in the tabernacle
of his flesh, that by him their persons, and prayers might be accepted. Christ
being come in the flesh, and the Temple at Jerusalem being demolished; God has
not now sanctified any place more than other, whereunto he has tied his
presence in such sort as he did unto the Temple. Wherefore we have not in our
Churches, neither must we have, unless we will be Iewishly-Popish, any such
permanent signs of Gods presence. For God has made us no such promise of his
presence in such signs; Mat. 18.10 Mat. 28.20
only we have his promise of his presence to his ordinances, when we are in
the act of public prayer, and in the reading, and preaching of the Word, and
in administering of the Sacraments, which special presence continues only the
time of his divine services, and when they cease, it cease.

come into a Church?

There is no commandment of God for it,

But may we not at all make our private prayers in the Church?

When the Church is to you as a private place (as when you are alone there) you
may; Mat 6.5.
or not out of an opinion of such an holiness of the place as tyeth Gods more
special presence unto it, even to the material fabric of it, without
relation to his public worship. But, while the Minister and people are in any
part of Gods public worship, all present both by the laws of God, and by the
doctrine and constitutions of our Church, should forbear their private
devotions, and should be busied only in quiet attendance to hear, mark, and
understand that which is read, preached, or ministered; joining together in that
common worship, That with one spirit, Romans 15.6
and one mouth, they may glorify God; Which thing they are held not to do,
Hom: of the right use of the Church, page 8.
that under any pretense of devotion shall pray privately in the time of any
part of common prayer; except only by secret ejaculations.

Now whether we should pray in the Church, or out of the Church, looking
rather to the East, than to any other quarter: the Gospel has left us free,
as to pray in all places, so to place our bodies as occasion serves, and as
will stand with decency, and conveniencie of the action. For, as in point of
Religion, it is not now material which way Churches do stand; so be it they be
made fit to receive the congregation, so it is no matter to be stood upon,
which way we turn our selves when we pray, if our hearts be lift up to our
Father which is in heaven; Ezekiel. 8.16
and to Christ our true propitiatory, whom the heavens do and must receive
until the times of the restitution of all things; by whom we have access to
the Father. We read of Idolaters that were blamed, who worshipped the Sun
with their faces toward the East; but we do not read in Scripture any thing
at all from whence we may so much as probably conjecture that we ought to pray
rather toward the East than toward any other quarter of the heavens.

It is dangerous to place religion and holiness either in gestures, places, or
any other actions which have not religion put into them by Gods institution;
albeit they may have a great show of devotion, or may have the authority and
countenance of ancient tradition. For though the things in themselves may be
thought to be no great matter, yet to put holiness in them is no small sin,
and is of very ill consequence. Our Savior else would not so vehemently have
enveighed against the Pharisees and Jews for putting holiness in washing of
hands and cups, Mark. 7.1. to the 14.
and such like things. The evils which by little and little have been bred and
nursed hereby, are, neglect of some or other of Gods commandments, also
hypocrisy, gross superstition, and idolatry, as any may observe, partly by
the practice of the Pharisees, and partly the rise and growth of Popery.

Touching these, and the like things in themselves indifferent, the Church and
supreme authority may, for order and decency in Gods public worship,
appoint what they judge fittest, to which all under their authority must
submit; but observing them still as things in themselves indifferent, and
without ensnaring the conscience with an opinion of holiness in them.

Sixthly, the consideration of Gods heavenly majesty, and being in heaven, may
teach us, that, Whether a man pray with a voice, or without voice, God can
hear the one as well as the other.

How far forth then is a man to use a voice in prayer?

Voice is not of the essence of prayer, The case of using a voice, or no voice
in prayer.
therefore it is not always needful to be used, as, in short ejaculations,
and when a man is speechless, or when he cannot be so private that he may
conveniently do it, or when a man finds that he can keep his mind alike
earnestly attentive, and rightly affected in prayer without voice.

But a voice is needful both in public and private, when a man is the mouth
of others that join with him in prayer.

And when a man prays alone it is also fit, and useful. For God has made
the tongue an apt instrument to express the meaning of the heart, and with it
also we ought to serve and glorify God.

And voice is a good help in prayer. For a man's own voice is heard of
himself, and is reciprocal upon a man's self, and serves both to keep the
heart and thoughts from scattering, keeping the heart more close to the present
business, and causing him the sooner to take himself in the manner, and to
check himself when his thoughts do stragle; As also the voice serves to
stir up, to continue, and to inflame the spirit, and affections of him that
prays.

But use speech in private prayer with these cautions. Cautions touching using
of voice in private prayer.


First, you must not think that God hears prayers the sooner, or the rather
because of speech.

Secondly, that you do it not to be heard of men, that it might be known that
you pray in private, as well as in public.

Thirdly, you are not to speak aloud in private prayer to the offense of those
who are so near that they cannot but hear you, yet cannot join with you in
your prayer.

This Doctrine yields also comforts: Our Father is in heaven; therefore he
can hear in every place, we need not tire our selves in going on pilgrimage to
any place to seek him: for if we can but enter into our hearts, and lift them
up to heaven, we shall find him. He also knows all things which we need.
Mat. 6.32. 1. Sam. 14.
It is not hard for him to help with little or no earthly power.

He is wisdom, and knows perfectly what is best, and when it is best to
help his children. Many parents would do their children good; but either want
wisdom and know not how, or want power and are not able: But God is both able
and knows how; and he will do his children good, for his love to them is more
than natural, it is an heavenly, therefore an infinite and everlasting love.
He has promised never to leave us: now his truth is an heavenly perfect truth,
it cannot be falsified. It is not hardness of our hearts, nor multitude, or
greatness of our sins can hinder our happiness, if we will not wilfully
reject his grace through our unbeleefe; if we will repair to him, and repose
our trust in him. For as the Apostle says, Romans 11.23
He is able to graft in again the hard hearted Jews, he can pardon ten
thousand talents as well as one penny, and can as easily say, Mat. 9.2.5
All sins are forgiven, as to say, Rise and walk. Mic. 7.18.19.
We can say Our Father is an heavenly Father, and who is a God like our God,
that pardons iniquity, transgression, and sin, that subdueth all our
iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the depth of the sea. It is not
with God as with man, man cannot help all his children at once; God can, be
they never so many, and never so far distant. Earthly parents may be drawn
dry; when they have given portions and inheritances to many, they have none
for the rest, as Isaac when he had blessed Jacob, Genesis 27.36.38.
he had no such blessing for Esau, so that he cried, Have thou but one
blessing O my father? God has mansions and a kingdom for every one of his:
Ioh. 14.2.
his custom is not that one son, or that sons only should inherit his
kingdom: but both sons and daughters do all of them inherit: for our Father
is an heavenly Father. Also this consideration of the heavenly majesty and
power of God added to the consideration of his fatherhood, does give us
assurance of hope, that we shall have all the petitions which we ask according
to his will. For as he is almighty, he can do whatsoever he is willing to do
as he is a Father.

Lastly, is our Father an heavenly Father? then we can assure our selves that
hereafter we shall in our measure partake of his heaven, and of his holiness,
and of his glory. For after death, when we awake, we shall be received into
heaven, where we shall ever be with the Lord, and be filled with his likeness:
Psalm. 17.15
and he who now by his heavenly wisdom does guide us with his counsel,
shall receive us into glory, where we shall see him as he is, and ever remain
in his presence, where are pleasures for evermore. For as we have borne the
image of the earthy, 1. Cor. 15.49.
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Of this we need not doubt, for
our Father is heavenly, therefore the children must needs be heavenly.

Thus much of the Invocation, and calling upon him to whom only prayer may be
made. The petitions follow.

The petitions do contain the matter of all lawful requests. They may be
divided differently according unto such different respects as may be conceived
of them. First, if we respect the number, there are six distinct petitions,
and no more. I confess, Divines of good antiquity have reckoned seven, making
two of the last: others of no less authority, have not regarded the number at
all. Some of the ancient, and most of the orthodox later Writers have reckoned
but six, and (as I think) upon good ground. All agree in the five first, all
the question is about the sixth, whether it be one or two. Now because the
subject of both sentences in that petition is all one, scil. sanctification;
and the conjunction (but) knitteth, Lead us not into temptation, and deliver us
from evil, together into one sentence, it is more than probable, that is but
one petition. But whether there be six or seven, it is no matter of our faith,
and does not deserve any heat of disputation to decide the controversy.

Secondly, if we respect the different persons whom the matter of the petitions
concern, they are thus divided: the three first concern God only; for we say,
Thy Name, thy kingdom, thy will, etc. The three last concern man; for we say,
Our bread, our sins, lead us not, deliver us.

Thirdly, if we respect that which ought to be the chief end of every man's
desire, and the means to compass the said end, they have this order, and are
thus divided: Summum bonum.
the first expresses the desire of the chief good, scil. the glory of Gods
name in the first petition, Hallowed be thy Name: the means whereby his Name is
hallowed and glorified, are the matter of all the rest, delivered in a most
heavenly order.

Gods Name cannot be hallowed, if he do not make his holy Name known by
erecting his kingdom: therefore the coming of his kingdom is the matter of
the second petition.

And because his kingdom is not made manifest, and his Name is not
acknowledged to be holy, and glory is not given unto him until his will be
unfainedly obeyed: therefore thy will be done, is the matter of the third
petition.

Now because no man can do the will of God upon earth, except God sustain him
on earth; therefore daily support from God is prayed for, and is the matter of
the fourth petition.

And when a man has all comfortable supplies for this natural life, yet if he
be not in Gods favor, and be reconciled unto God, he neither has will nor
power to glorify God, nor can be accepted in any thing he does; therefore
forgiveness of sins, and justification before God, is the matter of the fifth
petition.

Lastly, though a man have his sins past pardoned, and he be justified, he
cannot do Gods will, nor declare that the kingdom of God is come to him, nor
any way hallow his Name, if he have not grace and power against sin;
therefore the sanctification of the whole man is prayed for, which is the
matter of the last petition. This is the holy order and subordination of the
petitions.

Fourthly, the different manner of propounding the petitions cause a different
acception of them: some are petitions properly so called, when the good things
asked are expressed, and the evil prayed against is understood, as in the
four first petitions: some are deprecations, when the evil prayed against is
expressed, and the good prayed for is understood, as in the two last petitions.

The first petition is Hallowed be thy Name: here it must be considered what
is meant by Name; the object of hallowing; then what hallow signifies. (Name)
has reference to God, and it signifies God himself, scil. the person named.
Also all such names and titles of God, his attibutes, actions, ordinances, and
all things which have any special print of Gods holiness stamped upon them,
are Gods name, because by them he is known, as men are by their names. The
word thy appropriateth the hallowing of the name unto him who is before named
and described in the invocation, opposing and preferring Gods name to the name
of man, or Angel, or of any other creature. To hallow is either to make a
thing holy, which was common or profane; or to declare and acknowledge, and
use holily some thing which is holy already. Hallow must not be taken in the
first sense, scil. to make a thing holy: for God and his Name, always was, is,
and for ever shall be of it self most holy. But to hallow, Isa. 29.23.
here signifies, thus much, to conceive and acknowledge with the heart, and to
declare with the tongue and life, that God and his Name is holy, and to be
respected and used as most holy; in like sense as Wisdom is said to be
justified of her children, Mat. 11.19
that is, declared and respected as wisdom ought to be respected. For to
hallow a thing is, to respect and use it according to the holiness thereof.
Profaning Gods name is contrary to the hallowing of it. The aim of our
Savior is, that God may be set up in men's hearts, and may be glorified and
acknowledged in the world. For this cause he makes choice of the most apt
word that could be invented: for hallowing leads us to a consideration of
Gods holiness, which is the glory of all other his attributes, and includes
the cause why he should be glorified; and therefore is a word of larger extent
than magnified or glorified: for the one does but point out the glory of his
greatness, the other does not express the cause why he should be glorified;
both which hallowed does. For holiness is that rectitude in God, and freedom
from all impurenesse, and from all shadow of imperfection or sin, which is
the excellency and perfection of all other things that are in God; and (to
speak with holy reverence of his Majesty) the other attributes of God could
not be commendable in God, if they were not all infinitely holy; His
sovereignty would be tyranny, his justice would be cruelty, his mercy would be
foolish pity, his wisdom would be craft and subtilty, if his greatness,
justice, mercy, and wisdom were not infinitely holy. The like may be said of
his other attributes. For we see in creatures, (as in the Devil and sinful
men the more strength, and wisdom, and skill they have, the more mischievous
they be, because they want holiness to use these gifts aright. Wherefore in
saying Hallowed be thy Name, we desire that the excellency of his Godhead may
be acknowledged, as there is due cause: according as they sing in the Song of
the Lamb, Rev. 15.4.
Who shall not fear he, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art
holy.

Isa. 64.2.
This word Hallowed is set down impersonally, in such a form of signification,
as includes all persons or things which are capable of setting forth and
acknowledging his holiness. As, Let thy Name be hallowed by Thee, so says
Christ, Father, glorify thy Name; Ioh. 12.28.
and, make Me to hallow thy Name, in acknowledging thy holiness: and, let all
others acknowledge thee to be holy, and to be the only true God. 1 King. 18 36.
Thus Elias prayed, Let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel: And
God says when he will magnify and sanctify himself, Ezech 38.23.
I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am
the Lord. The petition being thus opened, we may express it in these or the
like words: Holy Father, whose Name is holy, to thee therefore all glory does
belong. Lord glorify thy self, make it known that thou only art God,
deserving all praises: make me, and all men to acknowledge thee only to be
God, and our God, and that of perfect excellency, according as thy Name in thy
titles, word and works do set thee forth. And let thy Name, Psalm. 111.9
which is holy and reverend, be so honored, that so far as any person or
thing, has upon it any print of thy holiness, it be honored and respected
accordingly. And far be it from me or any man to deny thee in whole or in
part, or give any of that glory which is due to thee, to any person or thing
whatsoever; or to profane any thing, whereupon any footsteps of thy holiness
is imprinted.

Hallowed be thy Name. If it be observed, that to desire that Gods Name should
be glorified, is the subject of this petition, and that Christ has set this in
the first place: we may learn,

The glory of Gods holy Name must be the chief of every Christian man's desire
and endeavor. Psalm. 96.7.8.
It must be every man's first and chief care, that Gods Name be hallowed and
glorified, and that his glory be not given to any other. Isa. ^2.^.
Whatsoever ye do, says the Apostle, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor.
13.31. It was our Saviors prayer and practice: he says, Father glorify thy
Name, Ioh. 12.28. he says likewise, I honor my Father. And, I seek not mine
own glory, Ioh. 8.49.50. And, I have glorified thee on earth, Ioh. 17.4.

holy, and who only is holy, that he should be sanctified, and his Name
hallowed. Isa. 5.16.
God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness, says the Prophet.
Therefore the Seraphims cry one to another, Holy, holy, Isa. 6.3.
holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. The four and
twenty Elders say, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, Rev.
4.11.
and power, etc. And, Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give
unto the Lord, glory and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due to his
Name, Psalm. 967.8
says the Psalm. The name of God, and of Christ Jesus, is a name above all
names. Of him, through him are all things, says the Apostle* therefore adds,
Romans 11.36.
To whom be glory for ever, Amen. Gods glory is the chiefest good; man's life,
yea man's salvation is to be set behind it: which made Moses to wish, rather to
have his name blotted out of Gods book, Exodus 3^.12.32.
than that God should be dishonored by the Egyptians; who would say, if God
destroyed the Israelites in the wilderness, that for mischief he did bring
them out to slay them.

Ephesians. 1.5.6
He predestined us to the praise of the glory of his grace. Prou. 16.4.
He made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil.
Therefore man should make the glory of God, the end of all that he does.

end why Christ redeemed man, that he might hallow Gods name, that both in body
and soul he should glorify him. 1 Cor. 6.20.


Adams fall, is most prone to fall into it, ascribing too little to God, whom
he does not see, setting up and magnifying the creature too much which he does
see.

That this sin may the better appear to the conscience, it must be
considered when and how God is dishonored.

Gods Name is dishonored, when he is professedly denied to be God; this is
professed Atheism: or when he is acknowledged to be God, yet is not esteemed
and glorified as God; Romans 1.21.
which disesteeme is then showed, when that respect which is due unto his
person and Name, is not given unto him. His person is dishonored, when what is
due to him, is not given to him, or is given to another.

Honor is denied him three ways, in heart, word, deed, and conversation. Man
dishonors God in heart, first when he is ignorant, and does not know him.
Secondly, when he has a mean opinion of him, or has erroneous conceits of
him, questioning his providence, power, wisdom, or any of his attributes.
Thirdly, when he is forgetful of him. Fourthly, when he does not believe him:
thus Moses and Aaron dishonored God. Number. 20.12.
Fifthly, when he does not love him. Sixthly, when he does not fear him.
Seventhly, when he does not trust in him. Eighthly, when he is not zealous for
him.

Man dishonors God in word: First, when he speaks not of him to his
praise, in confessing him. Secondly, when he speaks not for him when he is
dishonored by others. Thirdly, when he never or seldom speaks to him in
thankesgiving. Fourthly, when he speaks against him.

Man dishonors GOD in deed, when though he profess God in word, yet does
deny him by his evil deeds, as they did, Romans 2.23. of whom it is said, they
dishonored God; and as those in Titus 1.16. which though they professed the
knowledge of God, yet denied him in their works. Thus God is dishonored, by
not giving due honor unto him.

Gods honor is given to others, when men give divine worship to any person or
thing but God; as to worship Saints or images: also when men enter into too
near a league with idolaters, Mal. 2.11.
as to marry with the daughters of a strange god; or when men take divine
worship, as Herod did the peoples applause, saying, Act. 12 22.
The voice of God, and not of man: this glory of divine worship, God will not
have given to any other.

This taking to ones self, or giving to another the honor due to God,
proceeds from these evil causes, pride, self-love, too high admiration of
the creature; from ignorance, and want of admiration of the Creator.

Lastly, God is dishonored when due respect is not given to his Name, as to
his titles, attributes, or to his word and holy ordinances, Malach. 1.12. or to
his Saints and children. For all these have a special print of his holiness
stamped on them: so that if all these, or any of these, be either set at
naught, or lightly esteemed, he takes himself in them to be dishonored.
And, to shut up all in a word; all misconceit or irreverent conceit of God, or
irreverent carriage, whether by word or deed, either toward God, Mal 1.12.
Ezekiel. 22.26. Lev 19.12. Amos 2.7. Mal. 2.10.11.
or toward any thing that is holy; all abusing or taking of Gods name in
vain, all acts of unholinesse and disobedience are a profaning of the holy
Name of God.

Thus the conscience of every offender may take notice how he has profaned
the holiness of the Lord, and has dishallowed his Name, whereas he ought to
have hallowed it. But know, it is not safe for any to dishonor God: for his
own children, when they have failed in this point of giving honor unto God,
have received dishonor and disgrace from him. He says to Moses and Aaron,
Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I
have given them, Numb. 20.12. Deuteronomy. 32.51. 1 Samuel 2.17.
The high Priesthood was removed from the house of Eli, because he did not
honor God in restraining his sons, which caused (through their profaneness)
the offerings of God to be abhorred: therefore did God judge his house,
saying, They that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1* Sam. 2.30. If God
spared not his own best children, will he not then much more pour out shame
and everlasting contempt upon those which never make the glory of God the end
of their lives and actions; but through self-love, and pride of heart, make
their own pleasures, profits, and glory, to be the principal and utmost aim
of all their thoughts, words, or deeds? who if they attain their own ends,
they sacrifice to their own nets, applauding their own strength, wit,
industry, etc. or if they look out of themselves, they give the praise to
men, and secondarie causes, or to blind Fortune and luck (as they call it,)
but give not glory to the Lord. Pharaoh says, Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? I know not the Lord. But did
not the Lord honor himself upon Pharaoh and his land, by his wonderful
plagues which he sent amongst them, till he made Pharaoh himself and the
Egyptians to know that he was the Lord? Exodus 14 4.
Job says of those wealthy proud contemners of God and of his worship, which
said, What is the Almighty, Job 21.15.19.20.
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto
him? God lays up their iniquity for their children, and they shall drink of
the wrath of the Almighty. Did not the Lord make Senacherib an example to all
that should reproach the holy One of Israel? when for his arrogating too much
to himself, and for despising the true God, the Lord sent his Angel which
smote one hundred, fourscore and five thousand of his host, Isa: 37.23.36.
so that he himself was constrained to return with shame into his own
country, and there while he was worshipping his God, received his death by the
hands of his own sons? How did God disgrace proud Nabuchadnezzar, when
vaine-gloriously he vaunted, saying: Is not this great Babel, that I have
built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my majesty? Here was no acknowledgement of Gods power, nor any thing
done for the honor of Gods Majesty, therefore while the word was in the kings
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, Dan
4.30.31.
to thee it is spoken, the kingdom is departed from thee. Which was fulfilled
accordingly: for he was sent to graze with beasts of the field seven years,
until he was made to know, that the most high God rules in the kingdom of
men. Dan. 4.32.
But when God restored him to himself, and to his kingdom, then he could give
God the glory of all power, and majesty, saying in the last verse: Those that
walk in pride he is able to abase. For the same sin was Belshazzar weighed
in the balance, and found wanting, and his kingdom given to the Medes and
Persians: who because he profaned the vessels of the house of God, and praised
false gods; Dan. 5 23.
but the God in whose hands was his breath, and whose were all his ways, him
did he not glorify: Therefore was the handwriting sent, and that very night
was Belshazzar slain, and his kingdom conquered. Those two and forty
children who were torn with Bears, paid dear for their despising God, in
that aged Prophet Elisha, deriding at once, his age, his office, and his
holiness, crying, 2. King. 2.
Ascend thou bald head, ascend thou bald head.

Lastly, (not to weary you with examples of Gods judgments upon those which
did either derogate from God, or arrogate to themselves any part of that praise
which was due to him) observe Gods immediate hand upon Herod, who because he
gave not glory unto God, when the people applauded his eloquent oration,
saying, The voice of God, Act. 12.22.23.
and not of man: immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, and he was eaten
of worms, and gave up the ghost.

These severe judgments of God, executed upon men, because they took glory
from God, or gave it not to him, does plainly show that he is very jealous of
his name, and of his glory, and that he will not endure that his glory should
be given to another: Isai. 42, 8.
For of all things, Gods Name and honor is most dear unto him: nothing will
exasperate him so soon, or so much, as to be touched in his Name.

Let all men therefore take heed how they profane it by any means. But it is
not enough not to profane it, but if it be profaned by others, if they do not
contend for the sanctifying of it, they commit a great sin. If men be but
touched in their own name and reputation, they grow so impatient, as by no
means they will be persuaded to pass it by without revenge: when yet the
same persons can see and hear Gods Name dishonored by oaths, blasphemies, by
idolatry, contempt of religion, and of Gods children, and their hearts never
rise at it, and have not a word to speak for God. These do not hallow Gods
Name.

I desire that all that read or hear this, would examine themselves by what
has been said: by which they may try whether they hallow Gods Name, or
dishallow it. And if thou say this petition, Hallowed be thy Name, and yet by
taking his honor to thy self, or giving it to another, or if by not standing
for his glory, or not giving it to him in heart, word, and conversation, thou
dishonourest God; then know, thou do mock God, and playest the hypocrite;
and if repentance, and a care to glorify God do not prevent it, thou must with
hypocrites one day be the subject of the glory of his justice and wrath,
because in thy life thou would not be an instrument of glorifying his holy
Name: he will be glorified in thee, because he was not glorified by thee. Thus
it appears, who offend against this point; by which we may see what evils
are to be bewailed and prayed against in this petition.

pray for, that we must endeavor, and use all good means to attain;
according to that in the Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired, that will I
seek for. All men therefore which profess the Name of God, must both pray and
seek by all means that the true God be only set up to be worshipped, and
that his holy Name may be sanctified, which is done when men show true respect
unto him, and unto al such things as bear upon them some special note of his
holiness.

First, he is to be known and professed to be the only true God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: then to be honored and glorified as God.

God is honored, and his name sanctified many ways, as:

1 First, by knowing and acknowledging him to be such a one as he has revealed
himself to be.

2 By admiring him and his works, often times resounding that speech of David,
Psalm 8.1.
O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth!

3 By believing in him, whereby Abraham is said to have given glory to God.
Romans 4 20 Ioh. 3.33.
For by believing a man does set to his seal that God is true.

4 By fearing him. So says the Prophet, 1. Pet. 3.1^.
Sanctify the Lord of hasts himself, let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread. Isaiah 8.13.

5 Also by loving him, trusting in him, and zeal for him: for there is the
same reason that all the affections of the heart should be for him, as well as
any one.

Job 1.21.
6 By confessing with the mouth that he is just in all his judgments: so does
Daniel, saying, Dan. 9.14.
The Lord our God is righteous in all the works that he does: for we obeyed
not his voice. Josh. 7.19.
Thus Achan is bid to give glory unto the Lord.

7 Also by acknowledging his mercy, goodness, power, Romans 15.6. Rev. 19.7.
etc. in praises and thanksgiving. He that offers praise glorifieth me, says
God. Psalm. 50.23


8 By contending for God and his truth. Isa. 59.4.


9 By ordering the conversation aright, both in doing and suffering. Herein,
Ioh. 1^.8:
says our Savior, is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. Therefore
he exhorts his disciples unto good works, that as lights they may shine
before men, and glorify their Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5 16. Philip. 1.
And Paul was assured Christ should be magnified in his body, whether by
life, or by death. And Peter was foretold by what death he should glorify God.
Ioh. 20.19


10 Lastly, by regarding his holiness, in his titles, word and holy
ordinances, in his holy day the Sabbath, and in his children, whom he has made
to be an holy people. In all these our estimation and speech of them, our
carriage toward them, and use of them, must be with special respect to God,
whose holiness they carry upon them; always putting difference between
these things and all other, which have not the like respect of holiness.
Though we cannot in all these hallow Gods name as we would; yet we must
endeavor it, that we may be able with the Church to say, The desire of our
soul is to thy name. Now we know the particulars, let us give God glory every
way, and let us make it the end of our life, Motiv^s to hallow Gods Name.
to know and acknowledge him to be holy. It is Gods right, as you have heard;
we were created and redeemed to that end; and we have examples of the best,
David says he would speak the praises of the Lord, and says, Let all flesh
bless his holy Name for ever and ever. Psalm. 145.21.
Christ Jesus has gone before us in seeking his Fathers honor, and not his
own. It was Ioabs praise, so to order the battle, 2 Samuel 12.28.
that his Lord and king might have the glory of the day, and not himself.
Ought not all Gods subjects to respect their God, more than he did, or could
respect his king? Excellently spoke Joseph: (that the honor of interpreting
dreams might not be given to him) It is not in me, Genesis 41.16
God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. In like manner Daniel would not
assume to himself the power of revealing secrets, but says, Dan 2.26.28.
There is a God which ye^ ^alleth secrets. The Apostle John when he was in the
Spirit, heard every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and such as
are in the sea, saying, Blessing, honor, glory, Rev. 5.13.
and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever. These examples are for our learning, so that we must always say
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. If God be
glorified by us, Ioh 13.32.
he also will glorify us. Them that honor me, I will honor, 1. Sam. 2.30.
says God. Thus it may be learned what are the desires and endeavors to which
the first petition does lead us. Before I pass to the second, one thing must
be observed from Christ's choice of the word hallowed, rather than any other.

Hallowed. When Christ would signify that God was to be esteemed and
acknowledged with the absolutest honor that could be, he says hallowed, that
is, let thy Name be known and acknowledged to be holy* Whence we may infer,
that

Holiness is the highest title of honor and glory that can belong to any
person, yea to the most high God. As any person or thing is more holy, so is it
more honorable. When the Seraphins would give God the greatest honor and
glory, they cry, Holy, holy, Isa. 6.3.
holy is the Lord of hosts. The four living creatures say, Holy, holy, holy,
Rev. 4.8.
Lord God almighty. It was the honor of Jerusalem to be an holy City. It is
the glory of the third heaven to be the high and holy place. Isa. 57.15.
As men were more holy, Psalm. 16.3.
so did David count them more excellent. For such whom he calls Saints, he
also calls excellent. And when Christ Jesus will present his Church unto
himself a glorious Church, he will sanctify it, Ephesians 5.26.27. Reason.
and present it holy, and without blemish.

Because holiness in God is the rectitude and perfection of his power, mercy,
justice, and all other his attributes: which if they were not all holy, could
not be good, much less goodness, neither could he be God if he were not holy,
yea holiness it self. And as for other things, the more they partake of
holiness, the more like they are to God, and are therefore the more glorious.
Man at the first was therefore most glorious of all creatures here below,
because he was made according to Gods image, most holy.

Antichrist) the title of holiness in the abstract: For the title of holiness
cannot simply be given to any but to God, without blasphemy.

most excellent, and most worthy our love, and goodness: not the most witty,
most wealthy, most beautiful, or most noble by birth: but as any man is more
holy, so is he to be held and regarded as most truly honorable. Which being
so, the proud sinful world erreth foulely, in counting themselves the only
men of worth: and esteeming the holy ones of God to be base, and of no
reckoning.

If to be holy be so honorable, and glorious: this must persuade follow after
holiness. Heb. 12.14
Honor is the sharpest spur to prick men forward unto any action, let it
force us upon this of seeking to be renewed after God, in righteousness and
true holiness. Be holy, Lev. 19.2.
says God, for I the Lord your God, am holy. No honor like this of being an
holy man, a chosen generation, an holy nation. 1. Pet. 2.9.
It is the glory and happiness of a man to be holy, like unto God. Holiness
is an infallible and peculiar mark of a child of God. Therefore Gods people
are called the people of his holiness. Isa. 63.18. Ier. 2.3.
And Israel was holiness to the Lord. Let us purge our selves therefore from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God;
then shall we approve our selves to be worthy persons, even the sons and
daughters of the Lord almighty. Moreover, if the fruit of our Christian
profession be holiness, Rom 6.22.
the end will be eternal life.

holiness upon any man, though he have neither personablenesse, nor wealth,
nor wit, nor worldly honor besides: let him not be impatient for what he
wa^teth, but let him rejoice, and give thanks for what he has: for he has
that which makes him to be esteemed in the judgment of wise men, and of the
wise God, a worthy and excellent person. And if we consider the worth of
holiness, it will move us to bear the afflicting hand of God with patience,
and cheerfulness. For the end of his chastening is, says the Apostle, that
we might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12 10
than which, nothing is more profitable, nothing more honorable.

The second Petition.
Thy kingdom come. In the first petition, prayer is made that God only may be
set up, to be known and acknowledged to be as he is, most holy, most glorious:
to whom all things as to their proper end are to be referred. This is the
chief desire of a Christian, out of which all other petitions issue forth,
into which they do all empty themselves. Gods Name cannot be known, and
thereby hallowed, except God make himself known to be that High and holy
one, that only Potentate, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, to whom holiness and
glory does belong. Wherefore petition is made that he would please to advance
his kingdom, as a means to show his excellency and glory, that men may yield
it unto him. The coming of this kingdom is the subject of this petition.

Kingdom in the largest sense signifies the governance and rule of a people
under one head, or King. But here it is limited by particular reference to God,
saying, Thy kingdom, which imports that administration of government, which
God does exercise either immediately by himself, or mediately by Christ, in
preserving and ordering all things, so as may set forth his sovereignty, to the
glory of his holiness, in perfection of goodness, power, wisdom, mercy,
justice, etc. This kingdom of God is Universal, over all creatures, called
the kingdom of power or providence: Psalm. 103.19. is Special, respecting the
Church,
in this life, called the kingdom of grace. in the life to come, called the
kingdom of glory.


In this petition, kingdom signifies Gods kingdom of power, grace, and
glory, each one serving unto, or following upon the other: and all three do
set forth his holy Name, the hallowing whereof was in the first petition prayed
for.

Kingdom of his providence is desired, because it does both set forth Gods
excellency, and does minister matter and means for the better erecting of the
kingdom of grace.

The kingdom of grace is desired, because GOD therein does most admirably show
himself, and it makes way to the kingdom of glory, being the beginning and
entrance thereinto.

The kingdom of glory is desired, because it is the perfection of the kingdom
of grace: and when all enemies shall be vanquished, and all subjects gathered,
and advanced to the highest honor, 1 Cor. 15.^8.
then God shall be all in all, and shall be known and acknowledged to be all
in all: and then his Name shall be perfectly hallowed and glorified.

Kingdom here is called Gods kingdom, as it is a government different from,
and a government over the kingdom of men; but especially as it is opposed unto
the kingdom and dominion of sin and Satan. For the throwing down of Satan,
is (according as Saint John heard by a voice from heaven) the coming of
salvation, Rev. 12.10
and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. As his
kingdom goes down, Gods kingdom is set up.

This kingdom of God is either essential and inseparable, eternally and
equally belonging to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; or it is Deputative,
and separable, according as by the dispensation of the blessed Trinity it was
conferred upon the second person in Trinity, as he i^ the Mediator between
God and his creature.

The administration of this kingdom is either immediate, namely, when the
Father from himself by the Son (but not as Mediator) does through the holy
Ghost, communicate himself to the creature, and does govern all things; or
else it is mediate; namely, when the Father from himself, by the Son, as
Mediator between him and his creature, does communicate himself to his
creature, and does govern all things.

God did immediately govern all things in the world, until that by Adams
transgression, sin entered into the world; and in like immediate manner shall
he govern, when sin shall cease to be in the world, namely, after that
Christ shall have put down all rule and authority, and power, and has
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father at the end of this world.

But ever since sin has been in the world, and since it has pleased God to
enter into a new covenant with man, namely into the covenant of grace which he
established in Christ; the whole government, as well that which is universal,
which concerns the powerful conservation, and wise disposing of all things,
for the manifestation of the glory of God, and for the use of man; as also that
special government which concerns the Church, was conferred upon the second
Person, and has been administered, and is yet to be administered by him, as
Mediator, until the time of the redelivery of it unto his Father.

We may conceive the reason why God did govern the world after man's fall, not
immediately as before, out by his Son deputed to be a Mediator between him
and man, to be this* because, he, in his holy wisdom, held it not befitting
the purity and holiness of his nature to communicate himself to his creature
defiled with sin, otherwise than by a Mediator.

This government Christ Jesus took upon him and administered, as he was (first
by designation, and afterward actually by hypostaticall union) God and man.
Not as God only; for in that respect the kingdom was as natural, and
essential to him, as it was to the Father and holy Ghost; nor yet as man
only; for the humanity alone was not capable of such an universal, absolute,
and spiritual dominion, invested with power from himself to send forth the
spirit, and to subdue principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness, so as
to trample all enemies under his feet.

This government of Gods kingdom by Christ the Mediator, was first made
known to the Church by that first promise made to Adam, that the seed of the
woman should break the head of the Serpent; Gen 3.15.
and from that time it has been by Christ administered. For though he were not
actually incarnate, and made man, much less did he dye and rise again, Gal. 4
4.
until the fullness of time in the latter end of the world, in the several
times appointed thereunto; yet, in Gods purpose and appointment, as also in
Gods promises, and to the faith of Adam, Abel, Enock, Noah, Abraham, and of the
rest of the Patriarchs and believers, the incarnation, death, resurrection, and
dominion of Christ had a being, and was as effectual to them that then
believed in the Messiah to be incarnate, etc. as they now are to any that
believe in him now after that he is indeed incarnate, etc. For, as the holy
Ghost says, Rev 13.8.
Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; so he may be said
to have taken flesh, and to have risen again, etc. from the foundation of the
world. Therefore he says, Ioh. 8.58. Ioh. 8.56.
Before Abraham was, I am: and, Abraham was glad to see my day, and he saw it;
that is, he saw him in the promise, by the eye of his faith, made man, Heb.
11.13
dead, and risen again, and sitting upon his throne as King, governing all
things. So did David when he said, Psalm. 110.1
The Lord, that is, God the Father, said unto my Lord, that is, to God the
Son, who was to be made man, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Heb. 13 8.
For, Christ Jesus is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Thus our Savior Christ was then, Act. 10.36
and is now King, and Lord of all, reigning by his power, and working
effectually by his spirit, in the first times, in the ministry of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Priests; as he now in the latter times has done,
and does in the ministry of the Apostles and ordinary Ministers, both for the
gathering and saving of his Church, as also for the restraint and destruction
of his enemies.

That the manhood of Christ should in the fullness of time, Psalm. 2.6.7 Isa 9
6.7. Psalm. 110.1
be taken into the partnership of this government, designed to the second
Person as Mediator, the Prophets, before Christ came in the flesh, did
clearly foretell; and our Savior himself, before his death, told the Jews
that the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son;
Ioh. 5.22.
and has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the son of
man: that is, (by an excellency) that son of man, Ioh 5.27.
who was ordained to be Immanuell, God with us.

This son of man, our Savior, who is God blessed for ever, had his more
solemn investitute and inauguration into this his absolute government given
him of God, presently after that he had, for the glory of his Father, in the
redemption of mankind, humbled himself unto the cursed death of the Cross,
bearing his Fathers indignation, to the full satisfying of his justice for the
sins of all in whose stead he stood, who should believe in him; which was,
after that by his death, he rising from the dead, had destroyed him that had
the power of death, H^b. 2.14.15.
that is, the devil.

Of this more evident manifestation of Christ's Kingship, it is that he
himself spoke to his Disciples, when he said, All power is given me in heaven
and in earth. Mat. 28.18
And of this exaltation it is of which the Apostle speaks, saying, Phil.
2.9.10.11.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, that in the name of Jesus, that is, that to the power and sovereignty of
Jesus Christ, Isa. 45.23.
now manifested to be Lord, all should be subject; for to him every knee
should bow, Rom 14.11
of things in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth, and every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. He
is therefore said to have on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, Rev.
19.16
KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. By virtue of this exaltation and dominion it
is, that triumphing over his enemies, he ascended up on high, Col 2.15. Ephesians.
4.8.11, 12, 13.
and led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men, that is, to those his
officers which under him should erect and perfect his kingdom of grace here
upon earth; namely, He gave some Apostles; and some Evangelists: and some
pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Christ Jesus being thus advanced, it belongs unto him to reign as king
until he have perfected the salvation of all the elect, and until he have put
all his enemies under his feet, and have delivered up this kingdom to God even
the Father.

This kingdom of Christ differs from all other kingdoms; for, though it be in
the world, and above all the kingdoms of the world, yet it is not of the
world; Ioh. 18.36
it is a spiritual and heavenly kingdom, bearing rule in, and over the souls
and consciences of men. It is directly opposite to the kingdom of darkness,
and of the devil, the prince of this world; for by his agents, through his
ordinances, by the power of his Spirit, 2. Cor 10.4.5.6.
he pulls down strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; having in a readiness to
avenge all disobedience, when the obedience of his own subjects shall be
fulfilled.

This kingdom of Christ is an everlasting kingdom, Isa 9.7. Dan. 7.27.
never to have end, whether we respect the subjects or king, for at the last
day all that were subject unto him in this world in the kingdom of grace,
shall in an holy and glorious subjection unto God reign with him in the world
to come, in the kingdom of glory for evermore.

But this present administration, and government of this kingdom by Christ as
Mediator, is not everlasting, for in the end of the world, 1. Cor. 25.24, 25.
Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father, then the Son
himself shall be subject to him that put all things under him, 1. Cor. 15.28.
that God may be all in all.

This giving up the kingdom is not a cessation of it, but a delivering of it
up to God to his immediate governing of it in a state more glorious than ever.
It causes only a cessation of that form of government by Christ, which was
to continue from the fall, till after the day of judgment. For (Jesus Christ
having been faithful and powerful, as Mediator, in executing that authority
which was put upon him, Heb. 3.2. Mat. 25.4^. Rom 8.21
and that, to the saving of all the elect, receiving the^ into the state of
glory, and into the possession of the kingdom of heaven; and also to the
subduing of all enemies, executing upon them the vengeance of hell fire, and
delivering the creature from the bondage of corruption) there shall then be no
more need of such a mediate kind of government. Wherefore Christ shall deliver
up this kind of government unto God the Father, who for ever afterward, with
the Son, and holy Ghost, shall govern all things, immediately, communicating
unto the man Christ as head of his whole body, all glory, Job. 17.24.26.
and happiness; of which glory (by reason of that eternal and spiritual
union which each member has with the head) the whole body shall partake for
evermore. Col 3.4. 1 Ioh. 3.2. Phili 3.21.


Unto this immediate government the Son himself shall be subject, together
with the rest of his members; that is (his government as he was man, and
Mediator between God and man being at an end) he, as man, and as head of the
Church, shall with his whole body be subject. Not but that he as man was
always, as inferior, so likewise subject to God; but while with the second
person in the deity the humanity did as a Viceroy govern all things, having
the same government with the Godhead, he is not said to be subject; but when
this government shall be laid down, then this subjection shall be manifest.

In this immediate government God shall be all in all; that is, God shall no
longer communicate himself to his elect in Christ, in part, and by the
mediation of his Son, and by his ordinances and ministry of man, as formerly
he did in the state and kingdom of grace upon earth; but then he shall
communicate himself wholly, and by himself immediately. Revel. 21.22.23.
For as there shall be then no need of Sun nor Moon or any other natural
means to sustain man's body, in a natural being; so there shall be no need
of Temple, that is, of any ministry of the Word and Sacraments to sustain
body and soul in a spiritual and glorious being; but God shall be all in all,
his presence, and goodness will immediately supply all. For sin being
perfectly abolished, the creature is capable of a direct and immediate
communion with God his creator, he pleasing immediately to communicate to man
of his holiness, and of his glory.

But, this delivering up of the kingdom to the Father,

I answer, by no means; shall appear, if this mystery of the kingdom be
rightly understood. For as God the Father could, and did give all the
aforementioned authority and kingdom to the Son, without any the least
diminution of the glory and soveraigntie of the first person in Trinity; so
can and will God the Son deliver up the same government and kingdom again
to the Father, without any the least diminution of the glory and soveraigntie
of the second person in Trinity; or without any disparagement or lessening of
the glory of his humanity. For God the Father so gave all authority to the
Son, that yet he retained it all to himself as God, to whom kingdom and
power is essential and inseparable For whatsoever the Father has, that same
wholly he gives to the Son, Ioh. 5.17.19.20.26.
and yet retains that wholly to himself. The Father was King still and Lord
of all notwithstanding; the giving of all power to the Son, did not take off
any power and authority from the Father; but did only vary the manner of
administration of one and the same authority. Christ before he was deputed to
this his office of absolute authority over all as Mediator, was equal to the
Father, yet was not made above the Father by virtue of what was given him, for,
1. Cor. 25.27.
he was always excepted that put all things under him; so when Christ shall
have delivered up the kingdom, and all that authority which was given him,
he shall remain no less equal to the Father. For as his essence could not,
by acceptance of his office, admit of any alteration of his authority to the
greater; so his essential authority and government over all, as he is God,
cannot (by the rendering up again the same office and mediatorie dispensation)
admit of any alteration of his authority to the less. By this it is plain
that Christ, in respect of his deity, loses no authority by this deliverie
up of the kingdom to the Father.



inferior to the Father as touching the manhood; therefore the humanity
receives no disparagement by this subjection more in this latter state than in
the former. He is said in this latter state to be subject, that is, only
subject, and not governing the world as before; then he was subject in one
respect, but, King and governor in another, which latter only is taken away by
reddition of the kingdom.

Secondly, though Christ has given up the kingdom no more to govern as God
and man, as a Mediator, yet as God he shall still govern; and though Christ
as he is man, and as he is a part of his Church shall be subject; yet the
manhood of Christ shall still subsist in the Godhead of the Son, and the
fullness of his Godhead shall for ever dwell in the manhood, Col. 2.9.
by reason of the personal union in which respect, though the manhood shall
not participate in the work of governing, yet it shall participate in the
honor and glory thereof, because the Godhead and the manhood make but one
Person.

Thirdly, Christ as man remains the head of the whole Church which is his
body, establishing them in state of perfect holiness, and glory, through the
immediate communion which by him they have with God, by reason of that
spiritual and inseparable union which they hold with him. And it can be no
abatement of glory or content to him, to give up such a manner of government,
which though it was honorable, yet it was with a kind of burden and care; so
long as he did not give it up, until he had finished all which belonged to
that his Kingly Office in saving all his subjects, and destroying all his
enemies; for, the honor and glory of that former government is due unto him
for ever. Moreover, it must be considered that as he is head of his Church, he
must needs have more glory and joy when that all the members of his body shall
be perfectly glorified, 1 Cor. 12.26.27.
than he could have, when in state of his Mediatour-ship only, some of his
members were glorified, and they also then glorified but in part.

A King's only son being employed by virtue of a commission, as his Viceroy
to subdue and regaine to (...), a rebellious kingdom, when he has fully
effected it, he is to deliver up that kingdom with his commission; which when
he has done, it pleases his father to ease him of further care, and to cause
him all his life time to live in triumph, seating him next to himself in his
kingdom. This latter condition is no less honorable and glorious, but is
much more happy and joyous than the former. Like to this is the state of Christ
as man, after the delivering up of his kingdom, in the state of glorious
subjection.

That which is desired concerning Gods kingdom, is that it may come. To come,
properly is an action of such creatures which have power of moving, whereby
they, being absent or far off, do approach, and become present. Here it is
taken metaphorically, importing first a desire of continuance and establishment
of so much of the kingdom as is come already. Secondly, the coming and being
of his kingdom, where it is not yet erected. Thirdly, the growth toward
perfection of those things which are come in truth, but not in perfection of
degrees. Fourthly, the consummation and perfect coming of all things that
belong to the glory of Gods kingdom. The last is, when as things concerning
this kingdom are come in their being, they may so far as may be profitable
to us, come to our knowledge: Job 26.14.
for without this coming also, we cannot so well glorify God, in hallowing
his Name. Therefore it is, that every special manifestation of Christ's glory
when it appears to men, may be called a coming of his kingdom. Thus
Christ's revealing some glimpse of his glory, is called the coming of the
kingdom of God with power. Mat. 9.12
These senses of this word come, are so subordinate, and agreeing one to
another, that it comprehends them all. So that when we say, Thy kingdom
come, it is as if we said: O Lord, who art the only Potentate and King of
kings, declare and make thy Name known to be holy, by showing thy self to be
the absolute Sovereign over all, by sustaining, preserving, and disposing of
all things in the world, so as both thy glory may appear, and as it may make
for the kingdom of grace. And grant that all thine ordinances and means of
gathering and establishing thine Elect, may be set up in their purity and
power, to the effectual calling, ordering and perfecting of thy people, until
thou have glorified thy self in bringing them all to eternal glory. Be
pleased likewise to remove and beat down whatsoever power does let, and does
exalt it self against thee and thy kingdom, until thou have glorified thy
self in the eternal shame and destruction of thine enemies.

Thy kingdom come. The petition being thus interpreted, we may from the whole
scope of it, conclude:

All Christians should unfainedly desire that God would show himself to be the
absolute sovereign Lord God, both in the administration of his kingdom of
power over all creatures, and in setting up and establishing his kingdom of
grace, to the utter overthrow of his enemies, and bringing of his Elect in
Christ to the kingdom of glory. What David does praise God for, that all must
pray for, that as he says, Psalm. 145.11.
They may speak of the glory of his kingdom, and talk of his power. He says
elsewhere, O God show thy self. Psalm. 94.1. 1 King. 18.36.37.38.39.
Elijah prays, Let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and
that thou art the Lord God, and have turned their heart back again. Which
request he granted by sending fire, which consumed the offering: whereat the
people cried, saying, The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. Express charge
is given by the Prophet, saying, Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, keep not
silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, ^sa. 6^ 6.7.
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, Psalm. 51.18.
says David, The Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians to pray for the
Ministers, that the word of the Lord might have free course, and be glorified,
and that they might be delivered from unreasonable men. 2 These. 3.1.2.
The souls stain for the word of God, say, How long, Rev. 6.9.10
O Lord, holy and true, etc. Lastly, as Christ says, I come quickly: so John,
and all which love his appearing, say, Amen, Come Lord Jesus. Rev. 22.20


The general reason why the coming of the kingdom of power, grace, and glory
is desired, is because they are involved one in another, and neither of them is
fully come; and the coming of them do admirably set forth the glory of God.
The reasons why each is particularly to be desired, follow.

Gods government and wise disposing of all things is to be desired, because,
first, thereby he does show forth his eternal power and Godhead, in such
great letters, Rom 1.19.20.
that men may learn to glorify him for his infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness. Psalm. 19.1^*
For the heavens declare the glory of God. The variety, order, and use of the
creatures do show that in wisdom he has made them all. Psalm. 104.24.25.
These works of God, in giving all things meat in due season, and preserving
of the creation, do show to the sons of men the glorious majesty of his
kingdom, and do witness that the Lord only is the living and true God. Act.
14.15.17.


Secondly, the powerful and God in sustaining and governing the world, does
afford both matter and means for the kingdom of grace. For the propagation
and increase of mankind, is Gods nurserie, in which grow many stocks (though
crabstockes) whereof he will ingraft whom he pleases, into his Son Christ
Jesus, and make them trees of righteousness. This general government also is
as it were God's school, wherein he does educate and train up men to
civilitie, to trades and arts, which are excellent mediate helps to sustain the
materials, and to build up the frame of the Church of God. For these causes,
Gods general and common providence is to be prayed for.

Lord do not bear up the pillars of the earth, Psalm. 75.3.
the whole frame thereof will be dissolved: if he do not order and dispose of
all things in the world, and if he do not renew the face of the earth, there
will be nothing but trouble and death, Psalm. 104.29.30.
and returning to dust, wherefore his kingdom of power is to be desired,

Whereas it is most generally conceived, God's providence is f^^ to be prayed
for, because it cannot be resisted, and because it shall come certainly.

I answer, Job's case. Job 1.
He prevails much also in holding many parts of the world in barbarism. And
when he cannot hinder the ordinary works of God, then he blinds the eyes of
men, that they cannot see God in his works; but makes them believe that all
things come from nature, fortune, or humane policy: deposing God (as much as
he m^^) of his regencie in the wor^e And what though this kingdom shall come
certainly; the kingdom of grace shall come as certainly, if we consider Gods
decree and power to execute it. Only I confess, the devil more especially
would play rex against the kingdom of grace, for which cause it is most
especially to be prayed for. Moreover, this kingdom of power is yet in
coming until this world shall be dissolved. And though this kingdom of power
be come in respect of Gods act, yet there is but a part of his ways, Job 26.14.
yea but a little part that is heard of him, that is, come to our knowledge and
understanding: therefore in this respect prayer must be made, that we may
know his kingdom of power, for which we may sanctify his Name.

The kingdom of grace must be desired for these causes.

Secondly, the publishing of the word whereby this kingdom is erected, is the
means of revealing the will of God, and of making men able to do his will.
Therefore the coming of this kingdom is to be desired.

perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12.
and the measure of the fullness of the stature of the body of Christ is not
yet attained unto: Besides we which are now called, cannot without those who
yet are to be called, Heb. 11.40
be made perfect. But when the kingdom of glory shall be come, we shall all be
glorious. And then it is, 1 Cor. 15.28.
when God shall be all in all, and be perfectly glorified. Thus it is evident
that the kingdom of power, grace and glory, is to be desired.

Before we can make use of this point, it shall be needful to consider the
particulars comprehended in it, to be prayed for.

Concerning the kingdom of power, request is first made unto God that he would
continue the work of creation, renewing the face of the earth, upholding all
things by his power, ordering all things by his wise providence, that all men
may see his infinite greatness, goodness, and all other his holy
excellencies. We must likewise deprecate that confusion, disorder, vanity, and
defects of the creatures, to which the sin of man has made them subject.

Then more particularly, prayer must be made for mankind: first, that that
blessing, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, may be
continued; else how can the number of the elect be made perfect. Then prayer
must be made, that men may be endued with such good gifts of nature as may make
them civil and apt for society, and may be able in some measure to hold that
dominion over the creatures, which once man had: that he may subdue them, and
know the use of them. Wherefore also Arts and Sciences are to be desired, and
for that cause, that Schools and all Nurseries of good learning and profitable
knowledge may be erected, maintained, frequented, and be blessed: and the
rather, because these make much, as for the good of civil society, so for the
building up of the Church; and do serve to help man more clearly to see God in
all things. The contrary to these, as depopulation, and Barbarism, are to be
deprecated.

The requests to be made concerning the kingdom of grace, do respect, first
the King, then the means of setting up and governing this kingdom; external,
both the ordinances and officers of this kingdom; and internal, the coming
of the holy Ghost. Next they respect the subjects. Then they respect the
enemies. Lastly, they respect the franchises, liberties, and privileges of
this kingdom.

The King of this kingdom of grace, (as at large is before showed) is Christ
Jesus, God and man: for he says, All power is given to me in heaven and in
earth. Matthew. 28.18. And it is He that must reign, till he has put al his
enemies under his feet. 1. Cor. 15.25. Now Christ then reigns, when grace,
Romans 5.23.
and the gift by grace reigns unto eternal life: wherefore prayer must be
made that Christ may reign, that grace may be communicated to the elect, and
may reign in them by him: and that Satan the Prince of darkness may not
reign, Ro^. 16.20.
but be trodden under foot daily.

The external means of establishing this kingdom, are first the ordinances
thereof, viz. Isa. 11.4. 2. These. 2.8. Mat. 1.14.
the Word, Sacraments, and Discipline. The Word is the rod and breath of Gods
mouth: it is the Scepter and Gospel of this kingdom. The Sacraments are the
seals of the covenant that is passed between King and subjects. Discipline
serves to reform, or cut off evil members of the Church.

The kingdom of God is come, when his ordinances are set up in any place: Luke
17 21
In which respect he said it was among the Jews. Prayer therefore must be made,
2. These 3.1.
that The word of the Lord may have free passage, and be glorified every where
among Jews and Gentiles. And that mere inventions, Doctrines, and Traditions
of men may be abolished; and that all superstition, will worship, and false
worship, Mat. 15.13
every plant which God has not planted may be rooted out. Likewise that the
two only Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism and the Lords Supper, 1.
Cor. 11: 23.
may be purely and duly administered, according to their first institution. And
that all corruption of the true, and adding of false Sacraments may be
abandoned.

It must also be desired, that the censures and keys committed to the Church,
may be exercised with such discipline, that the good may be encouraged, the
evil may be shamed, and cut off from communion with the Church: and that to
the working of true awful credit of the Church, and advancement of the
kingdom of Christ Jesus. And that this authority may not be abused for the
maintaining of error, and disgracing, or thrusting the best members out of the
Church, as did the Pharisees, who made and executed this Canon, Ioh 9.2^.
That if any did confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be put out of
the Synagogue. Or as Diotrephes who did cast men out of the Church, 3. Ioh. 10.
for receiving the brethren.

The other external means of establishing and governing this kingdom, are
the officers both civil and Ecclesiastical.

The civil are the King, or supreme Magistrate in any place, and such as have
lawful authority under them: whose office is to countenance, and order
whatsoever things, or persons may promote Christ's kingdom. Isa. 49.23.
Therefore they are called nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers of the Church:
which office David and the godly kings of Judah did perform. Prayers must be
made for them (but especially for our own King and governors under him) that
they may so govern, that their subjects may live in all godliness, 1. Tim.
2.2.
and honesty: that like zealous Nehemiahs, they may rule for the praise of
them that be good, Rom 13.
and for the terror of them that do evil: and that they set up and maintain
the only one, true religion among their subjects. We must pray likewise
against Anarchie, when none reign, but every man lives as he lusts. Judge.
21.25
Also against evil government, when Magistrates maintain false religion, or
irreligion: or else do tolerate them to the corrupting of the true.

The Ecclesiastical officers whose office is to dispense the Word, to
administer the Sacraments, and to have the chief ordering of the censure of
the Church: also such assistants as may help the other in their government:
Touching these, it must be requested that God would send forth laborers into
his harvest, Mat. 9.38.
that he would increase their number, that he would give them gifts and skill
to divide the word of truth aright, Psalm. 132.9.
that he would give them grace and will to feed their people with knowledge:
that he would deliver all such from unreasonable men, and that they may have
liberty to preach the Gospel of the kingdom. Lastly, that they may be of
unblameable conversations, ensamples to their flocks in good works.

Prayer likewise must be made for all other that bear office in the Church,
that they may also have the mystery of faith in pure conscience, that they may
also be diligent in discharging their office.

Contrariwise, we must pray against having no ministry and government in the
Church, also against a false ministry, as that of Pope, Cardinals, Priests,
Jesuits, etc. Also against evil Ministers and officers, Ezekiel. 34.3 Isa. 56.16.
which either cannot, or will not teach or govern according to their place, or
teach idly, rule remisely; or teach erroniously, or rule amiss.

Now albeit the kingdom of God may be come in respect of the external means
thereof, yet if the internal means which is the holy Ghost, and the effectual
working thereof, be not come, neither can the Magistrate with his sword, nor
the Minister with the word avail any thing to the converting of any one
Christian, or winning of one soul to this kingdom.

Wherefore it must be desired that the holy Spirit of God would effectually
accompany the outward means of gathering, and building up the elect, to the
enlightening and translating them from the power of darkness into the kingdom
of his dear Son; and that they may increase in knowledge and every good
grace, according to the mighty working of his glorious power; that the Word,
Sacraments, and Discipline, the weapons of this warfare, may be mighty through
God to pull down strong holds, and cast down imaginations and high things
which exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, and may bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

In respect of subjects of this kingdom, prayer must be made that their number
be increased and perfected, that the fullness of the Gentiles may come: and
that the Jews, the two sticks, Judah and the children of Israel his companions,
Ezekiel. 37.22.24.
and Ephraim and the children of Israel his companions, may be united, and
gathered into Christ's sheepfold, and may have one King the Lord Christ, the
son of David, that so all Israel may be saved, as it is written. To. 11.26.
Isa. 59.20.
Also that being gathered, they may be loyal to their King, and at peace, and
loving one to another, that there be no Schisms and divisions in this
kingdom. As for enemies to this kingdom, not only Satan, and sin the
chief, which stand in direct opposition to Christ and the Spirit, but all such
men as are slaves to sin and Satan, and confederates with them, are to be
prayed against: whether they be open foes or false friends, which by force, or
fraud, go about to undermine, and resist the kingdom of Christ. The most
notorious of these are Antichrist the arch-enemie of the Church of the
Gentiles, Ezekiel. 38.16.
and Gog and Magog the arch-enemie of the Church of the Jews. All locusts which
war under their king Abaddon: Rev. 11.9.
All false Christ's, and false Prophets spoken of, Matthew. 24.24. which shall
endeavor to seduce the Jews, and hinder their conversion. Also every member
of the kingdom of darkness, must be resisted and prayed against. Here is
only the place for imprecation and praying against men.

The case of imprecation.
But because Christians are commanded to love their enemies, and to bless them
that curse, and pray for them that persecute them: special care must be had
how any man pray against another. Wherefore it shall be needful to observe
some distinctio^s, from whence rules of imprecations may be observed.

1 Prayer is made against enemies of Christ's kingdom, either in general, or
against particular persons.

2 Distinction must be put between the persons of evil men, and their evil
acts.

3 Distinction must be put between one evil person and another, by their
acts: some sin the sin unto death irrecoverably: some who now are enemies,
yet are curable, and belong to Gods election.

4 Difference must be put between a man's own private cause, and the cause of
God.

5 Difference must be put between evils temporal and eternal.

1 These things observed, rules of direction do follow. First that every
Christian may and must pray against the enemies of the Church in general: so
David, Psalm 104.35.
Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth.

2 The sins, acts, and counsels, of the enemies of grace, are always to be
prayed against, but not their persons, except in the case following. Thus
David, I pray thee, 2 Samuel 15.31.
turn the counsel of Achitophell into foolishness. Act. 4.29.
And the Apostles say, Now Lord behold their threatenings, We may therefore
pray that God would restrain the malice, and abate the power, and defeat the
plots of the adversaries: but must not pray against their persons, but love
them, for it may be they do belong to God, as Paul did, who was once a
persecutor.

3 The very persons of those which sin unto death incurably may be prayed
against. I say not says John, 1 Ioh. 5.19.
that he shall pray for it. And Paul wishes, that they were cut off that did
trouble that Church. Gal 5.12.
David prays against the malicious enemies of Christ, Psalm. 69.38.
saying: Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written
with the righteous. But this kind of sinners cannot be discerned by ordinary
spirits: this kind of imprecation therefore must be left unto such spirits as
was David's and the Apostles, and must be forborne of ordinary Christians:
except it be when the Church has righly for evident and just cause cut men
off, by the curse of Anathema Maranatha, not from the body of the Church only,
but from the head Christ also; as those deserve to be, which are open,
malicious, and inveterate Apostates.

4 The persons of our enemies and persecutors, though they do what they can to
hinder the Gospel, are not to be prayed against. For our Savior prayed,
Father forgive them, Luke 23.34
they know not what they do. Steven said, Act. 7.60.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Yea, we are commanded to pray for
them which despitefully use us, Mat 5.44.
and persecute us.

5 Prayer may be made, that God would sometimes inflict temporal judgments
upon obstinate sinners, but without limiting the Lord unto particulars: so it
be conditionally, if their case require it, and that it be in love to their
souls and persons, that they may be thereby made to seek God. Thus David
prayed, Psalm 83.16
Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O Lord.

6 Lastly, God must be interessed in the cause, else no man must be prayed
against. Gods dishonor, not only a man's private wrong, must cause it. It must
proceed from holy zeal for God, and not from passion and private spleen and
desire of revenge. These rules observed, it may be known when and how a
Christian may imprecate evil against his and Gods enemies, and how and when he
may not.

The last thing in the kingdom of grace, for which prayer must be made,
concerns the liberties and franchizes thereof: which are the very good,
commodity, Romans 14.16.
or livelihood of the subject: which so far as respects this life, are
freedom from the curse of the Law, and dominion of sin, Romans 6.11.
a freedom in righteousness, thence peace of conscience, and joy in the holy
Ghost; of which the Apostle says, the kingdom of God does consist, scil. In
righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

The last thing of all which is considerable in this petition, is the kingdom
of glory. Concerning which, request must be made, that God would hasten it,
that Christ would overcome the last enemy, 1 Cor. ^5.26.
death, and so put all enemies under his feet: that he would come to judgment
in his appointed time, to magnify himself in his just vengeance upon the
wicked, 2 These. 1.8. 1 Cor. 6.2.
the Saints sitting upon them with him in judgment: and that he would bestow
perfect glory upon all the elect, 2 These. 1.10
whereby he himself may be perfectly glorified in them at that day: when also
the form of governing this kingdom by him as Mediator being determined, he
shall have delivered the kingdom up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.28.
that God may be all in all, to the glory of Father, Son and holy Ghost, for
evermore, Amen, Amen.

Some of the particulars mentioned in this petition (I do confess) will come
to be condered again in the fourth, fifth, and sixth petitions, as the
continuance of the course of nature, magistracy, peace of conscience, and
eternal glory; likewise power against sin, and increase of grace: yet the
petitioner shall not therein tautologize, or make vain repetitions. For here
they are mentioned only as means to set forth the glory of God, in the
coming of his kingdom, that his Name may be hallowed: but there they have
respect to the good of man. The Doctrine being thus enlarged, the Uses will
more easily follow.

First, all such as desire not Gallio, Act. 38.17
care not which way it go with it, well or ill: All idle or unfaithful
Ministers, which in stead of directing Christ's spouse unto him, do smite and
wound her, Can. 5.7.
and shame her by taking her veil from her: who in stead of feeding, do
starve or poison Christ's flock: All Governors of the Church, which make sad
the heart of the righteous, Ezekiel. 13.22.
and make glad the hearts of the wicked: which censure and thrust out the good^
and receive into the Church, and hold, in the bad. In a word, all that do not
bear good will to Sion, which is indeed to be an enemy: for in this case, He
that is not with us, Mat. 1^.30
is against us, says Christ, and he that does not gather, scatters. Lastly,
if any be open persecutors of the truth, or seducers and inticers from it, all
these may see in this Doctrine, as in a large glass, their errors and foul
blemishes. But he which will say, Go ye cursed, Mat. 25.41 42.
to all that do not prove themselves to be his friends, will have to reckon
with all the enemies of his kingdom. How many be there that hypocritically
will say, Thy kingdom come, and yet use all means to hinder it, and keep it
down? And if it came in any place, it is the very burden and vexation of their
souls. Is not this most grossly to mock God? But woe be to such Pharisees,
hypocrites, which will say to God our Father, Thy kingdom come, and yet will
as much as they can, hinder the passage or power of the Gospel of his
kingdom; Mat. 23 13
which will not enter themselves, nor by their good will suffer those that
would, to enter in. Be wise in time. It is not safe to cast off, or refuse the
yoke of Christ's government, much less to enter a combination against him. Let
no man dare either by force, or craft, to oppose the coming of the kingdom of
God, whether it be by opposing any of his ordinances, or of his people; such a
one cannot go unpunished; for all that make faithful prayers (in saying thy
kingdom come) do pray against him. It is hard kicking against pricks. Act.
9.5.
Follow the counsel of the Lord, Psalm. 2 1^.
Kiss the Son left he be angry, and you perish: make your peace with him,
else you must feel that sentence executed, Luk 19.27
Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me.

must do what lies in him; the Minister what belongs to him. Every one (as
they to the building of the Tabernacle) must bring his gift, and do his part.
And when ye can do nothing else, yet for your own particulars open the
everlasting doors of your hearts, that the King of glory may come in, and
dwell in your hearts by faith, and rule in your hearts by his Spirit. And you
must also do as Christ here commands, pray heartily, and say, Thy kingdom
come. In thus doing we shall honor God, and approve that we prayed, Hallowed
be thy Name, unfainedly: we shall advantage our selves and our brethren: Psalm.
122.6. Rev. 1.6. Rev. 5.10.
For they shall prosper that love and pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and we
shall be a kingdom of Kings and Priests to God the Father for ever,

The third Petition.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. That the Name of God might be
hallowed, it was needful that God should make his holy Name known; therefore
request was made, that he would make himself known by the coming of his
kingdom. Secondly, to the hallowing of his Name, it is requisite that it be
acknowledged to be holy: which is done when men do his will on earth. Ioh.
17.4.
For then God is glorified on earth, when those under him finish the work he
has set them to do. Which is, when the wills of all the subjects of his
kingdom are subject to the will of their Lord and King. Wherefore that this
subjection may be yielded, prayer is made in this third petition. Concerning
which subjection, this petition directs unto the matter of it, Thy will be
done, in earth, the manner how, as it is in heaven.


In the matter of subjection, the thing to which, and the persons who, and the
place where they must be subject, is expressed. The thing to be submitted unto
is Gods will, employed in a special emphasis in the particle (thy) importing
thus much, not the will of Satan, or the will of men, but of God, whose will is
secret, this pertains not to us to pry into, only thus much we are to pray
concerning it in general, that he will be pleased to do whatsoever he has
determined to do; and that we may submit to it, and give him the glory of it
when it is done. revealed, this belongs to us, and to our children, Deuteronomy.
29.29. That we may do all the words of his Law.


Will, does here chiefly signify all his revealed will, Deu. 12.32
be it revealed by his word, or by the event of things by his work, whether it
be of things to be done or suffered. The act desired touching Gods will, is,
That it be done; as if he should say, Let thy truths be believed, thy
Commandments obeyed, and, whatsoever thou do, let it be acknowledged, and
submitted unto, as unto that which must needs be best done, because thou Lord
did it. Gods will is done by man two ways, in two degrees, truly, and in
endevor aiming at perfection; this is Evangelicall obedience. perfectly; this
is Legal obedience.


This latter is aimed at, and is the white, and rule of obedience. The former
is prayed for, as the means of following after, and attaining more and more to
the perfection of the Law, which is the rule of obedience, pressing hard after
that obedience in this life, which hereafter shall perfectly be done in heaven.

The persons who should do this will, are noted forth by the place where they
live, and where this will must be done, viz. all men on earth must desire that
Gods will may be done on earth. For (be done) is put impersonally, importing
thus much; Let it be done both by me, and by all other persons whosoever.

The manner of doing this will, is taken from a pattern and sampler of the
heavenly persons manner of doing Gods will. These persons are pointed at by the
place where they are, and where they do Gods will, viz. heaven, which can be
meant of no other but of the Angels and spirits of Saints departed, who do in
heaven show ready, faithful, and constant subjection unto God.

The particle (as) in which the force of this sentence does lie, is not here a
note of paritie, equality, or like quantity of degree, but a note of
similitude and likeness of quality. His meaning then is: Psalm. 103.20 21.
Thy will be done by men on earth readily, faithfully, unfainedly, as the
heavenly Angels and spirits do it in heaven. The sense of this petition may be
thus expressed: O Lord and King, since that unfeigned obedience to thy holy will,
does truly honor and glorify thy Name, and does manifest that thy kingdom is
come, and is a due debt to be performed of all thy people: may it please thee
to cause me, and all thy people to know thy will, and to submit their wills to
the same in all things, always, in all faithfulness upon earth, as thy holy
Angels and Saints do thy commandments in heaven. And far be it from me, or
any other to rebel, or mutine against thee.

Thy will be done: The doctrine which follows from the matter of this
petition, is this:

Every Christians desire unto God, and endeavor in this life must be, that
Gods will be obeyed, and submitted unto in all things. 1. Sam. 3.18. 2. Sam.
15.26.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, says David, Psalm. 143.10. When
the Christians of Casarea saw that Paul was not to be dissuaded from going up
to Jerusalem, they said, The will of the Lord be done. Act. 21.14.
Our Savior says, Ioh. 5.20.
I seek not mine own will, but the will of my Father which has sent me. And
elsewhere in his prayer he said: O my Father, if this cup may not pass away
from me except I drink it, thy will be done.

Mal. 1 6.
If I be a master, where is my fear? It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good, says good Eli, 1, Sam. 3.18.

sovereign and absolute, Romans 7.12.
it is holy, equal, and good. And good is the word which thou have spoken,
says Hezekiah, Isa. 39.8. Whereas on the contrary, the will of Satan, and of
the flesh, is stark naught. Great cause therefore why Gods will should be
done, and be preferred before all other wills.

Deuteronomy, 6.1.
is that that they should do it, and submit unto it.

Christ did therefore redeem Peter says) they should no longer live the rest
of their time in the flesh, according to the lusts or will of men, but according
to the will of God. 1. Pet. 4 2.

The chief heads to which the will of God may be reduced, are these.

First, that men should perfectly know his will.

Secondly, that they should perfectly obey it, thus much the Law of pure nature
taught before the fall.

Thirdly, since all have sinned, and, even after conversion, do in many things
sin, it is the will of God that men should be convinced of their sin, Act.
2.38.
be penitent for it, confess it, and ask him forgiveness through Christ
Jesus.

Fourthly, when men have done this, his will is, 1. Ioh. 3.23.
that they should believe what Christ has done and suffered for them,
believing in him, and relying upon him for pardon, for obtaining of grace, and
for everlasting salvation.

Fifthly, his will is that all that believe in him, and that endeavor to live
holily, and righteously, should hope steadfastly, and be assured that they
through Christ shall be for ever glorified.

Sixthly, that in the mean time, they be thankful for Gods goodness toward
them in every condition; and that they, patiently, fruitfully, and comfortably
bear whatsoever afflictions they shall meet with in the way; waiting when God
shall accomplish all his promises to them in Christ, unto their everlasting
glory.

and wilfully disobedient: nay, as if that were not bad enough, they cannot
abide any that strive to walk according unto the strict rule of Gods holy
commandments: but are all for following the course of this world, the will of
Satan, Ephesians. 2.2.3
and lusts of the flesh, in all manner of disobedience of Law and Gospel.
These may see how contrary they are to their profession, which in word can
say, Disswasives from disobedience to Gods will.
Thy will be done, but indeed do the contrary. God cannot brook this
abominable dissembling: howsoever they think of themselves, these remain yet
children of wrath, Ephe. 2.3. Ephe. 5.^.
because they remain children of disobedience. They are yet in the power of
sin: Romans 6.16.
for his servants they are whom they obey. These men cannot escape without
punishment. He that knows not his masters will is worthy of stripes, says
our Savior: But he that knows his masters will, Luke 12.47.48.
and yet prepares not, neither does according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Disobedience is a dishonor to God; so says the Apostle to
the hypocritical boasters of the Law: Rom: 2.23.24.
Through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? For the Name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. And it does exasperate God
exceedingly; he could not else have been so much provoked by Adams and Eve's
transgressing his will, by eating the forbidden fruit (a thing for matter,
small) as to curse the whole world in such sort, that it groaneth under the
burden of it unto this day; and also to damn all men in eternal flames, had
not the very Son of God by taking the curse upon himself, saved a chosen
number of them. How did Saul's disobedience provoke the Lord against him? who
because he rejected the word of the Lord, 1. Sam. 15.23.
the Lord rejected him. Yet his fact was such, as carnal reason could, and did
say much in excuse of it: but it was disobedience. Yet who more ready to
presume that the wrath of God shall be far from them in the evil day, than
such as will not do the will of God, but take pleasure in iniquity, and are
workers thereof? They will cry, Lord, Lord, Luke 13.26.27.
have thou not taught in our streets? and Lord, Lord, open unto us. The Lord
abhors this scraping of acquaintance with him, saying, Mat. 25.11.12.
Depart from me, I know yea not ye workers of iniquity, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore, let no willing transgressour of Gods will,
deceive himself, nor suffer any man to deceive him: for, Ephe. 5.6.
for such things sake, comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. For this is most certain, that Christ comes in flaming fire,
to render vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

David they may say, Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of waters run down their eyes, because they keep not Gods Law.
Motives unto obedience to Gods will.
(1) Nothing pleases God more, than to see his children to order their
conversation aright, and to finish the works he gives them to do: he has not
so much delight in burnt-offerings as in obeying the voice of the Lord: Behold,
says Samuel, 1. Sam. 15.22.
to obey is better than sacrifice: and to hearken is better than the fat of
rams.

Secondly, the Lord is much glorified when his servants and children submit
themselves to his will both in doing and suffering. Ioh. 17.4.
I have glorified thee on earth, says Christ to his Father; this he makes to
appear thus. I have finished the work which thou have given me to do. The
Apostle having resolved to keep a good conscience, says, be knows Christ
shall be magnified in his body, Phil. 1.20.
whether by life or death.

Thirdly, this is the way to gain the reputation and honor of wise men. Ephesians.
4 17.
Be not unwise, says the Apostle, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Deuteronomy. 4.6.
And this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the nations.

Fourthly, by doing Gods will we shall come to more knowledge of his will.
Ioh. 7.17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, says Christ,
whether it be of God or no. Act. 13.22
To fulfill Gods will, is to be a man according to Gods own heart.

Fifthly, it is to approve a man's self to be Gods child, and Christ's brother;
Mark. 3.35
He that does the will of God, the same is my brother, sister, and mother,
says Christ.

Sixthly, God will hear their prayers: Ioh 9.31.
If any man will do his will, him he hears.

And seventhly, to such belongs the salvation of God, Psalm. 50.23. Be ye
entreated therefore by the mercies of God, to give your selves both in bodies
and souls to GOD. Prove what is that good, Romans 11.1.2.
that acceptable and perfect will of God. Think thus with thy self: It is
sufficient, nay too much, that I have spent the time past of my life, according
to the will of men, and of the flesh, in all manner of wickedness: but now
that I am quickened, and profess better things: now that I am redeemed from my
former conversation; I will therefore strive, and pray, that I may live
according to the holy will of him that has redeemed me. Think thus; God will
have his will fulfilled by me in obedience: or he will have it fulfilled upon
me in his just vengeance. Let every man therefore use all means to know and
do the will of God. And, as much as in us lies, we must cause others to know,
and to do it. We have Christ's example, who also speaking of man's duty says,
Ioh. 13.17
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Now that we may do the will of God, Means inabling men to do Gods will.
we must first be ingrafted into Christ, and must abide in him, drawing grace
and virtue from him by the exercise of our faith, as the branch does from the
Vine; Ioh. 15.5.
then we shall do Gods will, bringing forth much fruit in him.

Secondly, we must deny our own wisdom, and our own will: Pro. 3.5. Pro.
23.4.
and we must not consult with flesh and blood, but with the word of God, and
the inward man in which dwells the Spirit of God. Genesis 22.3.
Thus Abraham became able to do as hard a piece of service as any man can be
put unto, in offering his only son Isaac, the son of his hope: Romans
4.19.20.21.
who as he believed in God in a thing impossible to reason, without reasoning
against it: so did he perform a commandment of killing his son (in
natural reason seeming unnatural, unreasonable, and impious:) this he did by
resting only upon the word of God, to which he was obedient, Heb. 11.19.

Thirdly, we must do our utmost, that we may know the will of God, else how
can we do it? to this end we must hear, read, and meditate on the holy
Scriptures, which have the power of God working with them, to inlighten the
mind with knowledge, and to incline the will to obedience.

Fourthly, pray unto God, who only can and will inform the understanding,
Phil. 2 13.
and give both to will and to do, at his good pleasure. Thus Paul prayed that
the Colossians might be filled with the knowledge of his will, Col. 1.9.
and that they might walk worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing. David
likewise prayed, saying, Ps. 119.8^.
Quicken me after thy loving kindness; so shall I keep the testimony of thy
mouth. And the Church says, Cant 1.4.
Draw me, and we will run after thee. If we will pray, and seek with all
our might, as we would for hid treasure: Pro. 3.4.^.
then shall we understand the fear of the Lord: and then shall we know, Hol.
6.3:
if we follow on to know the Lord. Then shall we also be able to do the will
of God: Phil. 2.13.
For he will work all our works for us; and we shall be blessed in our deed,
James 1.25.

As in heaven. Observe here that the pattern of perfect obedience is taken
from heaven: whence we may collect,

In heaven is all perfect obedience, there is no failing there, no not in the
least circumstance. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now I know but in part, says the Apostle: but then (that is, when he should
come to heaven) I shall know as I am known. Peter speaking of the new heavens
says, that therein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.

1 Cor. 6.9.
For heaven is the holy place, into which no unrighteous person can enter: for
when there were disobedient persons in heaven, namely the devil and his
Angels, which kept not their first estate, heaven did vomit them forth, never
to be burdened with them or the like again.

In heaven there are no tempters; just men, made perfect; Heb. 12.23.
therefore also no temptations unto sin.

The thoughts of this, will moderate grief for those our made perfect, where
they shall neither offend, nor be offended.

Does not the meditation the exchange will be so happy? It is but a parting
with a sinful miserable earth, for this heaven, wherein dwells perfect
righteousness. It is leaving mortality for life, sin for grace, and misery
for glory, in that place, where they shall neither be actors, nor beholders of
sin: where there is no sin, either to infect, or vex them.

of our obedience; and when we come there, we shall be as the Angels. Luke
20.36. and shall ever be with the Lord.

As in heaven. Here Christ does send us to the best and perfect examples:
whence note.

In proposing examples for imitation The examples of Angels and those that be
perfect must be imitated of men on earth. Therefore when Paul would have the
Corinthians follow him, it was with this condition, as he followed Christ: or
because he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.

In the following such examples,











Answer:

Whereas man is most prone understand the rule, and be heartened to put it in
practice, because it shows a possibility that it may be done. In doing thus,
we shall every day grow better, and yet not be proud: for we shall daily see
something before us, to which we must aspire, to which yet we have not attained.

What, would you have us Saints and Angels on earth? Answer them again with
this point: They must be as Angels here; or they do not understand what they
say, when they say (in earth as it is in heaven.) If they understand what they
say, they mock God, in that they mean not as they speak: and deal
profanely to mock at the performance of that by another, for which they
themselves did seem solemnly to pray. They may be told, they must obey God
like Angels and Saints upon earth, or they shall never be Saints, and as the
Angels in heaven.

Learn here with, what honor the Angels and Saints departed should be
honored by men on earth: namely, with the honor of admiration, and imitation
of their graces. As for adoration of their persons, both God forbids it, and
they themselves do abhor it, with See thou do it not, Revel. 22.9.

In earth as in heaven. This points to an heavenly manner of doing Gods will:
whence we learn,

Prayer must be made, and care had that Gods will be done in an holy manner.
The heavenly manner, as well as the lawful matter of doing Gods will must be
observed. Ephesians. 6.6.
Servants are exhorted to do the will of God from the heart. Not only to do
Gods will, but from the heart. Our Savior instructs his disciples in the
right manner of giving alms, and of fasting, and prayer, in this sixth of
Matthew.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. Matt. 22.37.

The good or evil manner of

Before use can well be made, it must be considered what is requisite in the
right manner of doing Gods will, wherefore observe these directions.

1 First, if a good thing be well done, it must be done wittingly and
purposely, not as bruit creatures, or wicked men, who may fulfill Gods will, but
are not aware that they do it.

2 In faith, believing that it is lawful for them to do it, else it is sin,
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14.23.

3 In integrity of heart, from an habit and true disposition to keep all the
commandments, as well as that one which actually he does keep for the present;
else if he allow himself in the breach of any one, Iam. 2.10.
God holds him guilty of all. And it is the property of a good conscience,
to will to live honestly in all things. Heb. 13.18.

4 In sincerity: which is, when a good thing is done unfainedly, Ephesians. 6.6.
Doing the will of God from the heart, and from right grounds, not for self
respects only or chiefly, or for by ends, but with aim at pleasing of God,
and bringing honor to his Name. For all things must be done to the glory of
God, 1. Cor. 10.31.

5 Constantly: a good conscience will endeavor to do well always, Act. 24.16.

6 In humility, reverence, and holy fear of God, whose work they do. As the
Angels observe all the former rules, so do they this also. For the Seraphims
cover their faces with their wings, Isa. 6.2. and the four and twenty Elders
fall on their faces, and cast their crowns before the Throne, Revel. 4.10. and
5.8.

7 Speedily, Psalm. 18.44 Dan. 92.
making no delay. This was taught by the wings of the Seraphims, wherewith they
did fly, Isa. 6.2. David said, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. Psalm. 119.60.

8 Lastly, Psalm. 110.3 Psalm. 40.8.
the will of God must be done with a willing mind, cheerfully, and with
delight. David says, It was his delight to walk in the paths of Gods
commandments, Psalm. 119.35. And it was our Saviors meat and drink to do the
will of him that sent him, and to finish his work, Ioh. 4.34.

By these particulars it appears, what is further to be prayed for, and
striven after; what also is to be prayed against on the contrary, and avoided,
according to the purpose of this third petition. The uses follow.

(as we speak) with, How good they are, and what service they do him: as these
kind of men, who will challenge God, like them in Isaiah, Isa. 58.3.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see us not? wherefore have we afflicted
our soul, and thou take no knowledge? No men presume that God should save
them more than these. They will say, Lord, Mat. 7.22.
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out devils? But
he will answer, I never knew you, depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. For
actions which are good in the matter thereof, yet do stink, and are very
iniquity in Gods account, Isa. 1.13.
if they be not done aright. For what is not done with a good conscience, and
in truth of heart, is not done at all in Gods account: for he looks to the
heart, and manner how all things be performed.

Let it be every man's prayer and endevor to do good things well: to fulfill
Gods will in an heavenly manner, viz. upon good ground, with good conscience,
and good affections. This is the heart, life, and very soul of every good
action. And though there may happen to be some failings in the matter of what
is done, (which also is not to be allowed) yet if the heart be upright in the
manner, God does bear with much weakness, and does accept of truth and
uprightness.

As in heaven. The pattern of the right manner of doing Gods will, is a
perfect one, taken from heaven. Christ would have all men aim at this: whence
note,

Christians must aim at perfection. They must always press hard forward to
attain it. Now the God of peace make you perfect, to do his will, says the
Apostle, Hebr. 13.20, 21. Let us go on unto perfection, Heb. 6.1. Let us
perfect holiness in the fear of God, says he, 2. Cor. 7.1.

Natural things do affect,

This blames all that think 1. Cor. 9.24
Not all that run, receive the price. If men fall back, or stand at a stay,
they can never finish their course. Wherefore he would have others do as he
did, So run that they might obtain; and so fight, that they might get the
masterie, and win the crown. He that puts his hand to the plough, and looks
back, he is not apt for the kingdom of God. Luke 9.62.

Means of growing toward perfection.
The thoughts of heaven, and of the patterns for imitation which are in heaven,
and the state of perfection in which we shall be when we come to heaven, should
be load-stones to draw us to heavenward, and to perfection. Be perfect, says
Christ, Mat. 5.48.
as your heavenly Father is perfect: in every thing, and every way perfect.
The way to attain this, is first to convince the heart that we ought to be
perfect: Phil. 3.12.13.
then see with the Apostle, that we are not already perfect. Thirdly, let us
not look on what we have done, and what is behind, but on that which is
before to be done. Fourthly, 2. Cor. 7.1.
be daily purging our selves from filthiness of flesh and spirit, and so
perfect holiness. Fifthly, that we may do all these, be daily conversant in the
reading, hearing, and meditation of the holy Scriptures: for their end is, 2.
Tim. 3.17.
to make the man of God perfect. Lastly, give al diligence, and press forward,
Phil. 3.14.
as the Apostle did, toward the mark and price of the high calling of God in
Christ. Thus do, and the rather, because he that does not aim at perfection of
degrees, has not the perfection of truth and of parts.

The fourth Petition.
Give us this day our daily bread. Having dispatched the handling of the three
first Petitions, which did more immediately concern God: we are now come to
the other three, which do more especially concern man; which are also means
to enable a man to glorify God by doing his will?

These petitions following, concern man in a double respect. First, in respect
of the outward man, for sustaining the body and life of nature, in this fourth
petition.

Secondly, in respect of the inward man, and good of the soul also, scil. the
life of grace: the hindrance whereof is sin; concerning which, the Lord
directs his disciples to deprecate and pray against two things: First, the
guilt and damnation of sin, praying for justification, in the fifth Petition.
Secondly, against the power and dominion of sin, praying for sanctification
in the sixth and last Petition.

Request for to have a comfortable natural life and being upon earth, does
follow immediately upon the request of doing Gods will on earth: for the dead
cannot praise God. And if a man be not gathered into Christ's kingdom before
death, there is no hope. Isa. 38.18.19.
For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge in the grave, Eccles. 9.10.
Wherefore because no man can do the will of God on earth, except God give him
a comfortable life upon earth, this petition follows next the other in a most
holy order.

This petition is placed before the other two, which concern the estate of the
soul, and of the life of grace, not in order of prioritie of dignity; as if
the temporal estate of the body were more needful or more excellent than the
eternal life of the soul; for this latter is far more excellent: but
because in order of nature, the natural life is before the spiritual; and a
man must have a being in nature, before he can have a being in grace; and a
comfortable natural life is both the fitter subject for the life of grace, and
fitter instrument by which grace works, and does the will of God upon earth:
therefore it is first prayed for.

Besides, it is usual in Scripture, that the thing which is least to be
insisted upon, is placed first in order, before that which sometimes is more
excellent; that having finished the less worthy subject in few words, it might
dwell more largely upon that subject which was most worthy. As the histories of
Iaphet and cursed Cham, Genesis 10.
are set before that of blessed Shem: Genesis 36.
and after Isaacks death, the story of profane Esau, i^ for this cause set
before that of Jacob. Genesis 37.
So our Savior in one petition, and in few words, does express the desires of
a natural life; but spends more words about the spiritual life, in the two
last petitions.

Again, Gods indulgence and yeeldance unto man's weakness, might cause this
order; giving him leave to ask things more sensible, thereby raising him to
ask spiritual. As our Savior by curing men's bodies, did lead them on to
know that he could and would cure their souls: letting it appear to them, he
could as easily say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, as to say, Rise and walk.
In like manner men may by the experiment they have of Gods power and goodness
to preserve the body, be led to seek unto him, with assurance that he both
can, and will save their souls. That this petition may the better be
understood, consideration must be had of the matter-subject of the desire,
namely having of bread. circumstances which concern the having of this bread.


The thing expressly desired is bread, which does not signify supersubstantiall
and spiritual bread, viz. the Sacrament: for the administration thereof was
prayed for in the second petition: and the bread here spoken of, is to be
desired every day, but the Sacrament not so. By bread therefore is first meant
that which properly we call bread. Also according to a borrowed form of
speech ordinary in Scripture, it signifies all manner of food, He gives to
the beast, (as it is word for word) his bread, that is, his food, Psalm, 147.9.
Goats milk is called bread, well translated food, Pro. 27.27. I could
multiply Scriptures in this kind. In like sort by another borrowed form of
speech, by this one kind of sustenance, he means all kinds whatsoever:
whether meat, or drink; whatsoever also is needful for preservation of life,
as clothes, houses, etc. Also by bread are meant the causes and good effects
of bread, as fruitful seasons, good temperature of air, health and
cheerfulness, as the Apostle says, He filled our hearts with food and
gladness, Acts 14.17, In a word, all things which may preserve life, or
restore health, as Physic, skillful and faithful Physicians, peace and good
order, and all good means to maintain it: as a wise and courageous
magistracy, a strong, populous, loyal, and loving commonalty. And whatsoever
is contrary hereunto is prayed against, as famine, pestilence, wars,
sickness, pain, etc.

The circumstances which concern the having this bread and means of life, are
diverse: in number six. They do respect,

1 The person of whom bread must be asked, scil. God, employed in Give thou.

2 The means of obtaining it, scil. by gift, expressed in Give.

3 The persons for whom means of life is desired, scil. themselves Us. others
Us.


4 The time when they would have bread, This day.

5 The propietie, whose bread, scil. their own, Our.

6 The portion both how much, and of what sort, daily.

The person of whom all temporal good things are sought, is God, employed in
the word (give) and the words of invocation, scil. Our Father, to be
understood in every petition.

The means of maintenance is from God, not by restoring any thing he does owe
unto man, but by gift, give, which has this full sense; give possession, give
right, give continuance, give leave to use, give a blessing to the use of daily
bread.

The persons, for whom bread is asked, are (us:) every one upon earth, who now
are or may be Gods children.

The time when this bread should be given is restrained to the present time,
this day.

The propriety, not such bread, whereto they have neither spiritual nor civil
right, or only civil, or only spiritual: but our bread, that which we have
true right to in Christ, and amongst men.

The portion, how much, and of what kind of maintenance, is contained in the
word daily.

Daily, does not set out the time when they would have bread; For that was
signified in (this day) in which words the time when, was precisely determined,
and our Savior in so short a form of prayer would not make needless
additions. But daily bread, signifies such kind of means, and so much
maintenance, as their daily and next necessities do require: all such supply
for our natural well being as we have next need of, or such as one day after
another successively our estate and condition needs. (...) ab (...) proxime
sequens.
So the word in ordinary acception will bear it. But that I may give a sound
and clear exposition of (daily bread) I refer the Reader unto other phrases
of Scripture, which carry the same sense with daily bread: as first to Job
23.12. and Pro. 30.8. which is the best Commentary of this petition, (...)
for it is the very same petition with this. We read there an attribute given
to bread, which signifies a necessary food, diet, or ordinary, or appointed
food, or food of a man's allowance, or convenient food. This very thing is
expressed in the Greek by diverse words and phrases, (...) dimensum.
Luke 12.42. It signifies a man's stint, or part, where he alludeth unto the
care of governors of families, of stewards, who do appoint to all sorts in
the house their several portions and allowances. In James 2.15. the words
translated daily food, (...)
is the same in sense with daily bread, and are expounded by James in the
sixteenth verse, to be, things needful for the body. All these places
conferred together show evidently, that by daily bread is meant convenient
provision of food, apparel, and all other things which the necessity of the
person or estate of any man does require. The petition thus interpreted has
this sense,

O heavenly Father, in whom we live and have our being, who only can fill
the hearts of men with food and gladness: since we cannot glorify thee on
earth in doing thy will, except thou do sustain us upon earth; vouchsafe
therefore unto me, and all the rest of thy children, that for this present day
we may have possession, right, and blessing upon that allowance, and
convenient supply of food and maintenance, which our present condition does
stand in need of. Yea, afford all such means as may make our lives comfortable
unto us. Be pleased likewise, good Father, to prevent, and remove whatsoever
may hinder the welfare of our natural life, so far as may stand with thy
good will and pleasure: that while we live, we may both in body and soul lo
rifie thee.

Give us this day our daily bread. After Christ had taught his Disciples, first
to ask the things that did concern Gods glory, in the three first petitions:
then he wills them to ask such things as did concern their own good, in the
three last petitions. Whence it follows that

When any man has unfainedly desired and sought the things which pertain to
Gods honor and glory, he may then with good warrant pray for, and expect all
good things for himself, both for body and soul. When the Israelites had paid
the third years tithes, they might pray, saying, I have hearkened unto the
voice of the Lord my God, Deuteronomy. 26.15.16.
and have done according to all that thou have commanded me. Look down from
thy holy habitation from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land
which thou have given us. Hezekiah says, O Lord, remember now, 2 King. 20 3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. When zealous
Nehemiah had reformed abuses among the Jews, by cleansing the house of God,
restoring maintenance to the Levites, and standing for the sanctifying of the
Sabbath day, he is bold to pray: Neh. 13.14.22.
Remember me O my God concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds, that I
have done for the house of my God. And again he says, Neh 13 31
Remember me O God concerning this also, and spare me, according to the
greatness of thy mercy. And, Remember me for good. Our Lord and Savior says,
I have glorified thee on earth: and now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self, Ioh. 17.4.5.

Psalm 91.14 15.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him says God.
He shall call upon me, and I will answer him.

enable a man still to glorify God.

This argues all such men of

Whereas many unfeigned that Gods kingdom should be advanced, and his name
glorified, whatsoever should become of themselves. Let such be admonished of
their fault, and let them not wrong the Lords truth and goodness, to think
that he will not be gracious to them in things concerning themselves, now that
he has been already so good, as to give them hearts to desire to glorify him.

them for their best advantage. Be zealous for God therefore, and thence take
encourageme^t to pray to him for thy self. This may be done, yet no allowance
is given to expect any thing of merit, for here the petitioner does only
present himself unto God, as one capable of his further favors, looking for
nothing but of mercy, and does therefore beg what he would have. So
Nehemiah, though he remembered unto God what he had done for the honor of God,
yet he says: Spare me, Neh 13.22
according to the greatness of thy mercies.

Give us this day our daily bread. The subject of this petition, or the things
desired, are all things needful for this present life. Whence observe,

It is the will of God that his children should ask of him, and use all good
means for the welfare of this natural life. David says, O my God, take me
not away in the midst of my days. Psalm. 102.24. If any man be afflicted, Iam
5.13.14.
let him pray. Prayer is used as a means of victory in war, and to remove
famine, pestilence, and all annoyances of the body, 2. Chron. 6. Ask ye of
the Lord rain, in the time of the latter rain. Zach. 10.1.

Godliness has the promise of the life that now is. 1. Tim. 4.6.

in a sound body; else he can neither enjoy himself, nor do good to his
neighbor, nor do the service and works which the Lord appoints: he cannot
profit man, nor serve his God. Witness the condition of distracted and
melancholicke, of naturals, of dumb, and deaf persons. Also what can men
diseased and in pain do, in comparison of what they may do when their minds
are free, and bodies strong and healthie?

Christ Jesus has redeemed 1. Cor. 6.20
therefore the good thereof, in its place, is to be desired.

That use may be made of this point, take a view of the particulars. They
respect the principal thing here desired, scil. life and health: also all
means thereof. The body is then in health, when it is in such good plight and
temper, that the soul can in and by it exercise the faculties of reason, sense
and motion, to the comfort of it self, the benefit of man, and service of God.

The means of this good estate, are wholesome air, meats, drinks, apparel,
houses, and whatsoever will keep from bodily infections and inconveniences,
whether they serve to quench thirst, or satisfy hunger, or preserve from
extremities of heat and cold, or to restore defects in nature.

Now because these things cannot be, except the Lord give fruitful seasons, by
causing the heavens to be well disposed* and the earth to be fruitful: request
must be made, that God would hear the heavens, that they would hear the
earth, Hos. 2.21.22.
and the earth the corn, and the win^ and the oil, and that they all would
hear and satisfy the necessities of man.

And when all these things are granted, yet such is man's frailty, that if he
have not a ^ill to make use of corn, wo^^l, physic, and so in other things,
he shall yet remain destin^^ of their use. Therefore reque^^ is to be made,
that God would give gifts and skill to men to that end.

Lastly, if a man be furnished with all things before named, yet if he lie open
to the fury of enemies, his life and welfare cannot consist. Wherefore a good
Commonwealth, consisting of wise, just, and valiant governors, and of
numerous, peaceable, loyal, and valorous subjects, is to be desired: and the
contrary to all these is to be deprecated.

All therefore that shall debar the gracious leave which God has given them
to make use of the good things of this life. But if a man set so little by his
life, that he offer violence to himself by poisoning, or otherwise by any
means; this man passes all bounds of grace and nature: 1. Tim. 5.8.
he is not only worse than an Infidel, but worse than the bruit beasts. For
what beast does not in his kind desire meat of God? and when God gives meat,
Psalm. 104.28.
they gather it. And what beast is it, that does either starve, poison, or any
way kill it self willingly?

scil. that it be after we have sought Gods glory, as has been taught. Also
it must be considered of whom, by what means, for whom, for what time, in what
right, and in what measure, or wherewith we would have our wants supplied: all
which particulars are taught in this Petition. Remembering always, that all
desires in this Petition are conditional, scil. if they may stand with Gods
good will and pleasure.

It will be said, seek the kingdom of God, Matt. 6.33
all these things for this life shall be ministered unto us. And that our
Savior says, Labor not for the meat which perishes. Ioh. 6.27.


I answer, that in Matthew. 6. it is not said, first, that is, seek it chiefly.
And the promise of having all things for this life, does not exclude the lawful
means to get them, but rather assures us, that because God has care of
meaner creatures, which can use no means to help them; therefore if his own
children shall til the ground and sow, shall spin and labor, he would much more
bless their labors, that they should not want.

Also Christ's exhortation in Ioh. 6. is not absolute, but comparative, namely,
that of the two, he would have them rather seek for that which is spiritual
and everlasting, than for that which is corporal and perishing.
Notwithstanding these places, or any thing else that can be objected, Iam 4 2.
James said, the cause why men had not, was because they did not ask. And the
Apostle Paul commands to labor with the hands the thing that is good, Ephesians.
4.28.
that we may have to give to them that need. Wherefore let every man know what
is Gods will in this behalf, and let him pray unfainedly, and labor
diligently, that he may live in this world, as well as that which is to come.
They are to know, that they may also pray against all temporal and bodily
crosses, as famine, sickness, wars; and may use all good means to prevent
and remove them. But what means soever be used, prayer must be one. 1. Chron.
16.12.
It was Asa his fault, not that he did seek to the Physicians for health, but
because he sought only to the Physicians, and not to the Lord.

It may be objected, It is good to be afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. And Jeremy
says, Correct us Lord. Ier. 10.24.


Afflictions in themselves are evil, they are fruits of sin, Agur prays,
that he might not be poor, that is, so needy, as to be destitute of daily
food and clothing, lest (says he) I steal, Pro. 30.8.9
and take the Name of my God in vain. Yet is it most true which David says.
But afflictions are good by accident, through Gods gracious working of
humiliation and repentance by them; of themselves they are not good. It is no
good argument to say, Afflictions do work for our good, therefore we may pray
for them, or we must not pray against them. For the very sins of Gods
children, through the infinite wisdom and power of God, may, and often do,
work much for their good; yet in no case may be prayed for, but always prayed
against.

The Prophet Jeremy does not pray absolutely that he might be corrected: but
as the case then stood betwixt God and his Church, since God was forced to
correct them, he desires that the correction might be in judgment and
moderation, as a fruit of his fatherly love, and not in extremity, as
proceeding from his wrath and heavy displeasure. The very words do show this
sense: for he says, Correct me, but in judgment, not in thine anger. He does
in this case only deprecate the greater evil of punishment, and willingly
submits himself unto the less. Wherefore notwithstanding any thing that
can be said against it, If any man be afflicted, let him pray: for we have a
precept for it, Iam. 5.13. We have also a promise, God himself says, Call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
Psa. 50.15

Give. This word shows, that the person of whom things needful for this life
are to be had, is, our Father which is in heaven; and the means by which we
have possession and use of them, is by his gift, not our deserts. It does
therefore follow,

The having, holding, and comfortable enjoying of all things needful for this
life, is of the free gift of God. Elihu says, He gives meat in abundance, Job
36.32. That thou give, they gather, says David, Psalm. 104.28. And, Thou
give them their meat in due season, Psalm. 145.15. All things come of thee,
1. Chron. 29.14. Therefore it was the manner of our Savior, always before he
did eat, Mar. 6.41. and 14.22. Luke 24.30.
to bless it, asking his Fathers leave to use it, with a blessing upon it. So
did the Apostle, He took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them
all, Act. 27.35.

The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, 1. Cor. 10.26. And though he
made it for man's use, and as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119.16.
has given it to the children of men; yet has he reserved the right in
himself, to dispose of it to this or that person, both what he pleases, and
as much or as little as seems good to him. And when he has disposed of any
parcel of his goods to any men, they hold them but as stewards, to be
accountable to him their master; and are but tenants, at the mere will and
pleasure of him their Lord. Therefore he must give both to have and to hold,
the things even of this life, or they cannot rightfully be held by any man.

When men have all things Luke 12.
All the rich fools, plenty could not continue his life. The unbeleeving Noble
man was in the midst of plenty, 2 Kin. 7.19
but did not eat thereof. Men may taste, and eat, and put on clothes, and
yet be neither warm nor satisfied. Hag. 1.6.
While the daintiest meat is in the mouths of men, it may be their bane, and
not their nourishment, as it fared with the children of Israel, Number. 11.23.
who while the meat was between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of
the Lord smote them with a very great plague.

preservation of due debt; then much less can they deserve so, as to challenge
salvation by their own merits: for we see that Peter himself was to obtain
bread by humble petition. Let all men therefore take heed, how they challenge
any thing at Gods hand by debt of desert, lest he give them nothing but what
they earne, Romans 6.23.
even the wages of sin, which is eternal death.

without Gods blessing: then they deal presumptuously with God, and foolishly
for themselves, that will lay hands upon the good creatures of God, such as are
food, and the like necessaries of this life, without as king leave of God, or
craving a blessing upon the use of them. This sin is common among all sort,
both rich and poor, noble and base: who if there be not a Minister present, or
some child to say grace (as they call it) they fall to their food, and depart
from it, as irreverently and brutishly as any swine. The richer sort do many of
them live as if this were only the poor man's prayer. If they have goods
before hand, they with the fool in the Gospel say: Eat, drink, and be merry:
Luke 3^ 39.10.
God is not in all their thoughts, though happily he be so near them, that they
feel his just wrath, with that presumptuous foolish man, ere next morning. For
as Zophar in Job truly spoke (if it had been as wisely applied: Job 20.22.23.
) In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straights: every hand of
the wicked shall come upon him. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall
cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is
eating. This Belshazzar found true in fearful experience, when being amongst
his cups, he saw the handwriting on the wall which did portend the loss of
his kingdom. Deuteronomy. 5.5.
Because men will not seek the things of this life of God, and because when
they have them, they will not in them see God the giver of them; God does often
cast them into want, or what he gives them, is given in his wrath, and is
accursed to them: their food accursed, their apparel, their marriage, their
lands and all that they have: because they do not sanctify and make them good
to themselves, 1 Timothy 4.4.5.
by prayer and thankesgiving.

Gods own children must be remembered of this their fault, of seeking to earthly
means, and trusting to them. Many of them are too like Asa; if they have
outward means, they seek to them and not to God, who must give them with a
blessing, or they cannot profit those that have them. But let Gods hand upon
his servant Asa be a warning to all that fear God. His disease was but in his
feet, yet because he sought not to the Lord, 2 Chro. 16 12.
but to the Physicians, it was his death.

Considering that God is the admitted to be members of his family, and
household of faith, this should cause them to approve themselves good servants,
by doing their Lord and masters will: then may they be assured they shall want
nothing that is good. It is of this God and Father, of whom it is said in the
parable: Luk 15.17
His servants have bread enough, and to spare. It is therefore good serving of
this master, who will always either give much, or cause the little which he
gives to be like the meal in the barrel, that it shall not waste, 1 King.
17.14.
or the oil in the cruse, that it shall not fail until he send all plenty:
who can so bless Daniels pulse and water, Dan. 1.12.15.
that he shall be as fair, healthy, witty, and every way in as good liking,
as those that fed upon all delicates. And when this our Lord pleases to show
his power, he can bless one meal, that a man in the strength thereof may
live forty days and forty nights. 1 King. 19.8.
Whosoever are good servants and children to such a master, such a Father, how
can they want? For as he has wherewithal to give; so having commanded us to
ask of him, Iam. 1.5.
he will give to us liberally, and never upbraid us with what he has given.
Moreover, what he gives to his own, he gives with a blessing which makes
rich, Pro. 10 22.
and he adds no sorrow with it. These things considered, who would not serve
and wait continually before this God, who is a Lord so all-sufficient and so
bountiful?

Whosoever would have acknowledge this as Gods gift with all thankfulness.

If a friend give us our board but a month or two, we think our selves much
beholding to him. How much then are we beholding to God, at whose table we
live of free cost all our life time? Let us seek our maintenance of God, 2 Kin.
6.27.
for if the Lord do not help (as the King of Israel could say when there was
nothing to be had either out of the barn floor, or out of the winepresse,) we
cannot have maintenance by any means. Prayer is a special means to obtain
good things with a blessing, which if they be received with thanksgiving, they
are good indeed. 1 Timothy 4 8
Let us not therefore forget the Lord our Lord, for it is he that gives us
power to get substance, Deuteronomy. 8.18.
What though we were borne to the things we do possess, or they were given
us, or we bought them, or did attain them by hard labor and industry? yet it
must be acknowledged, that Gods gift was in all these. For who made our
Ancestors? who gave them lands or livings to leave us? who did put it into the
hands and hearts of our friends to bestow any thing upon us? did not the Lord?
Hos. 2 9.
Whose money or goods was it, vvherevvith we bought any thing? was it not
Gods? And who gave us wit to invent, and strength to labor? was it not that
God, who does also teach our hands to war, and singers to fight? 2 Cor.
9.10.
Who ministers seed to the sower, and bread for food, and does multiply the
seed sown. All these things are of him, to whom be praise and glory for ever,
Amen.

Let no man say in his heart, Deuteronomy. 8.17
my power, or might of my hand has gotten this wealth: and let not any ascribe
praise for his maintenance unto friends, false gods, or any other means, but
to the true God: lest he teach them to acknowledge that, by his taking away of
their wealth, which they would not acknowledge by his bestowing it upon them.
For thus he dealt with Israel, to whom he said, She did not know (or
acknowledge) that I gave her corn, Hos. 2.8.9.
and oil, and multiplied her silver, and her gold. Therefore will I return
and take away my corn in the time thereof, says God, and my wine in the season
thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax, given to cover her nakedness:
Let us therefore say with David, All things are of thee: and if we give him
any thing, 1 Chro 29 12.13.
we must say, Of thine own have we given thee. Both riches and honor come of
thee, in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great,
and to give strength to all: now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise
thy glorious Name.

Us: that is, our selves and brethren: whence learn,

It belongs to every Christian to desire and procure the bodily welfare of
his neighbor. Abraham Sodom. Genesis 18. Psalm. 35.13 Act. 12.5.
David prayed for his enemies when they were sick. The Church prayed for Peter
when he was in prison. This duty is expressly commanded in James, where he
says, Pray one for another, James 5.14.15.16.

The law of charity does

They have need as well as



Iam. 1.27


viz. every man for himself. This doctrine teaches that every man must be for
his neighbor as for himself.

Amos 6.6.
and do not grieve for the afflictions of Joseph: nay they do afflict them
rather; 1. Ioh. 3.17
but how dwells the love of God in these men? For we may well assure our
selves, that those that will not lend their neighbors a prayer in their need,
will not give them wherewithal to supply their need.

There are many so far from wishing their neighbors welfare, that having
evil eyes, they envy their prosperity, and do seek their hinderance, by
pilfering, purloyning, cheating, and oppressing of them, desiring if they knew
how, to bring them to a morsel of bread: yea some grow to that height of
malice, that they do imprecate, curse, and pray (I tremble to name it) that a
mischief, and the plague of God or some untimely death, may seize upon them:
yet all these will sometimes in words of prayer say, Give us this day our daily
bread. What horrible impiety is this? (to say nothing of their unmercifulness
and injustice.) They do herein show themselves to be most abominable
hypocrites, and mockers of God. When the unmercifull man shall say, Lord
relieve the poor, but will not himself give him any relief, though he have
wherewith to give: when the envious shall say, Lord prosper them, yet fret at
it when they do prosper: when the malicious shall say, Give health, and at the
same time entertain murtherous purposes against them: when the persecutor
shall say, Lord give them liberty, yet plot how to lay them up, and keep them
in durance: when the unjust man shall pray, Lord give them bread, house, and
all other good means of life, yet at that time intends to steal their
goods, or detain wages and other dues, or to circumvent them by some cunning
device or other; or by depopulating enclosure, and laying down tillage, do
bereave them of houses and corn, turning them and theirs a grazing (for ought
they care) into the wide world, to learn new trades and means of living. If
all this be not palpable hypocrisy, manifest mocking of God to his face, what
is? But know, that tongue is set on fire of hell, Iam. 3.6.
which can pray to God for their neighbors in word, and yet at other times
curse and wrong them both in word and deed. All ye that do thus, abide in
death, says 1. John 3.14. and have not eternal life abiding in you, ver. 15.
And if Christ will say to all hypocritical unmercifull men, Mat. 25.41
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: for I was hungry, and ye fed me not:
where and how shall all hypocritical unjust persons appear?

especially to the household of faith. Gal. 6 10.
It must be done with our own goods: Pro. 5.17. Gal. 6 9.
it must be done in season, while we live, and have wherewithal, and while it
may do them good. In giving, be liberal, 2. Cor. 9.7.
also cheerful and constant. Let us remember them that be in bonds, Heb. 13.3.
as if we were bound with them; and them that suffer adversity, as if we were
in their case. If we join alm^^ with prayers, Heb. 13.16
they are excellent sacrifices, well pleasing unto God. Humanity and
Christianity both, do call for mercy at our hands; yea spiritual self-love:
for we do our selves good in relieving our brethren. Is not the hand a gainer,
when it has made hosen for the legs and shoes for the feet? Is not the
stomach benefited by cooking of meat for the rest of the members of the body?
We are members one of another. This doing of good to our brethren, is but
lending to the Lord, Pro. 19.17.
and he will repay with advantage. It is sowing in Gods ground, 2. Cor. 9.6.
which will recompense him that sows, with increase of an hundred fold at the
harvest. This is to make bags which will hold, Luke 12.33
and to lay up treasure in heaven, and to lay up in store for themselves a good
foundation. And we shall hear well of this another day, 1. Tim. 6.19.
when Christ Jesus at the day of judgment shall say, Mat. 25.34.35.36.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you: for I
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I
was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Wherefore let us all do
what in us lies to procure the welfare of our brethren.

Isaac could take away barrenness from Rebecca; Gen 25.21
and the supplications of one Eliah (who was also a man of infirmities a^ Iam.
5.17.18.
well as other holy men) could remove a dearth and famine: what cannot the
fervent prayers of so many faithful do, which cry to their common Father day
and night for them?

I know a discouraged heart, by the sleights of Satan, will sometimes turn
this honey into gall, saying, If God did love me, and if I were his child, since
I my self have prayed, and as you say the Saints on earth do daily pray, my
cross would have been removed; but my affliction abides: therefore sure I am
not Gods child.

I answer, thou may be the child of God, he may love thee, and may hear
both thy own and others prayers for thee, and yet the affliction may still
remain. For God never promised removal of crosses from his children, but
conditionally, namely, if it be good for him that is under the cross to be
delivered, then he never fails to deliver him, but if it be good for him to
be afflicted, it shall remain still. Again, God has no where told us the
time when he will deliver his: he knows the best times, which he will never
over-passe. But let it be granted, that thou never while thou live have this
or that particular cross removed, yet God hears thee and them, and your and
their prayers are heard, and return not empty. For they do procure some
measure of patience i^ thee, and contentment to sabmit thy self to thy Fathers
correction. They do also cause that the pains and crosses of the body and
outward man, shall turn to the good of the soal^, 2. Cor. 4.16.
and of the inward man, to the renewing of it daily. All things shall work
together for good? Romans 8.28
and God will assuredly give a good issue out of it, in life, or at death.

This day: that is, for this present day: here therefore we must observe,

The desires of temporal things are to be confined to the present day. Our
Savior says, Take no Matthew. 6.34.

Who is sure to live until to

God will have his children

God likes to see and hear

God looks for new acknowledgement of his gifts every day: therefore will
have that they shall have cause thereof by new gifts from him every day.



This reproves all carking have much goods laid up for many years; Luke 12.^0
and then are never a whit the better for it. The true disciples of Christ, are
subject, through weakness of faith, to fall into this fault: but they must be
chidden out of it, and must be warned of the mischiefs that attend this
fearfulness and distrust in God for what they shall have hereafter. It takes
away all sense and comfort of what they have in present: it provokes God to
give over providing for them, and to leave them to themselves, to learn to
know how little all their carking without God can avail them. And if he suffer
them to thrive in their course, that they reserve much for time to come, this
overplus of estate thus gotten, will breed nothing but pride, and trust in
riches, and many noisome lusts. Even as the Manna, Exodus 16.20.
which contrary to the commandment of God was reserved to the morrow, did breed
worms. Provision thus gotten, will stink and putrify, and do the owner more
harm than good; when the rust thereof shall witness against them, Iam. 5.
that they have heaped up treasures together against the last days.

be content, 1. Tim. 6.8.
and let him depend on God for the morrow. Let us care only for one thing,
which is, every day to do our Fathers works, which he has given us to do in
our general and particular calling, and we may assure our selves that such a
Father will make provision for such children, who if they need any thing, they
may make their requests known to him, with thanks for what they have had, and
with assurance of what they hope to have, Phil. 4.6.
and need be careful in nothing.

For God, according to the graciousnesse of his nature, and truth of his
promise, does care for them.

Does not this open a gap to idleness, improvidence, Pro 6.6.8.
which provideth her meat in Summer, and gathers her food in harvest: to
which silly creature, the Lord sends the sluggard to learn thrift and
providence. Does not this likewise disallow all laying up of money or
money-worth against old age, or for posterity?

for: yet these servants, if they be faithful, will be painful, and
provident for their master, that there may be plenty brought in, out of which
they might have their daily allowance. Therefore in harvest these servants reap
and carry into the barn more in one day than need be spent in many days: Yet
their care is but for the present, though their providence be for time to come.
So it is between the great Lord of all the earth and his servants, he
appoints every man his work in a lawful calling: a great part of his work
is to earne and gather in, such things as may maintain him and his, that there
may be meat in Gods family for a man's self, and for his fellow servants, as
God shall please to distribute. Here is labor, providence, and laying up by
the servant; but all is for the Lord his master. When much is thus gathered
into Gods barnes and storehouses (say they be men's own houses) yet this
servant should only expect his dinner, and supper, and other maintenance from
his master for the present day: leaving the care of provision upon God: it is
not meet he should be his own carver. This doctrine opposes only care of
distrust, and carking about what shall be had hereafter, doubting of Gods
providence, and success of their labors: but not the care of a wise
providence, to gather by lawful means things meet for this life; nor yet the
care for laying up for them and theirs; for God allows that when a man has
paid his debts, Romans 13.8. Eccles. 3.12.
and that he and his have comfortably enjoyed a part, according to the
condition of their place and occasions, and after that pious and charitable
uses have taken up another part, then the overplus may, nay must be saved and
reserved for afterward. Our Savior would have the remainder of the loaves and
fishes gathered up, Ioh. 6.12.
that nothing be lost. And it does belong to Parents to lay up for their
children, 2 Cor. 12.14.

It is comfortable to Gods on him according as he has commanded us, it
concerns him to provide for us. He has store, and great plenty, he will
provide for his children that which shall be sweet, and good, and enough. It
will not stand with his honor, that his children should want. No man under the
Sun can live more merrily, and more securely than Gods children may do: for
they need care for nothing but to please God. Though there are many things for
which they must labor in their calling, yet there is nothing for which they
need to care. The children of Israel might lie down and sleep securely in the
wilderness, when they had not one morsel of bread against to morrow; for the
morrow-day brought with it Manna, provision for to morrow: this was because God
sustained them. Psalm. 3 5. Psalm. 4.8.
This holy security we should always have, for it is the Lord which
sustaineth us also.

This day: Therefore bread must be asked every day. If this petition for bread,
then the other petitions also: whence we are taught,

Prayers must be made to God It was David's use, At evening, morning, and at
noone to pray, and cry aloud unto God, Psalm. 55.17. Daniel prayed three times a
day, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime: it was his custom,
Dan. 6.10.

The daily morning and evening sacrifice, appointed in the Law, does teach as
much.

Prayer and thanks are testifications

Gods glory, kingdom, and forgiveness of sins, and new supply of grace
every day.



hypocrites, Job. 27.10.
Will he always call upon God? says Job, He that will pray but seldom, but
now and then, may justly expect that God will hear him never: for of such he
says, Pro. 1.28.
They shall call upon me, and I will not answer. What shall I say then to
those, that do not only utterly neglect this duty themselves, but despise all
other that do make it their practice daily to call upon God? The Prophet does
set this as a brand upon Atheists, which in their hearts say there is no God.
Psalm 14.4.6.
They call not upon the Lord, says he. You shame the counsel of the poor,
because God is their refuge. But know ye, the Lord looks from heaven, and
does behold and punish such impiety and profaneness.

In concerns all Christians other words to the same effect) every day. It was
Christ's practice, and has been the manner of the faithful in all ages. Then
shall we hold a gracious familiarity with God our Father. Then will he hear
us always, and we shall ever have our requests granted, when it shall be best
for us. The case touching how often in a day we must pray.
If it be asked how often in one day prayers are to be made? I answer,
ejaculations and short liftings up of the heart should be very often, according
as sudden occasions shall minister cause: more set and solemn prayers should
be made ordinarily at morning, at meals, and at evening. These times do
always minister due cause of solemn prayer, and may ordinarily without
necessary lets be performed. Also at other times prayer must be made as there
shall fall out special cause. 1 These. 5.17.
For we must pray continually, that is, in every state and condition, and upon
every good occasion, when there is opportunity, then pray, and also praise God.
No certain rules can be given for any set number, how often; this is left unto a
man's Christian discretion, as his necessities, and as his opportunities do
vary. But to keep canonical hours, and to pray by stinted numbers, upon
beads, or otherwise as Papists do, is ridiculous and too too superstitious.

It will rejoice a Christian which one man's suit is heard, at which time other
men's suits must be put off to other days of hearing. Every man cannot have his
suit sped every day, no not every Term. But all Gods people may come to him by
Christ Jesus, and have their requests heard and granted in the Court of heaven
every day: yea seven times, and if need be, seventie times seven times in one
day.

Our: that is, such bread whereto we have true right and propriety. Hence we
are taught,

The maintenance whereupon a Christian may desire to live, must be his own. He
must have right both before GOD and man. Drink waters out of thine own
cisterne, Pro. 5.15. The Apostle commands that men should eat their own
bread, 2 These. 3.12.

If they have not a spiritual their marriage with Christ, it will be impure
unto them: for to the unbeleeving and defiled is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15.

To desire to live upon that

With what face then can with quietness work that they might have bread of
their own to eat) say, Give us our bread? 2. These. 3.10.12.
the Apostle says, such should not eat, until they have labored and gotten
wherewithal, by honest means. But more especially, how dare those that get
their living, and raise their estates by indirect and unlawful courses, such as
lying, stealing, defrauding, gaming, oppression, usurie, and such like means?
how dare (I say) these pray to God that he would give and bless to them their
own bread? when, what they have to eat, is the meat of wickedness, and what
they have to drink, is as the wine of violence? But we unto him that
increases that which is not his. Pro. 4.17.
Hab. 2.6.

a civil right. The special right is founded in Gods special love to his
children in and through Christ, which is added to their common right, namely, a
right of inheritance, which gives not only a right to the things themselves,
but to the blessing and comfortable use of the same; this is a spiritual right
derived to a believer through Christ. The want of this right is the cause, why
to the wicked, even the things which they lawfully possess, are, in their use,
impure. Tit. 1.15.
Hence it is that wicked men have not so good and so full a right to the good
creatures of God, as true believers have; nor yet can have so comfortable and
so sanctified a use of them as the godly may have; they never partake of the
good creatures of God, but he has to except against them, though not always
for the having; yet for the abusing, and for the unsanctified use of them. For
God gives meat, and so I may say of other things, to them that believe, 1.
Tim. 4.3.
and know the truth to be received with thanksgiving. Though men may have a
common right to the creatures of God without Christ; yet they cannot have the
special right, or blessing in the use of them, but by Christ.

For this cause it concerns us to do two things: First, make we sure to be
ingrafted into Christ the heir of all things, that through him, it may be
said, 1. Cor. 3 22.
All things are ours. Secondly, we must live in an honest calling, Ephesians. 4.28.
and therein labor with our hand or head the thing that is good: we must
work, that we may eat our own bread, having a civil right to what we
possess, as well as a spiritual. We must not think to be maintained, being
in a fruitful land, with Manna and Quails from heaven: for God will not allow
his servants to eat either the bread of idleness or wickedness.

Our bread. Here God gives his children leave to call bread, their bread:
whence observe,

Every child of God has a The meek have right of inheritance unto the
earth, Matthew. 5.5.

They have right in the right All things are yours, for you are Christ's, 1.
Cor. 3.22.

What they have is given godliness, 1. Tim. 4.8.
It has the promise of the life that now is. Wherefore, if they do also
possess their goods by a true civil right (which is the only determiner of
what and how much Christ does allow to be held in his right) they may assure
themselves they have a true right of their own.

than the riches of many wicked: Psa. 37.16.
so is their hold by a far better title than any of the wicked. And let them
comfort themselves in this, that what they have is their own, and that by
special right in and through Christ Jesus.

Since every believer has so scil. the Lord. Men may not therefore cast away
their goods in sport carelessly, nor spend them upon their lusts wickedly: for
though they may have a true right, yet is it a limited ^ight: it is such a
right as the wife has in her husbands goods, not such a right as the husband
has in himself. A wife may be bold to use her husbands goods, because she has
right to them by him: but she must use them according to his will, and for his
honor, else the husband may justly cut her short, and restrain her of her
former liberties. It is a profane speech to say as they in the Psalm, Our
tongues are ours, therefore we will speak: so to say, Our goods are our own,
therefore we will spend. For whosoever has best right to any thing, has a
chief Lord over him, by whom he must be ordered in all his expenses, to whom
he must give account in the day of reckoning.

Our bread, not others bread: whence we may note,

All things are not necessarily common amongst Christians. There is a
distinction of mine and thine, of ours and other men's. Each man has such a
propriety in that which he lawfully holds, that without his leave, or just
cause, no man ought to meddle with it. In the very time when community of
goods was most needful, Act. 4.22.
and when voluntarily the Saints made their goods common, even then, till a man
had passed away his right by his own act, the propriety and right was still
in himself. For thus says Peter to Ananias, While it remained, was it not
thine own? and when it was sold, was it not in thine own power? Act. 5.4.

God has set this order amongst men, that, Deuteronomy. 15.11.
liberality of the rich, and patience of the poor.

This confuteth the Anabaptists,

This doctrine likewise condemns to some abundance, and to them and some
others little or nothing; whereupon they grow bold to carve out something to
themselves out of the others pl^^tie: and they think they may do it, because
that other has enough. What is this but to control Gods wisdom, and to call
his absolute Soveraigntie into question? May not he do with his own as he
will? Mat. 20.15
Let every one therefore, as they are to rest satisfied with their own
yoke-fellowes, so rest contented with their own maintenance, that is, to live
only upon that maintenance, Exo 20.17
to which they have a true right when they use it.

Daily bread: that is, ordinary convenient maintenance. Here is no prayer for
abundance, but for daily bread: neither too much nor too little, but according
as shall be needful, be it fine or course, much or little. Whence note,

The desires of the things of Such was Jacobs prayer, namely, Gen 28.20
Preservation in his way, bread to eat, and raiment to put on. Agur in his
prayer, which is the best interpreter of this clause, daily bread, says, Pro.
30 8.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me.
Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content, says the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 6.8.

A man's life does not consist in Luke 12.13.

Abundance is 1. Tim. 6.9. Isa. 5.12.
dangerous disregard of God and his works, yea denial of God, as he says,
lest I be full and deny thee. Prove. 30.9. From thence likewise do grow
confidence in riches, 1. Tim. 6.17. Psalm. 123.4
high mindednes, and contempt of the poor. The heart thereby is stolen away,
and won to the love of the world, Matt. 22.
so much, that either it keeps men that they come not at all to the means of
salvation: They have bought a farm, they cannot come: or if they do come to
the preaching of the Word, and sit as Gods people before the Minister; yet they
do not profit, because their heart goes after their covetousness: Ezekiel. 33.31.
or if while they hear they begin to affect the Word, yet when they are gone,
the cares of this world and deceitfulness of riches choke the word, Mat 13.20
and they become unfruitful. 1. Tim. 6.9.10.
They that will be rich, says the Apostle, fall into temptation, and a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. For if once men affect and love riches, it becomes a root of all
evil, causing shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. Abundance is likewise
hurtful to the body, it does break men's sleep. So says Solomon: Eccles. 5.12
The abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. And out of this
fullness do breed surfets and diseases of all sorts.

A moderate estate, yea a little Agur prays, Pro. 30.8.9.
neither for poverty, nor riches, but for food convenient, lest if he be full,
he deny God, or if he be poor, he should steal, and thereby through practice
unbeseeming his holy profession, should dishonor Gods holy Name.



That a clear way may be made to the uses following, it shall be needful to
set down what is that moderate and convenient estate which the doctrine
speaks of. For this cause it must be considered, that things needful are of
two sorts, absolutely needful. respectively needful.


Absolute necessity is that, without which life of nature cannot be sustained,

Respective necessity is that, without which the personal and civil
condition of a man according to his calling, cannot be maintained.

Now whatsoever is needful in both these respects, is here meant. From this
distinction of necessity, arises a position, which will give light to this
point in hand: namely, that is needful, and may be prayed for by a man of one
calling and condition, which may not be desired of some other man of another
calling and condition, because respective or conditional necessity follows
the calling and personal condition of men. A King has need of greater means
to maintain his State, than any subject. And of subjects, one may have more
need than another, according to their different callings, employments, and
lawful expenses.

Yet one question requires an answer, scil. How much is that which is needful
and requisite for a man's place and civil condition of life? I answer in
general; Not what a man's self shall out of his covetous, or voluptuous and
vaineglorious conceits hold needful; for these know no limits: but what those
that be truly liberal, temperate, and godly wise, and what the examples of
frugall men in Scripture declare to be needful, that is to be held needful.
As for particulars, no rule can be given: for times, places, and conditions of
men do often vary the case: only this is most certain, that when a man's
desire is served, if this do but increase his thirst after more, like the
dropsie-mans desire of drink, he must know his desire is immoderate and
unlawful.

and ambitious men, who know no bounds, but still like the horse-leech cry
give, give, Pro. 30.15
More, more. Howsoever in words they say, Give us daily bread; yet in desire
they wish for the estate of Dives, Luke 16.19
to go gorgeously, and fare sumptuously every day. But be it known to all
such, that he that inlargeth himself as hell, and never thinks he has
enough; for him hell does enlarge it self, to receive him as it did Dives, to
be tormented in flames for evermore, Luke 16.24.

Who so has food and raiment, Agur, Pro. 30.8.^
as well against too much, as against too little. This will be a good proof
that we do not mind earthly things: and that howsoever the world may be to
us, it will hereby appear, that we are crucified to the world, and that we do
not care for it, so as to set our hearts upon it. It is not a sin to have
abundance; for Abraham, Job, David, and Solomon abounded in riches: but it is a
sin to affect wealth, and to desire to be rich. Yet great care must be had,
that greatness and plenty do not corrupt the owners thereof. Therefore
caveats are given to such in the Scripture, Psalm. 62.11
viz. that If riches increase, they do not set their heart on them. They that
be not high minded, 1 Timothy 6.17.
and that they trust not in them. They that forbear all intemperate use of
them: They must eat in due season for strength, Eccles. 10.17.
and not for drunkenness. Now that riches may not hurt those that possess
them, take this direction. Always behold God in them, Hos ^18. Deuteronomy. 8.18.
and acknowledge him to be the giver and absolute owner of them. Then will a
man use them for Gods honor, with thankfulness; and part with them when God
does take them away, with patience. Then will he, according as God has
commanded, let the plenty and overplus of his estate run over for good uses,
Pro. 5.16. 1 Timothy 6.18.
for the maintenance of Gods worship, and relief of the poor. This, like the
running of a spring, will keep the Wellhead from gathering filth, and from
breeding noisome vermin, which breed in standing waters.

Lastly, has God given unto

In the passage from this petition which concerns the natural life, unto
those which concern the spiritual life, it must be observed, that there is
but one short petition for the things that concern the natural life, whereas
there are two, and those larger petitions that concern that which is
spiritual. Whence learn,

The petitions for the things of this life, must be less insisted on, than
those which concern the life of grace. Though God give his children leave to
ask first for things earthly, yet he would have them seek chiefly for things
heavenly. With all thy getting, get understanding, says Solomon, Pro. 4.7.
Seek first, that is, chiefly, Gods righteousness, Mat. 5.33. Labor not for
the meat that perishes, that is, labor not for this, in comparison of that
meat which indureth unto everlasting life. Ioh. 6.27.


For the life of the body is nothing

The things of this life are

They therefore, whose desires mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19.



The fifth Petition.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Here follow those
petitions that concern the soul and eternal life: which as they do properly
tend to the exceeding great benefit of man, so do they most excellently serve
for the accomplishing the chiefest desire of every good man, namely, the
attaining of the glory of God, in the coming of his kingdom, and doing of his
will. For no man is accepted to be a subject of Christ's kingdom, until his
sins be forgiven; neither can any man do the will of God, until he be
sanctified, and have power against sin. Now because sin does hinder Gods
glory and man's happiness, our Savior directs his Disciples to deprecate
sin, and that in two respects: First in respect of the guilt and punishment,
from which they are to desire to be acquitted and justified. This is the
subject of the fifth petition. Secondly, in respect of the dominion and power
of sin, which is prayed against, and is the subject of the last petition.

These words, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, contain a
petition, Forgive us our debts. an argument to persuade him that asks
forgiveness, that he is capable of forgiveness, and that he may be assured
he shall be forgiven.


In the petition come to be considered the subject of it, Forgiveness of
debts. the circu^sta^ces which do set forth this forgiveness.


In the subject of this petition there are to be considered the act of
forgiveness, forgive, and the object whereabout forgiveness is exercised;
namely, our debts.

Debts, that is, sins; so Saint Luke says, Forgive us our sins. And because
it is set down in the plural number and indefinitely, by debts or sins, we
must understand all sins, both original and actual, venial or smaller
sins, deadly or greater sins; the smallest are not so little that they need
no pardon, and the greatest are not so heinous as that they cannot be pardoned.
Sins are called debts by similitude, because man stood bound by the law
(first written in man's nature, and after in tables of stone) unto perfect
obedience, with this obligation, Genesis 2.17. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
that If he continued not in all things written in the Law, the forfeiture was,
he should be accursed; which curse comprehended in it all miseries in this
world, and eternal destruction in the world to come. This forfeit Adam and Eve
did make, and in them all mankind, who daily add unto this debt by their
actual sins: the guilt and punishment of these sins are the object of
forgiveness.

Forgive. Forgiveness is an act of grace, whereby a man is acquitted from the
whole guilt, and is released of all the punishment of his sin, in such sort
that nothing can be laid to his charge. In this act of forgiving, Romans 8.33.
allusion is made unto the acts of creditors to their debtors, which stand
bound to them in obligations to pay certain sums of money, or upon not
payment to forfeit a far greater sum. Now when the debtor does make this
forfeit, and is no way able of himself to discharge it, if the creditor does
forbear to sue the debtor, and does freely cancel the obligation, and give to
him an acquittance of that debt, this act of his is, To forgive.

It is likewise resembled by the act of a King and a judge toward such
subjects as by transgressing the law, had forfeited their lives into the hands
of justice. Now when the King of his mere grace does remit the offense and
punishment, this is to pardon and forgive. Such an act as this, is that of Gods
forgiving of a sinner.

Now because forgiveness of sins is of the greatest consequence that can
concern man, and because justification of a sinner, and this act of
forgiveness is much mistaken, by some wilfully, by others ignorantly, I will
endeavor, in opening the meaning of this word (forgive) as distinctly, and as
clearly as I can, to show what our desire extends unto, when we say, forgive,
showing

First, what things do necessarily go before forgiveness of our sins.

Secondly, what it is to have them forgiven.

Thirdly, what are those immediate effects of forgiveness, which are
comprehended under it.

Before any man can have his sins forgiven, two things are required.

First, that satisfaction be made unto the justice of God, who is the party
offended by Sin.

Secondly, that there be a qualification of the party to be forgiven, by
faith, whereby he does apply to himself the interest which he has in the
satisfaction before mentioned.

For, although Gods forgiving of sins be in many things like man's forgiving of
men their trespasses; yet in this it differs much. Man by a mere single act
of mercy forgiveth without satisfaction, else it were no forgiveness: but in
Gods forgiving there is an act of mercy, mixed with justice. For the Scripture
says, that without shedding of blood, Heb. 9.22.
that is, without satisfaction, and expiation for sin, there is no remission.

Not but that God by his absolute power and mere mercy could have forgiven
man's sin without any satisfaction of his justice. Exodus 34.6
For mercy is as natural to God, as is justice, and God was in himself free
to either, being no more tied by his justice to punish sinners, than by his
mercy to forgive them. God does nothing, out of himself, by any natural
necessity, but does all things freely, according to the good pleasure of his
will. Ephesians. 1.9.
And if he had so pleased, he might as well out of his mere mercy have
pardoned a sinner without any satisfaction, as to account the guilt, and
inflict the punishment of man's sin upon another, upon Christ a surety, in
himself innocent, and to accept of that punishment for satisfaction.

But God, intending to bring more glory to his holy Name, and to show his more
abundant love unto man, in doing him a greater good, he did in his holy wisdom
make choice rather of saving man by a way of mercy tempered with justice,
whereby the glory of more of his Attributes and Excellencies might shine
forth; and man being by this way incorporated into Christ his Savior, his
salvation is made sure for ever. Whereas if God had by a single act of mercy
pardoned man, and then have left him to stand upon his own bottom, he had
remained in a great likelihood of falling again into a like state of
condemnation.

God intending thus to glorify himself, and to save man in a way of mercy,
but not without satisfaction to his justice, he knowing that no person in the
Godhead was capable, as God only, to perform any act of satisfaction to God;
knowing likewise that no mere creature could be of allsufficient power and
worthiness to satisfy his justice, or to stand as a Mediator between God and
man, they being at enmity by reason of sin: He therefore in his infinite
wisdom, and of his rich and free grace, did ordain his only begotten Son,
the second person in Trinity, now Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom he made man,
and all things else, and in whom all things consist, that he should become man,
by assuming into the person of his dietie, the very nature of man, consisting
of body and soul, to subsist in the dietie by a personal union, being to be
very God, and very man in one person; who being thus qualified to be a
Mediator, Romans 5.17, 18, 19. 1. Cor. 15.45.
he ordained him to be a second Adam, as a common root, and to stand as a
suerty in the stead of all those whom he co-ordained should be ingrafted into
him, and which should be made members of him, and be saved by him. Wherefore he
together ordained that with man's nature he should assume the guilt of sin,
Isa. 53.4. 2. Cor. 5.21. Romans 8.3.
and to be accounted as a sinner, and, by God himself, to be proceeded against,
as against a notorious sinner. For which cause he was to be accursed, not only
by being made subject to humane infirmities; but to be arraigned, condemned,
and withal to have the fierceness of the wrath of God due to sinners, poured
out and executed upon him. And that he should dye the accursed death, that by
death he might expiate sin, and through death he might overcome death, and
destroy him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14.
even man's greatest enemy, which is the devil. All this our Savior took upon
him, and perfectly fulfilled, Philip. 2.8.
being obedient even to the death of the cross, upon which he made that one
oblation, by the merit and efficacy whereof, Ephesians. 2 15
he slew the enmity, and made the atonement between God and us: having
obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12.
and became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb.
5.9.
perfecting for ever them that are sanctified; in that by the power of his
dietie he conquered, and rose from the death, Act. 2.24.
it being unpossible that he should be holden of it, Heb. 8.1.
and is set down on the right hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens,
Heb. 7.25.
ever living to make intercession for them.

Thus you see the first of those requisites which go before remission of
sins; namely, satisfaction of Gods justice, by the merit of those things
which Christ Jesus did and suffered in man's stead, He sheading his blood (as
he himself says) for many for the remission of sins. Mat. 2^ 28


The worth and efficacy of this satisfaction made, and redemption purchase^ by
the precious blood of Christ was greater than only to merit at Gods hands that
now (his justice being satisfied) he might forgive sins, and save men if he
would, upon any such possible condition as he should please to appoint, and
accept: for Christ by his death, resurrection, and intercession, deserved and
procured, that God should actually forgive; Job. 17.19. 1. These 5.9, 10.
and also give grace and eternal life to all those to whom Christ was ordained
to be an head and a Savior: Act 3.31.
even to all those who^, from before the beginning of the world, Ioh. 17 2.
God gave unto Christ, and were ordained to believe in Christ, and that should
be united to him by his Spirit.

A second thing required before that a man's sins shall be forgiven, Romans
10.^, 10.
is belief, and faith in Christ Jesus. For faith is the condition of the new
Covenant published in the Gospel; Ioh. 6.29.
and i^ is the bond of our spiritual union with Christ on our part, and is the
mean and instrument whereby we receive Christ, and do rely upon him, Ioh.
1.12.
and whereby we do apply him with all his merits and benefits unto our selves
unto our salvation. Ioh. 6.35.
This the Scriptures do hold so useful and necessary, that they ascribe our
justification by forgiveness of our sins unto it: Rom 5.1.
God accounting our faith, as he did Abraham's, To 4.3 5.
unto righteousness. But how is our faith accounted for righteousness? not as
it is a gracious quality inherent in us, and a part of our sanctification, but
as it has relation to Christ, who is our righteousness, and is the sole
object of our faith unto justification; for which cause we hold, against the
Papists, that we are justified by faith only. Of this it is that all, both
Prophets, Christ himself, Ioh. 3 16. Act. 10.43
and all the Apostles, have witnessed, namely, that through Christ's name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive forgiveness of sins.

By faith in Christ, I mean such a faith as is a sound, a lively and an
effectual faith; such a faith as has faith in the Law unto conviction of
sin, and unto penitence for sin, going before it; and a faith in the
precepts both of the Gospel and of the Law unto repentance of sin and
holiness of life concurring with, and following after it.

This condition of believing which does qualify a man for, and which does
interest a man into, the benefit of Christ's redemption, is not left, as Adams
standing or falling was, in the hands of a man's free will; for so there might
have been a possibility that all Christ's sufferings might have been in vain
and none might have been saved, namely, if none would believe. But Christ
dyed, and rose again, not only to satisfy Gods justice in the behalf of all
which were to be saved, but also to give them faith that they might indeed be
saved. For it is apparent by the Scripture, that the end why Christ dyed, and
gave himself a ransom for many, was not, Mat. 10.28
that only he might satisfy Gods justice, in which satisfaction man's
redemption does virtually consist, but that also God by him might give faith
unto all which were ordained to eternal life, Act. 13.47.48.
by which their redemption and salvation (purchased with Christ's blood) might
actually, in the time appointed by God, exist, and take effect in them. For
faith is one of those blessings wherewith God blesses, Ephesians. 1.3.4.15.
in and through Christ, all whom he chose in him before the foundation of the
world. It was not enough for man's redemption and salvation, Heb. 10.14.15.16.17.
that Christ by his once offering of himself, should only begin to save
man, but by the same he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
Wherefore the promise of the new covenant is (as the holy Ghost witnesses)
that he will put his laws in their hearts, and in their minds, he will
write them, that is, h^e will give them faith and repentance; and their sins
and iniquities he will remember no more. Here we see that God promises to
give knowledge of him, and faith in him, as well, as to forgive their sins,
nay therefore he gives faith, and the knowledge and fear of him, that (in a
way of mercy mixed with justice) he may forgive, that so (as he says) (...)
righteousness being ou^ (...) faith, Romans 3.26.
God might be just, (...) justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Christ,
elsewhere, is said to have given himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, which cannot be meant by
satisfying Gods justice only, that so God if he pleased, might forgive
iniquity, and that man if he pleased, might believe (as the diefiers of man's
free will would have it) but that he might purify us to himself, (which he
works by his spirit, in the exercise of our Act. 15.9
faith) to be a people zealous of good works. This is the very end why God
raised Christ and exalted him with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, namely, to give repentance, as well as forgiveness of sins. He does
not say, Act. 5.32.32.
to give forgiveness of sins to the Israel of God, if they will believe and
repent; but he says absolutely, to give repentance, that is, faith, and
amendment of life, that their sins past might actually be forgiven. Though
faith be not in the text named, yet it is understood in the word repentance,
faith being the first part of repentance, whereby an unbeleever turns from
his unbelief, and becomes a believer, from whence follows the whole change
of a man by repentance to new obedience. In this sense repentance is also
taken, Acts 2.28. as will appear if we compare Saint Paul's answer to the
Iaylours question, Acts 16.31. with that of Saint Peter's, both answering to one
and the same question in effect: Peter says, Repent and be baptized, Paul
says, Believe and be baptized. So that if Christ dyed and rose again to give
repentance and remission of sins, he dyed and rose again, and was exalted to
give faith and forgiveness of sins.

Faith (considerable in and about forgiveness of sins) is either primary, or
secondary.

The first is a believing in Christ, that through him our sins may be
forgiven, and that we through him may be saved.

The second is a believing that our sins are forgiven, and that by Christ we
shall be saved.

The first is a single and direct act of the soul, Ioh. 1.12.
receiving Christ, and relying upon Christ, and upon the promise of
forgiveness and salvation by him; by virtue whereof a man is united to Christ,
and is ingrafted into him, and before God is justified.

The second is a reflect act of the soul whereby in a man's conscience he has
some spiritual sense that he does believe in Christ, and that God has
forgiven him his sins, and has justified him through Christ, by which act
God does by his spirit speak peace and comfort to a man's soul, which is not
that faith whereby we stand just before God, but that whereby we are assured
our sins are forgiven, and that we are in state of grace through Christ.

The primarie faith is that which is to be chiefly prayed for, in the behalf
of our selves and others before conversion. The secondary faith is chiefly to
be prayed for in the behalf of our selves and others after we believe, and are
in state of grace and salvation.

Christ's righteousness, whereby a man is justified before God, in that it was
performed by Christ for man, unto God, is virtually, and in way of right, man's
righteousness, even before he does actually believe, and that because by the
decree of God the Father, and in the purpose of Christ it was performed for all
that should through him believe. But this righteousness of Christ is not
accounted to a man, nor yet is his in possession and use until he do indeed
believe, (I speak of men of years) by that primary faith before spoken of;
nor yet is Christ's righteousness ours in any comfortable sense of it to our
selves, until we believe by that secondary faith before mentioned.

Now, secondly, I am to show what it is to have sins to be forgiven.

Forgiveness in proper speech is an act of Gods mercy in not imputing or
accounting to a man his sins, and thereupon, in not punishing him for sin.
Which act is called also in Scripture, a taking away sin. A covering of
sin, a blotting out of sin, a casting it behind his back, and the like.

To forgive sin, not to impute sin, and to be justified and discharged from
the guilt and punishment of sin is all one. Act. 13 38.39.


Here the sense of forgiveness of sin is to be enlarged, and taken
synechdocically, for our whole justification and salvation; that is, not only
for freedom from guilt and punishment of sin unto eternal death; but also
for acceptance unto favor by the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto
eternal life.

In this justification, these two things are to be considered: First, the very
act of forgiveness of man's person, in respect of Gods not accounting him a
sinner. Secondly, the application, and manifestation thereof unto a man's self,
whereby a man has assurance that his sins are pardoned, and does actually
enjoy the benefits that follow forgiveness. Forgiveness in both these
respects are here meant. That this may be fully and plainly understood,
consider the whole order of justification. It is first in the gracious purpose
of the Father, to forgive and justify a sinner; wherefore with the Son and
holy Ghost he did fore-appoint him thereunto. Secondly, it is in the Son, who
being God and man, did actually by his death and resurrection purchase this
forgiveness. Thirdly, it is in the holy Ghost, who does actually apply the
grace and merit of Christ, and so makes a sinner capable of the favor and
mercy of the Father, through the merit of the Son. When this application is
made, Christ actually by way of intercession, presents the sinner unto his
Father, who thereupon does actually receive him into favor. Now, after this
act of acceptance of a man into favor is passed with GOD, through Christ, then
the holy Ghost does make application of it unto the conscience of him that is
accepted.

In the justification of a sinner, there is a blessed concurrence of the
special acts of the three Persons in the blessed Trinity. God the Son having
made satisfaction, does also make intercession for him; God the Father having
imputed his sins to his surety Christ, cease to account them unto him, and,
accounting Christ's righteousness to him, he accepts of him as most
righteous. The holy Ghost having made an inseparable union between Christ and
the sinner, he does seal and ratify this his justification unto him.

It must be diligently observed, that though justification be but one
individual act in respect of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in the first act
of Faith, and conversion of a sinner, whereby the person of a man stands
justified before God, and shall, without intercision of justification and loss
of this favor of God, stand before the bar of Gods tribunal, and is, and
always shall be absolutely justified and acquitted from all sins past,
present and to come, because all obligations and handwritings against him, are
in that act cancelled and blotted out: he forgiving all trespasses, Colos.
2.13.14. Yet it must be known, that of this act there is (as it were) a double
sentence: First, in Court of heaven, at which time the elect in Christ have
their names enrolled in the book of Gods effectual calling, and are numbered
among the just, which sentence can never be revoked or blotted out: this is
that which was passed with God (that I may so speak, after the manner of men)
in the first act of conversion. Secondly, this sentence of forgiveness is
passed in the court of the conscience of him that had the former sentence
pronounced for him in heaven. This sentence is the second act of the holy
Ghost, wrought in this manner. First, after that a sinner is co^vinced of his
guiltines of sin, and of his damnable condition because of his sin, then
forgiveness is offered, and pronounced to the ear in that gracious promise of
salvation to all that believe in Christ Jesus, which promise is proclaimed in
the ministry of the Gospel, in which light of the Gospel, he shows unto a
man possibility of salvation, setting before him (I speak of men of years and
understanding) Christ the means of salvation; and by this means the holy
Ghost works faith in Christ; then confession and grief for sin; then
prayer to ask forgiveness; and grace to live godly, and then does witness to
his spirit that he is accepted of God. Thus sentence is pronounced in the
conscience: from whence arises sense of Gods love, which is called the
shedding abroad of the love of God in our hearts by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
also sense of the loving countenance of God, Psalm. 4.6 7.
which is the sign of his loving kindness, and is that speech of God, by
which he does say to our souls, he is our salvation, and then arises in our
hearts peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.

This sentence of forgiveness unto the conscience has different degrees: it
is sometimes more clear in the apprehension of the soul, sometimes more dim,
yea sometimes quite blotted out in the counterpane of our release, or copy of
our acquittance; as it was with David, Psalm. 51. so that a person perfectly
just before God, has sometime little or no sense or apprehension of it in his
own conscience, but doubts whether he be in state of grace or no. Which
happens because of the stain and guilt of new sins, which guilt abides in
the conscience, until a man do confess his sins, repent, and ask
forgiveness, and, by a renewed faith, apply forgivenes: by which means the
evidence of his pardon is again by the holy Ghost exemplified, and sentence by
this new application is again pronounced in his conscience; whence arises new
assurance of salvation, and renewed joy in the holy Ghost.

This is that justification, which for distinction sake, Divines call
justification by parts, or continued, or repeated justification, or new
application of one and the same justification: which justification though in
respect of the sentence pronounced in heaven, is one individual act, whereby a
man stands always just before God; yet in respect of the pronouncing of that
sentence to the heart, it is not actually applied; neither can a particular
sin be said to be every way actually forgiven, until after it have been
committed, is confessed, and repented of; nor until forgiveness be asked, and
until the holy Ghost has made new application thereof unto the conscience,
through renewing of faith, by which a man does again and again, as new sins
are committed, apply the merits of the blood of Christ unto his soul. Also it
must be known that the sentence of pardon which is passed in heaven with God,
is not fully executed until the last degree of it, when sentence of absolution
shall be pronounced by Christ Jesus: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matt. 25.34. It
must moreover be conceived and held, that notwithstanding this distinction of
justification between an absolute justification in respect of God, and a
justification by parts in respect of application to man's conscience, there are
not two kinds of justification, a first and a second, as the Papists hold: but
one and the same justification, considered in different respects. In respect of
Gods actual acceptance of a man's person, justification is absolute; but in
respect of the actual application and manifestation of Gods acceptance unto a
man's conscience, justification is by parts and degrees. When a man already
justified asks forgiveness, he does not ask a new justificatio^, but a
second or new application of pardon unto the conscience of those particular
sins which are daily committed, together with continuance of Gods favor, and
more clear evidence that he is sealed up unto the day of redemption.

The third thing to be spoken of for the better understanding the word
[forgive] concerns the effects following the apprehension thereof; these are
Peace of conscience, Rom 5.1. To. 14.17.
and joy in the holy Ghost.

These things touching justification and remission of sins being opened, we
may understand what is prayed for, when we say, Forgive sins. We pray,
first, that those which belong unto Gods election, but are not yet converted,
may be accepted of God through Christ Jesus, God not imputing their sins to
them, but unto Christ, whereby they are freed from the curse. We pray likewise
that Christ's righteousness may be imputed to them, that they believing in
Christ, might be saved; and for that cause pray, that they may believe.
Secondly, we pray that our selves and others being justified and accepted into
favor, it would please the Lord to continue this his favor, and that he would
signify and make the same known to our hearts and consciences daily, by a new
testification of the holy Ghost, accompanied with a new application of pardon
for new sins daily committed, and that we may have more and more assurance
of our perfect redemption at the day of judgment; and that we may have peace
of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, in the mean time.

The particular circumstances in this Petition come next to be laid open,
which are three: First, the connection of this Petition by this copulative (and)
that is, As well forgive sins, as give daily bread. The second is, the person
who is to forgive, that is, God the Father, through the satisfaction and
mediation of the Son, by the application of the holy Ghost. Thus much is
employed in forgive, in which the person God is understood.

The third circumstance concerns the persons prayed for, (us) that is, the
same persons mentioned in the fourth Petition, namely, our selves, and all our
neighbors living upon the earth, that belong to Gods election, be they
already justified or not justified.

As we forgive. These words contain an argument to encourage him that prays,
to ask forgiveness. The Evangelist Luke says, for we forgive: which place in
Luke does interpret this in Matthew. The particle (as) does import a
resemblance, from an act of ours toward man, of that which we would have God
do for us; but it does not denote either the measure or manner how we would
have God forgive us, but only a certainty of the truth of their own
forgiving of others. And although this (as), and (for) in Luke, show that these
words are a reason and argument to move us to ask and expect forgiveness from
God; yet it does not imply that our forgiving of others is the cause why God
should forgive us: but arguing from the less to the greater, argues thus: We
do, and can forgive; therefore God can much more forgive us also. This is but a
proposing of their estate and condition unto God, reasoning from a sign of
Gods love and grace toward them, that they have cause to expect forgiveness.
In like manner (for) is used, Luke 7.48. Her sins which are many, are
forgiven, for she loved much: where the woman's love was not a cause of great
forgiveness, but a fruit and sign of Gods forgiveness. So that in these
words he that prays, does represent to his own thoughts, and does utter unto
God thus much: That since he himself that has but a drop of mercy, yet could
and did forgive; and since this power in them to forgive others, proceeded from
a reflexe of his mercy toward them, and so was an argument that he already
loved them; therefore they are bold to ask and expect forgiveness of him, who
is infinite in mercy, and has begun to show mercy to them already.

The sense of this whole Petition may be rendered thus: O Lord God, who art the
only forgiver of sins, since we cannot glorify thy Name, neither can our
lives be pleasing to thee, or comfortable to our selves, so long as thou art
unreconciled to us, and so long as thou hidest thy loving countenance from us:
be pleased therefore through Christ, whom thou have made to be our redemption,
to be reconciled to me, and to all thine elect upon the earth: impute not our
sins to us, but free and acquit us from the whole guilt and punishment of all
sins, small and great. For this cause we confess our sins, and do believe
thy promise of forgiveness, Lord help our unbelief. Impute likewise the
righteousness of Christ unto us, and grant that thy Spirit of Adoption may
daily make more and more application of forgiveness to our hearts, untto he
f^^ assurance of hope, that we may have peace of conscience, joy in the holy
Ghost, and in the end everlasting life. Lord this thou can easily and will
readily do; for even we, that have but a small measure of compassion, forgive
those that wrong us. And since by this our forgiving of others,. we know thou
have begun to forgive us, continue therefore thy grace; and certify daily to
our hearts, that thou art our salvation.

And forgive us our sins. If it be observed how this Petition is joined to
the former, intimating, that natural life without forgiveness of sin, will
little avail a man: and if it be considered that forgiveness of sins (in
that sense as has been delivered) is the subject of this Petition, we may
note,

It concerns all men to desire with the application and assurance thereof to
their hearts and consciences by the holy Ghost. They must desire that God would
not impute their sins, but impute Christ's righteousness unto them, that they
may be delivered from all guilt and punishment of sin, and may be heirs of
glory; and that he would daily pass the sentence hereof to their conscience.
Hoseah says, Hos. 14.2.
Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously. The Prophet David to whom the Prophet
Nathan had pronounced forgiveness of his murder to his ears, 2 Samuel 12.13.
yet because God had not pronounced it to his heart, but withdrew his
countenance from him, he is therefore earnest with the Lord, saying, Purge me
with hysop, Psalm. 51.7. to 13.
make me hear joy and gladness. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out
all mine iniquities. Renew a right spirit within me. Restore to me the joy of
thy salvation.

Until sins be forgiven, Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
made him hide his face from you, that he will not hear. And, We have
transgressed and have rebelled, says Jeremy, thou have not pardoned. Thou
have covered thy self with a cloud, Lam. 3.42.44.
that our prayer should not pass through. If a man be not in state of grace,
his prosperity in this life does but fat him against his day of slaughter; and
increase of his days are but a multiplication of his sins, against the day
of account. And he may look for death to arrest him every day, which if it do
before his sins be remitted, he shall be found in his sins at the day of
judgment, to his everlasting perdition. If a man be in state of grace, yet if
by new sins the Lord be provoked to withdraw his loving countenance, and to
show tokens of his displeasure against him, his life becomes unprofitable,
and uncomfortable, until God speak peace to his soul again. He cannot come
boldly into Gods presence to pray, hear, or receive the Sacrament: or if he
do come, he is very heartlesse in the performance of them, and all that a man
has, though it be a kingdom, can give him no comfort, Psalm. 32. Psalm. 51.
as it was in David's case. But when God forgiveth sins, God of an enemy
becomes a friend, and of a displeased Father, begins to look graciously
upon his child: from this pardon it is that a man is freed from all misery,
and by the assurance and sealing of pardon to the conscience, do follow peace
of conscience, freedom and liberty of heart, to come before GOD at all times,
and in the end everlasting life.

Until sins past be pardoned, Luke 7.47.^7.
until much be forgiven, no man can love much; for to whom little is forgiven,
the same loves little, says Christ. A man is not sanctified until he be
first justified: he can never repent, and live holily in time to come, until
he have hope that all his sins past are pardoned. But when a man by a lively
faith, does lay hold on Christ for pardon, the same faith does draw virtue from
Christ, whereby (...) does kill sin, and is quickn^^ in the inward man. And
nothing makes man so fearful to offend, and careful to please God, for time
present and to come, as a firm persuasion of Gods love to him, in pardoning
his sins past. Now this pardon must be sought for in Christ, and must be
applied by faith; because Christ Jesus is the Mediator, who has satisfied for
sin, and has made a way for Gods mercy: and faith is the only instrument on
man's part, to apply this remission and redemption.

The particulars comprehended in this point, may easily be gathered by that
which has been said in the interpretation of (forgive:) namely, that in
asking forgiveness, we ask freedom from the guilt, and punishment of all
sin: we ask eternal life, together with reference to the means, namely,
Christ; therefore we (...) faith to apply Christ, and a daily certificate by
the spirit, that our sins are pardoned. Also we ask assurance, and the
fruits of assurance of forgiveness in this life, viz. peace of conscience, joy
in the holy Ghost: The particulars being remembered, the uses follow.

If forgiveness of sins be in seeking remission of sins by Christ Jesus,
they have no thoughts of making their calling and election sure. Nay, because
they would be thought to have reason for what they do, in not seeking for
assurance of salvation, they would make themselves and others believe, that it
is impossible to be attained, and that to be sure of salvation is high
presumption. If they can provide for their bodies, they will trust God with
their souls, they hope that he that made them will save them: they confess
they be sinners, and who are not? Thus slightly they pass over their
Justification, a matter of the greatest consequence of any thing that can
concern them. But what does this argue, but that they are ignorant and
senseless of their miseries: for if they knew they were cast and condemned,
they would, as in case of life and death, beg pardon, as a prisoner at the
bar would beg for his life. If these men did not love their sin, and
flatter themselves, presuming of God, that he will be merciful notwithstanding
their abominable sins, they would never neglect that invaluable benefit of
remission of sins. But let them not catch hold and rest on these presumptuous
hopes, they will deceive them, for they be but the hypocrites hopes, like
spiders webs; the Beesome of death puts an end to them all. Then, God will
show that he can be merciful to the vessels of mercy, and yet be just in the
damnation of all that neglect so great salvation, offered by such gracious
means as by (...) pardon, if they would heartily ask it.

This should move all men to assurance thereof to their conscience. He that is
in danger of an execution upon his body, to imprisonment or to death, or that
has not evidence for his lands and possessions, cannot rest nor have any
quiet, until he have a pardon, and have gotten better evidence. Motives
inducing to the asking forgiveness
Were we but spiritual to apprehend the miseries that abide men until sin
be pardoned, namely, that we are exposed to Gods eternal wrath; and if we did
prize heaven at so high a rate as it deserves, it being an inheritance
incorruptible, reserved in the heavens: and if we did but well consider, that
if the pardon of the sins even of Gods people be not made known and sure to
their hearts, though their sins shall not damn them indeed and for ever, Psalm.
32. Psalm. 51:
yet they damn them in their own sense and feeling for a time, through horror
of conscience, as it was with David. And if we did but consider, that the peace
of God passes all understanding, and that there is nothing would make us so
comfortable to our selves, nor so fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as assurance of salvation: and if we held him to be only the blessed
man whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.
and whose sin is covered; we would use all means to have faith in Christ;
we would importune God, and give him no rest, until he had pardoned our
sins, and sealed the pardon to our conscience by his Spirit, which is the
seal of our redemption.

Forgive. The person of whom Forgiveness is asked, is our Father which is in
heaven: wherefore it follows,

It is God that forgiveth sins. conclude that it belongs to God only to
forgive sins. I, Isa. 43.25.
even I, am he, says God, which blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. Daniel says, To the Lord our God
belongs mercies and forgivenesses, Dan. 9.9. With the Lord is mercy, and
plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130.7. And it was a true position among the Jews,
that none could forgive sins but God only, Mark. 27.

To forgive iniquity, transgression, Exodus 34 7.
and sin, is a branch of his name, therefore peculiar to God.

David when he had committed adultery and murder, Psalm. 51.4.
said, Against thee only have I sinned.

perfect and most holy law, and against an infinite God: so that there must be
infinite merit in the Mediator, and infinite mercy in him which through the
Mediator shall pardon sin, which infiniteness is only to be found in God.

Men are to forgive their brethren,

Distinction must be made,

Ministers are allowed by God himself to remit sins, Ioh. 20.23.

Ministers remit sins ministerially, in Christ's name, pronouncing only Gods
forgiving of sin; as Nathan said to David. 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin: But they do not forgive sins authoratively,
as from themselves.



God, and not to any creature, living or dead.

Psalm. 86.5.
for David says, He is plenteous in mercy unto all them that call on him. What
though our sins have abounded, both for greatness and number: The grace of
him that pardons abou^deth much more: For with God is plenteous redemption,
Psalm. 130.7.

All that believe this, and have Who is a God like thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage?
Micah 7.18. And with David, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy Name, who forgiveth all thine iniquities. Psalm. 103.1.3.

Forgive: this implies a free gift, wherefore if justification be by
forgiveness of sin, we may conclude,

Salvation is by the free grace The Apostle says, We are justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.24. Also he
says, And you has he quickened, being dead in your sins, having of his
grace forgiven you all trespasses: so the word forgive there signifies, (...).
Col. 2.13. And God himself says, I, even I, blot out thy transgression, for
mine own sake. Isaiah 42.25.

Either salvation must be of grace, Romans 11.6.
for then grace were no grace, or works were no works. But salvation is not of
works, therefore of mere grace, according to that of the Apostle, By grace are
ye saved through faith, not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of
works, lest any man should boast. Ephesians. 2.8.9.

it was purchased, and merited for us.

I answer: of Gods grace, and yet of merit, and therefore of justice; herein is
no contrariety, if we distinguish, and consider different respects; In respect
of Christ, our justification and salvation is of merit, and is an act of Gods
justice; but in respect of us it is of grace, and is an act of Gods mercy. It
is true that salvation is purchased for us: but who did it? was it not God the
Son? Man did not, nor yet can he purchase his own redemption. And though we
be saved by that purchase of Christ, how were we ordained thereto? How was
Christ ordained and became a purchaser for us? How came we to have the Gospel
preached, and to have faith by the preaching thereof, and the earnest of the
Spirit joined to our faith? Is not all this of Gods free grace? Therefore the
Apostle when he speaks of redemption through Christ's blood, he adds,
through his rich grace, Ephesians. 1.4.5.6.7.

Had man stood in equal terms with God, when he entered into covenant with
him; and the tenor of the covenant had been that he must keep the Law, or be
damned, except he himself could procure a sufficient suertie to suffer, and be
damned for him. If man had then procured for himself such a suertie, and the
same suertie had made satisfaction; in this case, Gods aquitting the offender
had been a mere act of justice. But Adam stood bound alone, without a
suertie, and, he having sinned; both the new covenant, and the suertie in whom
it was established, and all the means, whereby a sinner is saved are of Gods
gracious appointment, accomplishment, and acceptance; he glorifying himself by
saving sinful man in a way as well of infinite mercy, as of infinite justice.
Hence it is, since the price was of Gods gracious ordination, and was paid by
Christ as well very God, as very man, the greater the price and satisfaction
was, the greater is the mercy and grace of God, in pardoning by such a means.
So that free grace in God, and such a purchased redemption by God for man, can
stand well together. Indeed our salvation in respect of Christ is purchased,
for he has paid dear for it. Therefore when he does mediate for us to his
Father, he can, and does hold forth his merits and satisfaction for us; that
his Father may see that now the Law is satisfied, he may without impeachment of
his justice be merciful to such whom Christ does present unto him: But in
respect of us, salvation is every way of Gods free grace.

Luk 17.10
he is an unprofitable servant.

and find that they have nothing in them to pay for a release, or ransom?
here yet they may see grace, yea free grace in God. If we will but ask
forgiveness, 2. Cor. 5.20.
and accept forgiveness (for God sueth to us by his Ministers to be reconciled
to him) and if we would be thankful for forgiveness, his name and nature is
to be gracious: he must deny himself, if he do not of his free grace forgive,
and save us.

Forgive, does import remitting of guilt and punishment of sin. Whence, since
justification is by forgiveness, this follows:

All that are truly justified, are The Apostle says, There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1. He says likewise, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Romans 8.33.

Isa. 53.4.5.6.
for it is said, He bare our griefs, and carried our sorrows. And he was
wounded for our transgressions: and the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us
all. And Christ is said, By himself to have purged our sins. Hebr. 1.3.
Wherefore if all the guilt and punishment be satisfied in Christ, it must not
be thought that God will at a punish any that are saved by Christ.

David's adultery and murder, yet reserved for him temporal punishment: and
the like may be observed in Gods dealing with many others, wherefore sin may
be pardoned, yet as punishment not remitted.

evils did befall David after his sin was pardoned; and the like does befall
other of Gods children: but it must be known, that those afflictions were not
satisfactorie punishments, or had any respect unto the justification of those
that were therewith exercised; but they only had respect unto their further
sanctification. The same evils in different persons, namely, the godly and the
reprobate, are of different natures, and are sent of God for different
purposes: in the wicked they are signs of his wrath, but to his children they
are signs of his love; Heb. 12.
they are to the wicked plagues, and forerunners of destruction, but they are
unto the godly corrections unto instructions: they are only Gods physic, to
purge out the corruption, and to abate the power of sin, and are means
leading to sanctification, as I said, but have no respect of satisfaction in
any degree unto justification.

Christ, that he should pay so great a price for the redemption of man from
eternal punishment, and yet should leave him to himself to satisfy for
temporal.

The hearts of all that believe freely redeemed, but that they are also fully
redeemed from all punishment temporal and eternal. If temporal chastisements
be inflicted, God does send them in love, either as trials of his graces
wherewith he has endued them, or as physic to prevent or remove the
corruption of sin which yet remains in them; they do only serve to show
what grace they have, or prepare and make way for that grace they shall have.
Crosses are not curses to them, but blessings: for, Blessed is the man whom the
Lord corrects, and teaches him out of his Law. Psalm. 94.12.

Us: that is, the Disciples as well as others. The Disciples were already
justified, yet by Christ's direction, even they must every day make this
petition, even as often as for daily bread: whence learn,

The best of Gods children, notwithstanding they be already justified, must
every day ask forgiveness of their sins. Daniel prayed every day, Dan.
6.10.
and in his prayer he confessed and asked forgiveness for his own sins, and
the sins of the people, Dan. 9.19.

Iam. 3.2.
and in something or other do sin daily; therefore had need to ask
forgiveness daily.

to present it self before God, or if it do come into Gods sight, those many
sins are confessed and prayed against but confusedly and in gross, for the
most part.

In asking forgiveness, a man forgive) new applications to the conscience of
pardon of the sins, which daily he does commit, with a further ratification
of assurance of salvation unto his heart. It is not enough that the pardon of
man's sin be actually passed with God, but this pardon must be sued out, that
the same may also be passed in a man's conscience: and this must be renewed
daily, even as the conscience is blurred and stained with sins daily; else a
man shall have little fruit or comfort of that general and original pardon
which stands upon record for him in the heavens. The Lord has in most
excellent wisdom ordered, that the justification of a sinner should be in
this manner, namely, though it be a perfect and absolute act of God, whereby
the person of every membere: Christ, in the very instant of actual ingrafting
into Christ, stands acquitted of all sins, yet in respect of the
application of it by the work of the holy Ghost, and in respect of the full
execution of it, he will that it shall be made known to man by parts and
degrees, and that he shall wait for the full execution of it until the day of
the Lord. For this makes a man conceive more hainously of sin, and to be
more circumspect that he do not commit it; it makes him more earnest to pray
that it may be forgiven, and it makes him more heartily thankful when it is
forgiven.

If any dream of perfection

By this it appears, that sins else our Savior would not have framed this
petition of asking forgiveness, for the use of Peter, and the rest of the
Church in case of their failings. And if God require that one man forgive
another, not only every day, but seven times in one day; then God will much
more forgive his children if they sin often in one day, if they do but
confess their sins, and ask him forgiveness.

God be upon them, Danger of deferring to obtain forgiveness of sins.
or until some especial cause of humiliation be offered; then through disuse
they are much to seek: for time has caused many sins to be forgotten, and
custom of lying long in sin does harden the heart, that it does not distaste
sin as it might have done when it was first committed. Hence for the most
part comes slight, general, and confused confessions and prayers: or if they
set themselves more carefully to search out their sins, (it having been long
since they made their peace with God) the multitude of their sins come so
thick to their remembrance, and do so affright their conscience, that their
souls are much perplexed through despair. All these inconveniences would be
avoided, if they had asked forgiveness of every days sins every day.

But of all men they are most too blame, that make no care of obtaining
forgiveness till age and death, when often times death gives them no warning,
or if it do, pains and sickness take up the whole man, that as for the most
part they have no heart, because their hearts are hardened through long custom
of sin, so they have time little enough then, to attend and seek ease and
health for the body, which is in the sense of misery. And then it shall be
just with God, to reject them in sickness and old age, which in their health
and youth would not accept of forgiveness when he offered it.

Wherefore it shall be every pardon, and to make his peace with God every day.
It is not safe to suffer sins to lie long unconfessed and unpardoned, lest it
fester. Green wounds are soonest cured, with most ease to the Patient* if
David had ^ake^ pardon for his adultery that day he did (...) it, he had not
murdered Vriah: for sins lying unpardoned, beget other sins daily. And if he
had relented at the bloody fact of killing Vriah, and presently repented, it
would not have cost him so much horror of conscience as it did. Ask pardon
therefore every day, then w^ sins be more particularly confessed, and more
distinctly, and earnestly prayed against, and pardon will be sooner granted,
and that with less horror of conference.

much affright and burden the heart of many of Gods dear children, in so much
that they are afraid to come so often to God for pardon of the same sin: yea
sometimes they doubt whether they be in state of grace. This Doctrine does
serve to remove this doubt, and these fears. This salve which Christ has
prescribed to cure such sores, shows that it is incident to his own
Disciples to have need of it. And since he has appointed a remedy for sins
committed after conversion, namely, every day to ask forgiveness, and more
assurance of his favor: let us daily use this remedy, assuring our selves that
this days sins confessed and prayed against, shall be forgiven as well as any
committed and forgiven heretofore. As the body has relapses into the same
diseases, and the same physic may be used to recure them: so the soul has
relapses, and the same remedy which before has done good, may and must be used
again to recover them.

Us: that is, all such who in judgment of charity now are, or may be Gods
children. Hereby our Savior teaches,

Every Christian ought to desire and endeavor that others may have their
sins pardoned, and their souls saved as well as their own. Our Savior
says, Father forgive them, Luke 23.34. If a man see his brother sin a sin
which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them, 1
Ioh. 5.16. Daniel he prayed for forgiveness of the sins of the people, Dan.
9.19.20.



praying for the greatest good unto them, namely, forgiveness of sin, and
peace with God.

Love to the Church and common Ezra to pray for the people, fearing lest God
should be angry with them, till he had consumed them: because they had married
strange wives, Ezra 9.10.14.

Wherefore all that hinder they use all devices to keep them from hearing the
word where it is preached, or do use any enticing or compulsive means to draw
them into sin. Thousands there be of this sort, gross hypocrites as they are:
for they will say, Forgive us, when yet they take all courses to clogge others
with the guilt, and make them obnoxious to the temporal and eternal
punishment of many sins, if ever they had obtained pardon themselves, they
would not thus hinder the means of forgiveness of the sins of their
neighbors.

God that he would say to their souls, that he is their GOD. Thus doing, you
shall honor God, and give good proof that your own sins are pardoned, you
shall show love to your neighbor; and you shall be a means to convert a
sinner, and comfort a distressed soul.

Lastly, whereas the sins of stock, when ye have little of your own. The
Papists talk of a Treasury of the Church, wherein are reserved the overplus of
the merits of Saints, that when men lack merits of their own, the Pope may
furnish them with some merits of others. This treasury is but a fiction: but
this doctrine commends unto you the true Treasury of the Church. First,
Christ Jesus, who commanded all Christians on earth to pray one for another, he
did pray for you, Ioh. 17. and he ever lives to make intercession for you.
Heb. 7.25.
Next him, all faithful Christians do, according to the will of God, pray for
you, which prayers of theirs are daily offered up by Christ for you. Out of
this treasury of others prayers, you shall assuredly obtain pardon: for all
their fervent prayers cannot but avail with the Lord, because they pray for
you by his appointment, as you see in this text.

Us: that is, such as were mentioned in the former petition, for whom they ask
bread, namely, their living neighbors: whence note,

Forgiveness of sin is to be

If it were a duty to pray for

It is vain and bootlesse to Luke 16.
or else they are thrown into hell (the Scripture knows no third place) out
of which our prayers cannot fetch them. Eccles 9.10.
And there is no repentance or forgiveness in the grave.

God be with him, or, Lord have mercy on his soul. If ye tell them of this
fault, they say, Better say so, than worse; and if we do them no good by our
prayers, we are sure we do them no harm. I answer: what necessity is there of
praying better or worse for them? And grant that your prayers do them no harm,
I am sure they do them no good. But in praying for them, you do your selves
harm, in committing a sin against God, by making a prayer which cannot be a
prayer of faith. Now he is unwise that will do himself harm in any thing,
wherein he neither pleases God, nor does good to his neighbor.

Our, implies a plain acknowledgement and confession of sin, without
hiding, excusing, or extenuating of sins. Whence this is observable,

In asking pardon of sin, there When David gave over hiding his iniquity,
and said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, then, says he, Thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 32.5. We have a large example of his
confession of sin, original and actual, Psalm. 51.3, 4, 5. Daniel says, We
have sinned against thee, Dan. 9.8.

Hearty confession of sin gives glory to God; for thereby it is
acknowledged that God should have been obeyed: this gives him the glory of his
authority and soveraigntie. Also thereby is acknowledged that Gods Law which
is broken, is equal, holy, and good, else the act of sin could not be
acknowledged to be a fault.

God upon, to seek out his proofs, and bring him to his trial.

God: as it did Daniel, who after his confession, is most fervent in prayer,
saying, O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for
thine own sake, O my God. Dan. 9.19.

God has promised to forgive If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins. 1. Ioh. 1.9.

It is therefore a great fault Adam and Eve into sin, he knew the best way to
keep them from forgiveness, was to teach them to excuse, and extenuate their
sin: the man lays the fault on the woman, yea upon God himself: Genesis 3.
the woman lays it on the serpent, neither of them will take it upon
themselves: Even so it is with all the children of Adam, until God endue them
with a great measure of his grace, either they will deny, or excuse, or
extenuate, or shift it off, imputing their sin, either to their natural
disposition therefore they cannot choose they must be borne with* or they
impute their sins to the wickedness of the times, or to their company, or
to the devil; when all this while the evil heart which is most in fault, is
not charged at all with any faultiness: whereas in touch whatsoever was the
occasion, or whosoever was the entise* if the heart yield to commit sins, the
sin is a man's own and must be called as it is in the petition, Our debt, or
my d^ It is the extremest folly (...) can be, to go about to hide si^ for it
cannot be hid from his eyes which sees all things, who will one day, when
all secrets shall be made manifest, fully discover it. It is a fault to commit
sin, but it is aggravated when it is not confessed. If I covered my
transgression as Adam, or after the manner of man, says Job, Job 31.33. and 2.
By hiding my sin in my bosom. Then what portion of God is there? and what
inheritance of the Almighty from on high, verse 2. For this is the general
evil, which is to be applied to all the particular sins mentioned in that
Chapter. The hiding of sin therefore is dangerous, according to that saying,
He that hides his sins shall not prosper. Prou. 28.13.

Would any man have his them in Christ, who is the covering and true
propitiation of all our sins, that through him, he may put them out of his
remembrance, as if they were cast into the bottom of the sea. In confession,
it shall be needful to observe these rules.

1 Confession must be hearty, not verbal, for this is mere hypocrisy.

2 It must be voluntary, not constrained, and forced; as w^ that of Pharoahs,
when Gods terrible judgment being upon him, he said, I have sinned against
the Lord, etc. Exodus, 1^.16.

3 It must be mixed with faith, and hope of pardon: (...) was that of Daniel,
Dan 9.9.
saying, (...) the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we
have rebelled against thee. It must not be a desperate com^sion, like that of
Judas, Mat. 27 4.
sayi^ I have sinned in betraying inn^cent blood.

4 It must be with holy affections, of grief and godly shame for sin; with
contrition and brokennesse of heart; with a lothing and detestation of the
sins confessed, and with true humiliation of heart. Thus did Ezra confess,
saying, O God, Ezra 9.
I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God; for our iniquities
are increased over our heads. Thus did the prodigal son, saying, Father,
Luke 15.18.19.
I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son. Such was the confession of the honest Publican, who with a
dejected countenance, and humble gesture, said, Be merciful unto me a sinner.
Luke 18.13.

5 It must be entire and unpartiall, one particular must lead to the
confession of original sin: so did David, Psalm. 51.5. And from original
sin we must ascend to particular actual sins, and as near as we are able,
unto all particulars, be they secret, or open, among which be sure that thou
conceal not those sins to which thou art most inclined, yea thy best beloved
sins especially.

6 Lastly, confession of sins must be made with full purpose and resolution
of heart to forsake them. Whosoever shall in this sort confess their sins,
shall assuredly be forgiven, For he that confesses and forsakes his sins,
shall have mercy. Pro. 28.13.

Debts. Sins are called debts, because of the resemblance they have to debts by
forfeit, for not keeping the condition of the obligation. When^ note,

Sins do cast men into debt; and into arrerages with God. Those that are
called sins (...) Luke 11.4. are here called deb^ by Matthew. And sin is
likened unto the debt of ten thousand talents. Mat. 8.24.

Sin is a breach and forfeiture God by the Law.

The consequences of sin

This serves to discover unto to owe no man any thing, they are then proud,
and insult over their neighbors: when yet they make no bones of any sin, that
may make for their pleasure, profit, or credit. This doctrine does give these
foolish ones to understand, that there is a debt of love to be paid to their
neighbor, and a greater debt of love and obedience to God; which debt they
must pay, or else, if it be not answered for, they do forfeit their bodies and
souls to the wrath of God, to be tormented in flames of brimstone for ever.
Wherefore I wish all such to consider, they are far in debt, it may be not of
money, but in a debt which is ten thousand times worse: they are in debt to Go^
into whose hands of justice it is a most fearful thing to fall. Heb. 10.31
If they were in debt to man, it may be they have, or may have wherewith to pay
it, or might by bribes, or favor, or cunning de vices, or by hiding
themselves, or by running away, or lastly by death, quit themselves of their
adversaries. But this debt of sin no man can pay, for what shall a man give
for exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26
What is the whole world to it? it cannot buy out one soul. Here is no
shifting of the arrest of conscience: sooner or later it will serve them with a
writ to appear and answer at the great Assizes before Gods judgment seat;
there is no hiding of themselves, though they call to the mountains to cover
them; there is no running away; Rev 6.16. Luk 23.30 Psalm. 139.7
for whither can they run from Gods presence? And whereas death freeth other
debtors, this debt into which sin has cast them, is most called for, and
most terrible after death: when within a little while, they must come to
judgment, where Gods justice is so exact and infinite, that every particular
sin, with every aggravation thereof, must be put into the indictment, and into
the plea, and be proved against them: then he must pass sentence against
them, and then, except it can be pleaded for them, that Christ Jesus has
satisfied for them; and unless they can show an acquittance sealed by the
Spirit of God in their life time before their death, which seal leaves
always an impression of holiness in him that is sealed; if they cannot do
this, the exe^tion of eternal damnation is served upon them. Oh fear^
execution! and oh miserable men that are in continual danger of it, yet make
no care (...) prevent it!

because they tie themselves so strictly to hear every Sermon which they can
with any convenience, and because they will not let a day pass without prayer,
nor will eat a meal but with prayer before, and thanks after meat: they
will not swear an oath, nor run to Wakes and dancing on the Sabbath day:
they will not drink with good company (as they call themselves) nor be
familiar with those that are not so precise as themselves* for this they count
them fools, and call them Puritans, and any thing that may disgrace them. This
Doctrine gives these scoffers to know, that if these should not do the things
for which they twit them, they should run into the debt before spoken of: and
what though the omission of some things they do, be but a small sin, as they
will account it; yet many of these will make a great debt: besides the least
debt without forgiveness will damn a man. These men therefore might be wiser,
and should forbear their scoffs, and it were much safer for them to do as
the strictest Christians do.

sin (...) a debt, you are loath, nay you dare not come into that debt, which
may forfeit your right and comfort in God, and may cost you the loss of your
souls. If this answer may not be taken, it is because they want grace, and
true wisdom. But howsoever, let this comfort and confirm your own hearts in
well doing.

Let this provoke all men to Spirit, which he will give to all that ask it.
This we should do, Luke 11.^5.
because sin is a debt, and that of most dangerous consequence.

Debts: Our Savior does not say debt, as speaking of one debt, or of one kind
of debt; but he says debts, that is, all kind of sins, as well venial as
mortal, (if we may use that distinction) as well small as great. From hence
observe,

Whosoever would be justified before God, must be beholding to God for the free
forgiveness of all his sins, as well as of any David says, He forgiveth
all thine iniquities, Psalm. 103.3.

Cursed is every one that con^inueth not in all things written i^ the Law to
do them, Gal. 3.10. Wherefore if all sins be not pardoned, a man abides
under the curse there denounced.

Christ, to all believers and penitent persons; therefore they may expect pardon
of all, as well as of any one.

This confuteth the tenent of

Let all that will be saved, be

As we forgive our debtors. These words are the reason serving to strengthen
the faith of such as are to ask forgiveness. Here therefore we learn,

In asking forgiveness of sin, it is meet that reasons be used to express
what ground a man has to ask and to expect forgiveness. Thus David yields
reasons why God should have mercy on him: first from his tender mercy; then
from his own confession of his sins; then from his faith in Christ, and from
the effects which would follow upon Gods showing mercy to him; all which may be
plainly seen in Psalm. 51.1.3.7. etc.

then he sets all his sins before him, and stretches them upon the tenters
of aggravation, making them seem bigger than they are, pleading Gods wrath and
justice against them. Now against arguments of discouragements and fears,
reasons of asking forgiveness are very useful.

They are therefore to blame,

Let all that would break GOD in prayer, though they are not to go about to
persuade God with arguments to grant that which of himself he is not inclined
to, yet they may use arguments to persuade themselves to ask, and hope for
forgiveness.

As we forgive them that trespass against us. Note here; those which make this
petition, must be able to say truly, they forgive others, that thereby they
may approve themselves to be capable of forgiveness from God, and that they
have good reason to expect it. Hereby we learn,

Whosoever would have God forgive them their sins, they must be able truly
to say, they forgive all other their trespasses against them. Our Savior
says, If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you: but if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6.14.15. Also he says, When ye stand
praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any, Mark. 11.25.

God has expressly commanded Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13.
Now if man will not for his sake, at his commandment, forgive one hundred
pence, why should he expect that God should forgive him ten thousand talents
at his entreaty?

God has promised forgiveness Mat. 18.35. Mat. 6.14, 15.

To forgive another in mercy forgiving of us: for Gods love to us first, makes
us love our brethren. Now if we can assure our selves God has begun to pardon
us, we may assure our selves he will again pardon our sins if we ask it.



Stev^ did, Acts 7.60.
who said, Lord lay not their sin to their charge. But forgiveness spoken of
in the point, is of forgiveness, not of the sin, but of the wrong and
trespass against man.

The Scripture allows men to require their debts,

In every wrong done unto us, will to us, must always be forgiven; so that all
ill will in us to them, and all purpose of revenge must absolutely and utterly
be laid down by us: and of this forgiveness the petition speaks: of
requiring of debts and of satisfaction for the second evil in the wrong done
to us, that is, for the hurt and damage we sustained by the wrong, is that
which the Scripture allows us to require. Yet because requiring of debts and
satisfactions may proceed from malice and revenge, difference must be put
between one wrong and another: some are small, and they do us little damage,
and the consequence of them cannot be to any great harm: some other wrongs
are great, which do much hurt our names, goods, or lives, and the consequent of
them is great.

Again, satisfactions must be distinguished: some are to be made to the
Magistrate, others unto the party wronged.

Now all those smaller wrongs, which are no great blemish to our name, or any
great empairing of our goods or quiet, must be remitted, even in respect of
satisfaction; 1. Pet. 4.8.
because love should cover all such offenses. And if we seek satisfactions in
these cases, it must needs proceed from want of love, and from some degree of
revenge: except the Magistrate and commonwealth be interessed in the cause,
and do require us to prosecute such offenders, for to make them examples to
like offenders: but then it must be done in love, and mercy to their persons.

But if the damage be greater than love is bound to pass by; In what case a
man may go to Law, and, how.
because, in our name, life and goods, we are much wronged, or the consequent
of not seeking satisfaction would be much to our damage, or to the dishonor of
God and religion (as in some cases it falls out where the matter of the wrong
is not always great) in such cases the Scripture allows us to seek
satisfactions: but with these and the like cautions, and rules.

First, be sure the cause of the complaint be good and just.

Secondly, that, as I said, it be a matter of weight.

1. Cor. 6.5.6.
Thirdly, that it be necessary; for what may be well composed otherwise, must
not be^ brought to the Magistrate.

Fourthly, the prosecution o^ a suit or complaint, must not be in an ill
manner, as, in spl^ and malice, or by any indirect and unlawful courses, but
(...) love, and in a legal way.

Fifthly, the end of the pro^^cution must be good, as to re^ver his right
without whi^ he cannot well live, with his own, or others great prejudice; or
it must aim at the suppression of the wicked, Psalm. 10.17.18. 1 Cor. 5.5 Deuteronomy.
19.19.20. 1. Tim. 2.2.
or chiefly at their reformation, or for the terror of others; or last of all,
that we may live in peace.

The objections being answered, and the doctrine thereby explained, the uses
follow.

All malicious and revengefull less sin than he that utters it in
hypocrisy. They that revenge themselves upon their neighbors, wrong God more
than their neighbor could wrong them; for they usurp upon his divine
prerogative: To. 12.19.
for vengeance is mine, says God, I will repay. Therefore they should not give
place to wrath, for if they would be patient, God would right them. Let all
these unmercifull and revengefull spirits consider what is said in the parable
of him that would not forgive his fellow servants: Mat 18.34.
He was delivered to the tormentors: and let them also consider, that th^^
shall be judgment merciless, (...) him that has showed no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

Let every one that would have God forgive him his sins freely from his heart
forgive all those that trespass and wrong him. Let us for this cause put (...)
bowels of mercy, Colos. 3.12.13.
kindness humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one
another, and then this will follow, forgiving one another. No man can wrong us
so much as we daily trespass against God: therefore if he forgive us the
greater, we must forgive the less. No man can wrong us so much as our Savior
was wronged for us, Luke 23.34
yet he forgave his persecutours, and has left us his example, that we should
follow his steps. And because no man shall have the like provocations that Gods
children shall have, they have need of much faith; wherefore that we may
forgive our brethren, until seven times a day, let us with the Disciples pray,
Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.4, 5.

If any man have a merciful heart, though sometimes his and do keep it down,
and does put away al purpose of revenge, freely forgiving his brother: this man
should herein take comfort, because he may with boldness ask, and expect of
God that he will forgive him, For mercy rejoices against judgment. Iam. 2.13.

The sixth Petition.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

When a man, having been wearied with the burden of the guilt of sin, and
with the fear of Gods wrath, has at the length by earnest suit obtained
forgiveness of all his sins, and also peace with God, his next desire and
care is, how he may keep this peace, by endeavoring to spend the rest of his
time in holiness, willing in all things to please God. The thing contrary to
this holiness, is the act of sin, which is here called evil. The cause of
this evil is temptation, both which are deprecated in this petition; and the
contrary, namely, good motions unto holiness with perseverance therein, are
prayed for. The subject therefore of this petition is sanctification,
consisting of abstinence from evil, and perseverance in doing that which is
good. The place and order of this petition is excellent, for by obtaining what
is here asked, a man keeps his peace with God, and holds the assurance of
pardon of his sins. Secondly, holiness brings with it convenient means for
this present life, for it has the promise thereof, 1. Tim. 4.8. or contentment
with want. 1. Tim. 6.6. Thirdly, it enableth a man to do the will of God on
earth. Fourthly, it is a proof that the kingdom of God is come unto him.
Lastly, when grace is obtained, and sin beaten down, in the same measure
Gods name shall be glorified. Thus it appears how all the petitions in a
perfect order are linked one to another: all the five latter serving the first
and principal, namely, the glory of God in hallowing his name. This petition
is propounded in two sentences, joined together by the discretive conjunctio^
(but) which shows, that in the latter clause the petitioner does enlarge his
desire, and crave Gods help against sin in a further degree then was asked
in the first clause, scil. that God would not only not lead th^^ into
temptation of evil: Ne inducas, sed educas.
but to deliver them from evil.

Sin here is considered in the immediate cause thereof, scil. temptation,
prayed against in the first clause, Lead ^s not into temptation. It is
considered likewise in respect of the very act of sin, scil. evil, prayed
against in the second clause, But deliver us from evil.

In the first clause, an act of God concerning temptation unto sin is
deprecated, namely, that he would forbear to lead into temptation, and
forbear to show himself an adversary: but this is asked not absolutely, but
under correction, if it might stand with his pleasure, and with his glory.

In the second clause, their suit is enlarged, wherein they desire a further
act of God, that if it must needs be that they must be exercised with
temptations, that he would stand for them, and deliver them from the evil of
those temptations: this latter is asked for, absolutely.

In both clauses of this petition, we; must consider the person to whom suit
is made, scil. God. the persons for whom, us.
the things prayed against, namely, sin, but in different respects, both of the
cause thereof, temptation. act of sin, evil.


Temptation. Temptations unto which men are subect, Tentatio probationis,
tentatio se duct^^n.
are of two sorts, proofs or trials of a man's graces; these are not to be
prai^ against, for in such he must rejoice, Iam. 1.2. motions or enticements
unto sin, by Satan, by evil men, or by a man's own evil heart, such as are
spoken of, Jam. 1.14.

Temptation is good, or evil.

A good and blameless temptation is, when any one that has right to make
experiment of what a man is, or of what he will do, does (to a right and good
end, by lawful means) make trial whether a man will do or not do that to
which he is moved or occasioned.

An evil and blameworthy temptation is, when the end of him that tempts is,
that he that is tried or tempted should do that which is evil; doing it with
a mind to persuade thereunto.

Lead, By this act of Gods leading into temptation, we are to understand such
an overruling act of Gods providence, by which he disposes of all things good
and evil, whereby, (partly by what he does by his concurrence with him that
tempts, touching the substance of his act, and partly by what he permits
in not hindering what he could hinder concerning the evil and irregularitie
thereof, and partly by what he omitteth, leaving a man to himself to strugle
and wrestle with the temptation) it comes to pass that a man is not only
intised unto, but overcome of the evil unto which he is tempted.

God must be acknowledged to have an holy hand in all temptations whether good
or evil.

In good temptations God is properly an agent and worker, Genesis 22.1.2.
as when he proved and tempted Abraham by commanding him to offer his only
son Isaac: likewise when he causes men to prosper, as when he rained Manna
to tempt or prove the children of Israel, Exodus 16.4
whether they would walk in his law; In like manner when he sends
afflictions, as he did to the Israelites in the wilderness to humble them, and
to prove what was in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
whether they would keep his Commandments or no.

In evil temptations God is not at all (in proper speech) an agent, or worker
of the evil of the temptation; but yet he has to do in, and about all evil
temptations, and that not only in determining them to a good end, as to his
own glory, and also in the concourse of his power to the substance of the act,
whether of Satan, of a man's self, or of other men when they tempt; God has
further to do in evil temptations. He has to do in them both by way of
permission in permitting, and in not restraining Satan, or a man's own
concupiscence, or other men from tempting, by which way of permission he is
said to prove or tempt men; as in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy 13^.
in his permission of false Prophets to seduce: and also by way of omission
insuspending his action, and forbearing to give grace, or to do that which he
was wont to do, and if he would, could do, to keep a man from acting the sin
to which he is tempted. By this way of omission God is said to have proved or
tempted Ezekiah, when the Ambassadors of the King of Babel came unto him. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
The Scripture says, God left him to try him that he might know what was in
his heart.

These acts of Gods permission, and omission (for which (in Scripture phrase)
God is said to tempt, or to lead into temptation) are expressed sometimes by
words of negation, and sometime by words of action. By words of negation, where
it is said, speaking of the great temptations which the Israelites saw; Deuteronomy.
29.4
The Lord had not given them an heart to perceive, etc. By words of action,
where it is said by the Church, Isa 63.17.
O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart
from thy fear?Likewise God says of false Prophets, if the Prophet be
deceived, Ezekiel. 14.9
I the Lord have deceived him. And in the Revelation it is said touching the
ten Kings which became Antichristian; God has put into their hearts to fulfill
his will (namely, Revel. 17.17.
his purpose and decree concerning the permission of the tyranny of Antichrist)
and to agree and give their kingdom to the beast, etc.

Now because where God permits tempters to tempt, and also forbeareth to
give grace to resist the temptation, he does not remove that, which, if it were
removed, would hinder the temptation, nor give that which should hinder the
yielding to it, and for that hereupon such is man's sinful disposition)
temptation, and sinning follows infallibly, therefore this permission and
omission of Gods, is expressed by words of action, and by words (as it were) of
eausality as here, by leading; though God be far, and far from being any
cause of the sin, or of being any blameworthy cause of the temptation, as
shall further appear hereafter.

To tempt unto sin properly (which God does not) and to lead only into
temptation, (which God does, and may do) do much differ. For to tempt, (taken
in the evil sense) is to entice, and to endeavor to move the will of man to
wickedness, and that with a mind to have him to act it: according to that of
the Apostle James, Iam. 1.14.
A man is tempted when he is drawn away by his lust, and is enticed. Of this
tempting it is which the Apostle Paul speaks, when he says to the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.5.
J sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you.
But, to say, that God does thus tempt any man, is blasphemy: for Saint James
says, Iam. 1.13.
God tempts no man, because he cannot be tempted to evil.

But to lead into temptation, (taken in the good sense) as it proceeds from
God, is only such an act, or acts of Gods sovereignty and wise providence
concerning man, whereby it so comes to pass, that a man is exposed to the
temptations either of Satan, of other men, or of a man's own evil lusts, who
are the proper, and only actors of temptation unto sin.

In this act of leading into temptation, allusion may in part be made unto the
acts of a General of an Army, who may according to his discretion, lead which
band he pleases, and set them in the Forlorn hope, the place of greatest
danger; and may keep which band he pleases in the Reserve, or in some Fort,
the place of greatest safety. It may likewise be somewhat resembled by an act
of the Moderator of the games of combats, where none might enter the lists, and
play their prize, but according to the permission and appointment of the
overseer and moderator of those exercises. The Lord God he is the great Lord
of hosts, and is the over-seer and over-ruler of the great Theater of the
world, who does at his pleasure moderate and order all actions therein in
perfection of wisdom to his own glory.

Evil, is either evil of punishment, which is temporal, prayed against in the
fourth petition. eternal, prayed against in the fifth petition:


Or evil of sin, which is referred either to persons, or actions. When this
word evil notes out a person in Scripture, it signifies the devil, who
because he is of himself so exceeding evil, and does make it his work to
infect all men with evil, he is called the evil, or the evil one. So he that
(Math. 13.19.) is called the evil one in the Greek, is v. 39. called the
devil. Some would restrain this word evil, that it should mean the devil,
as if he only were prayed against in this petition: (...).
and that because this word evil in the Greek has his article joined with
it, which gives an emphasis to evil, pointing at some special evil one,
which is the devil. I do grant that sometimes these articles do give a
special force unto the words to which they are annexed, yet for the most part,
the Greeks use to add them rather for a grace and ornament of speech, and are
so used seven or eight times at least in the Lords prayer. So that seeing there
is no necessity in respect of the word evil, to understand the devil only;
and because evil of sin, is most opposite to sanctification, I think that
it is not Christ's meaning to restrain the word evil unto him.

Evil has respect to actions, and then by evil is meant any irregularitie or
swarving in any action contrary to the will of God, to which will of God, evil
of sin, (...), id est, (...).
properly stands in opposition: in which sense it must be taken in this
petition; and if we put any emphasis in the article, it may as well denote
evil of sin in general, as any particular evil: yet here I do not exclude
the devil, as if he were not meant at all to be prayed against; but do
include both him and evil men, and the evil world, the evil heart, and all
other things, so far as they are movers and inticers unto evil. In this very
sense are the same words used by Christ, saying, Father, Ioh 17.15.
keep them from the evil or from wickedness. So 1 Ioh. 5.19. The world lies
in evil, or wickedness. And that of the Apostle, Romans 12.9. is without all
exception, Abhor (...) that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. Evil
is here taken indifferently, for all manner of evil of sin, and whatsoever
does conduce unto it.

Deliver, implies two things: First, preservation from falling into sin:
Secondly, help of God to rise out of sin by repentance: both these
deliverances are here meant. Keeping from evil in Christ's prayer, Ioh. 17.15.
and deliver from evil in this prayer, have one meaning. When Paul says, Rom
7.24.
Who shall deliver? he means, who shall give me power against this body of
sin? And that Gods giving of repentance is deliverance from evil, that
saying of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.25.26. makes it manifest, where Gods giving
men repentance, verse 25. is all one with recovering themselves out of the
snare of the devil: which evil, is without our question prayed against in
those words, Deliver us from evil.

Us, in both clauses, ( lead us, and deliver us) notes out the same persons
mentioned in the fourth petition, scil. our selves and all our brethren that
live upon the earth. That we may understand the meaning of this Petition more
fully and more cle^ly, it is to be considered, what grace of God it is which is
he^ prayed for, by virtue whereof a man may be delivered from the evil here
deprecated.

First, we pray that God by an act of his gracious providence would free us
(if it might be) from the very temptation unto sin, namely, that we may be
delivered and kept from seducers and corrupters, that they may not tempt us
unto evil; according as Saint Paul prayed, that Satan's buffeting, 2 Cor.
11.7.8.
the prick^ in the flesh, might depart from him. We may pray that God would
please not to lead us unto temptation.

Moreover, since GOD has thought it meet that his own children should be
exercised with manifold tentations; and the flesh, the world, and the devil
conspire to assault us with temptations; it cannot be, but we shall daily be
tempted. Wherefore prayer also is to be made unto God, that he would not lead
us into temptation; that is, he would be pleased to uphold us, and that he
would so effectually work in us by the grace of his spirit, that we may not be
ensnared by it, and held under the power of it, so as to be overcome, and made
to yield to commit that sin to which we are tempted.

This special and effectual grace is it which is requisite, both that we may
resist temptations, and that we may have both will and ability to live holily
and righteously in the whole course of our life.

By this effectual grace I understand not only such a work of the holy spirit
of God, that inlighteneth the mind, and which cures the will by an immediate
influence, so far, as only to raise the will from its natural propensitie
to evil, to a mere indifferency to resist a temptation to evil, if a man
will, and to embrace a motion to good, if he will. But it is such a powerful
work of the Spirit, that it causes the will so to decline evil, that it will
resist the temptation, if he can; and causes the will so to incline to good,
that it will embrace the motion thereunto, and perform it if he can.

For true saving grace is goodness, making the sinful and evil will of man,
holy and good. Now the goodness and holiness of the will of man reformed does
not consist in a bare power to resist evil, and to do good, if a man will;
but it is an habitual disposing of the will to that which is good only.

Hence it is that although (by reason of the dominion of the flesh before a man
is regenerate, and by reason of the remains of the flesh after he is
regenerate) he is apt to resist, and for a time may actually resist
exhortations and motions unto good actions; and also is apt to take part with a
temptation to evil, and for a time to yield unto it; yet this saving grace of
God, is so powerful, that in the end it prevails against all opposition made
against it. For this gracious work of God, does so clear and change the
judgment, will, and affections, and does so powerfully purge and convince the
conscience of a man, that it takes away from him a will to resist a motion unto
good, and it takes aaway from him a will to take part, with a tentation to
evil, so that his former unwillingnes to good, and his former willingness to
evil cease; and therefore he has no longer a will actually to resist that
which is good, though in respect of the nature of the will, there does remain
a possibility of resisting, if the will were otherwise disposed.

The will of man which was ill disposed, having formerly lost its freedom to
good, being in bondage to sin and to Satan, is now by this grace of GOD
rightly disposed, being freed and set at liberty to bend it self, from sin;
toward holiness, and i^ thereby enabled actually to refuse the evil, and to
choose the good.

This alteration and change in the will of man, and the effectual
determination of it by Gods grace infused, is not made by any constraint of the
will, for the will cannot be constrained; And it is without any the least
infringing of the liberty of man's will in a most free production of his acts.
For it is effected by a gentle, by a sweet, and by a gracious drawing forth the
act of the will, in a moral way, by force of argument and persuasion. For it
causes (together with the propounding) that divine truths are received with
that clearenesse and evidence in man's judgment, that in reason he neither
can, nor will choose but believe them. Likewise this good grace causes sins
from which a man is dehorted, to appear to him so odious and abhorrent, that
he in reason neither can, nor will choose but refuse and shun them, when in a
temptation they are presented to him. Also it makes the good, to which a man
is exhorted and moved, to appear so lovely, so desirable, and so choice
worthy, that he, in reason, neither can, nor will choose but to embrace it, and
endeavor to perform it. 2 Cor. 8.16.17.
In this manner was the will of Titus drawn forth into act according as Saint
Paul testifies when he says, Thanks be to God which put the same earnest
care into the heart of Titus for you: for indeed he accepted the exhortation.

This grace does so strengthen the inner man with might, by a plentiful and
powerful shedding the love of God into man's heart, that it causes such an
ardency of love unto God, and causes such an intension of will to please God,
and such a conviction of the conscience of his duty to God, that the love of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14.
(to use the Apostles phrase) constrains him, and prevails powerfully, and
overcommeth his old contrary delight and concupiscence of the flesh, so that
the old man of sin, cannot do the evil, nor yet hinder the good which it
would. Gal 5.17.


For, when God pleases to work in man effectually to salvation, he does by
his grace, first inlighten the mind, and heal the will of its imbred
averseness and adversenesse to good, and of its pronesse to evil; Isa.
57.17.18.
and this he does by his spirit, ingenerating and infusing a spiritual
principle of grace, giving to man a divine and new nature, 2 Pet. 1.3.4.
which is as the soul of the soul, by which man's will is not left indifferent,
and indetermined to do, or not do; but by which it is made apt, Psa. 119.^0
and by which it does bend and press forward unto the performance of all such
actions as do tend to a supernatural end, such as tend to Gods glory, and
eternal life, this he does by his prevenient grace: then from this inward and
vital principle (God by his subsequent grace preoperating and setting man on
work) the understanding, will, and affections do apply themselves according as
they are occasioned by their objects, and their God assisting, the acts of
faith, hope, and charity are drawn forth, and perfected.

This grace therefore whereby a man is delivered from evil, is not only an
habitual grace, giving a power only to the will, leaving it in the pleasure
of the will to suspend whether it will resist a temptation or no; but it is an
actual grace improving the habitual power which God infused into the heart of
man in the first act of true conversion, which it does, by adding new strength,
whereby it assisteth and stirs up the will, and draws forth its ability
into the act both to nill and to shun what is sinful; and to will and to do
what is hon^ and godly. For as no man has so much as a power to will to
abstain from sin, without habitual grace, so neither can he actually
abstain from sin without actual grace. The moral power of abstaining from
sin, flows from that good habit of grace which prevails over the natural
power of the will, causing it to cease its indifferency to good or evil, and
to incline unto good only; and that not in general, as by the natural power
of the will it may do; but in special, namely to the good of holiness and
honesty: This good habit is by a special grace of God brought into act, not
only to will, but to do that which is good, Phil. 2.13.
and acceptable in his sight. For God not only determines the will to the
substance of the act, by a way of determination natural; but also to the
goodness of it, by way of determination supernatural. This grace God gives
to one, and not to another, not because of his foresight of what one would
do, and another would not; or because one has disposed himself for it by the
readiness of his will, or by some other good work, and the other has not;
but of his mere good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Therefore he that would have it,
must ask it of God by prayer.

That it is needful to the producing of good works of faith, repentance, new
obedience, and of perseverance, that GOD should afford first his prevenient
superoperating grace to begin the good work in the will of man, whereby (the
will being an active power) does suboperate, and actually will to believe, will
to repent, and to resist a temptation, to live godly, and to persevere; and
also that it is needful that God do afford a subsequent prevailing grace
whereby a man under God by his help may indeed believe, repent, resist a
temptation, and do what may be pleasing in Gods sight, and also persevere;
this is evident both by the Scriptures, namely, Philip. 2.13. and elsewhere, as
also by the experience of the best children of God. God has given the Apostle
grace to will, for he says, Romans 7 1^ 18.19.
to will was present with him, when yet he wanted power to do the good which
he would, for, he says also, how to perform that which was good, he found
not. The Spouse had grace to will to run after Christ, yet in the sense of her
inability actually to run, she prays thus, Cant. 1.4.
Draw me, and we will run after thee. Our Savior says, Ioh. 6.44.
none can come to him, except the Father draw him. That man comes to Christ,
that is, believes in him; this is the formal and proper act of man, but that
he is wrought to this act, this is of God by his grace, as effectual as if he
were forcibly drawn. Now if God should give only a less measure of grace,
that is, if he only raise the will to an indifferency, to will, if a man will,
and shall suspend the concourse of his gracious power requisite to the act of
willing and doing that which is good, until the will by its own liberty, now
restored by grace, shall determine whether it will choose, or refuse to will,
or to do; man in this state shall never partake of that gracious concourse,
whereby a man should actually will, or do any thing that is truly morally
good: for man in this state will never determine to will, or to do that which
is good, but rather the contrary. For since man's fall, the remains of inbred
sinfulness, (even in the regenerate) which does so easily beset him; Heb. 12.1.
together with the addition of the weight of a temptation, these will, (if God
add no more then a general concourse of his power, which he affords to the
substance of al men's actions, good or bad; or if he only be ready to yield a
special gracious concourse to the doing of a good work, which he is a like
ready to yield unto all, upon supposition that their will shall first determine
to will, or to do it) the weight, I say, of the disposition of the flesh,
lusting against the spirit, and the weight of the temptation, will cause that
the wills indifferency to good shall cease, and the will of man will actually
determine for that which is evil. Whence it must of necessity follow that
every man will inevitably fall into sin, and will live and dye in it, and so
no man can possibly be saved: for we may well reason thus. If our first father
Adam, who had not in his will two contrary principles, flesh and spirit, who
had not two contrary dispositions and propensities fighting and weighing one
against the other; as every man (even he that is most regenerate) now has; But
if Adams will was habitually and perfectly well disposed to the choice of good
only, having not the least propensity to evil, and had no weakness, but what
was common to him as a creature, namely a possibility through freedom of his
will to choose the evil, and to refuse the good, if he would, it being
possible that he might be deceived in judgment; yet, because, when he was
tempted, (though with no other temptation but such as by his habitual grace he
might easily have resisted) God left him to the liberty and power of his own
will, and did not afford him a special help by his grace; he was overcome of
the temptation. Let it now be considered, if Adam in state of innocence, and in
a state of perfection, if when he was left to the liberty and power of his
will, the temptation caused his will, that was in equal balance, to will and
to make choice of that which was evil; being overcome of the temptation, is it
possible that any man living, (who shall have only grace to will and do well,
if he will, who shall have no more grace of God, till first he himself has
determined to will that which is good) shall ever actually withstand daily
temptations, or, being fallen, shall ever rise out of his fall; for he never
will will, either to resist the temptation, or by repentance to rise out of his
sin.

The matter of this petition, and the words being explained, they carry this
sense.

O Lord God which love good, and hate evil, thou which over-rulest and
disposest all things by thy divine providence, now that, of thy mercy, thou
have delivered me, and all other of us that believe, from the punishment of all
our sins past, in forgiving all our trespasses; do not now (we beseech thee)
expose us unto the temptations of the wicked world, of the devil, or of our
own evil hearts; but that, whenever they assault us, to entice us, or
enforce us to evil, we may by the power of thy grace and might resist and
overcome them. And whereas through our frailty we are fallen, and daily do
fall into sin; Lord give grace unto us to rise out of our sin by hearty
repentance. For this cause vouchsafe unto us thy holy spirit, that good motions
may be put into us, and may be strengthened in us, that by the deeds thereof we
may mortify the deeds of the flesh. Let the same good spirit also frame us
unto, and uphold us in an holy course of new obedience, that we may serve thee
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, to the glory of thy
most holy Name, in doing thy will.

Lead us not, etc. It is evident that sanctification and holiness of life, is
the principal thing aimed at in this petition: whence if we observe with it,
the conjunction (and) which joyneth this to the other petition, we learn,

It ought to be the desire and As well to have power against sin, as pardon
of it: as well to be sanctified, as justified. Christ prays for all that did
and should believe, saying, J pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou should keep them from evil. Ioh. 17.15. and verse 17.
Sanctify them with thy truth. David speaking of presumptuous sins, says to
God, Let them not have dominion over me, Psalm. 19.13. The like prayer he makes
against all sins, saying, Order my steps in thy word, and let not any
iniquity have dominion over me, Psalm. 119.133. The whole tenor of Scripture is
that we should abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good,
Romans 12.9.

fruit of it unto repentance, and holiness of life here in this life. This I
shall make evident by these arguments following.

(1) It is one part of the new Covenant of grace that men should be holy: and
for that cause God has not only required holiness to be shown on their part,
but has promised as well to write his Law in the hearts of his people, Heb.
8.10.12.
as to be merciful to their unrighteousness, and not to remember their sin.

(2.) It is one end to which God has chosen men in Christ to be holy, Ephesians.
1.4.5
and without blame before him in love, as well as to be adopted children by
Christ to obtain everlasting life.

(3.) It is the end of the office and coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, and
of the merit and efficacy of his death, resurrection, and intercession, not
only that believers should obtain forgiveness of sin, and everlasting
life; but that so many as the Father gave unto him might believe, repent, and
live holily and righteously in this present world; Tit. 2.14.
he purging them to himself to be a peculiar people zealous of good works.

(4.) It is the end of the Scriptures not only to lay the foundation of faith
for the remission of sins, that through consolation thereof, Ioh. 15 4. Ioh.
17.7 Ephesians. 5.26.
believers might have hope; but also to sanctify and cleanse them from the
filthiness of their sins, that they might be holy, and without blemish.

(5.) It is the end of every Christian man's profession and calling, 1 Thessalonians.
4.7.
not only to believe and hope to be saved by Christ; but also to be holy, and
to become the servant of Christ.

(6.) It is the end why God sends his Spirit into their hearts, and causes
it to dwell in his children, Rom 8.16.
not only to be a spirit of adoption to witness to their spirits that they
are Gods children; but also to be a spirit of sanctification to work out the
stony heart, Ez^k. 36.26, 27.
and to frame in them a new heart, causing them to walk in his statutes, and
to do them.

(7.) It is the end of the Sacraments, the seals of the new Covenant, not
only to signify and seal remission of sins by Jesus Christ; but also that,
by him, all that believe in him, being ingrafted into the similitude of his
death and resurrection, Romans 6.4, 5, 6.
should dye unto sin, and walk in newness of life.

These things considered, it is most apparent that justification and
sanctification are never severed in one and the same party; wherefore he that
prays for, and expects to be justified, must also pray, and endeavor to
approve himself to be sanctified.

A second general reason, why all Christians should pray for, and labor after
holiness, is because if a man be not holy and righteous in this life, he is
not capeable of true glory and happiness in heaven* in the life to come; and
that whether we respect God, or a man's self remaining in his sin. God will
not admit him, let him make what claim he can unto the kingdom of heaven;
his put off shall be, Luk 13.27
Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity. For without holiness
no man shall see God. Heb. 12.14
But suppose it were possible that a sinful man might be admitted into heaven,
heaven would be no heaven to him. The place, persons, and exercises there would
be tedious, and a vexation unto him. For all things there are things of God,
holy and spiritual most contrary to the disposition of a natural and carnal
man. 1. Cor 2.14.
God says, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
they are foolishness unto him. To whom Gods ordinances, and presence in them,
as in hearing, praying, and praising God, and to whom holy company, and holy
conference is tedious, in this life the same heart and affections remaining,
even these and the like things would be an hell to them, even in heaven. For to
make a man happy (even in heaven) it is needful that the faculties and powers
of his soul be so fully rectified and perfected, that he may comprehend and
enjoy the object, that thing wherein man's happiness does consist. Now though
Gods presence in his glory, and in his goodness, which is the object of man's
happiness, is always in heaven; yet, if the understanding, the will, and the
affections of a man be not sanctified, and thereby made capeable of, and
suitable to the object, what content, and joy can he take therein. It is with
the reasonable soul in the apprehension of intellectual and spiritual things,
as it is with the senses in bodily objects: Colors though never so orient and
various, yet they can give no delight to a blind, or ill-affected eye. Sounds,
though never so melodious, cannot delight a deaf, or ill-affected ear. Meat
and drink though never so well relished and delicious, cannot delight him whose
pallat is out of taste; nay the best do savor and taste ill with such a one.
Even so the most spiritual things in heaven would be so far from delighting
a carnal and unholy man, that they would seem, to his fancy, very foolishnes,
and they would be to him a very vexation.

Number. 23.10.
this is the fault of too many who desire to have their sins forgiven, but
desire not to have them mortified; they desire to go to heaven, like cursed
Balaam, when they dye, but endeavor not to be holy while they live. But (as if
this were not enough to be sinful themselves) many do make a jest at all
conscionable living in others, and a scorn of all that endeavor to keep a
good conscience in all things, and yet will expect that Christ shall save them.
How has the devil deceived these men? yet thousands are justly given over to
this strong delusion. If any of you shall happen to cast your eyes on these
lines, consider the Doctrine in hand, and learn that for certain, he that is
not holy in this life, shall not be happy in the life to come. For whomsoever
God justifies, Romans 6.
those he sanctifies; and whosoever have faith to partake of Christ's merits,
do by the same faith partake of the virtue of Christ's death to the killing of
sin; and of the virtue of his life and resurrection, to the quickening of the
inward man. And at the day of judgment all that profess Christ, and yet obey
not the Gospel of Christ, 2 These. 1.8.
shall be burnt in flames of Gods vengeance, as well as those which know not
the Gospel, and profess it not at all. For when such shall say to Christ,
when the door of heaven is shut against them, Lord, Lord, open to us, he shall
say to them, Luke 1^.25, 26, 27, 28.
I know you not whence you are; if they reply, we have professed thy name, he
does make the same answer as before, saying, I know not whence you are; depart
from me all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, when they shall see all the godly in the kingdom of God, and themselves
thrust out.

worldliness, and prophannesse; and how that they show forth little more then
a bare form of godliness, showing little or no power thereof in their lives.
I do entreat these men to consider seriously of the reasons of this point, and
of the motives to an holy life prosecuted in the next Use; and to say each with
himself, How do I by my sins grieve and dishonor God? how do I discredit my
holy profession? how do I grieve, and hinder the godly? how do I open the
mouths of the wicked? and how do I hurt my self, and interupt my peace with
God? and how do I play the fool, in making choice of the crooked damnable
ways of the devil, leaving the straight and saving paths of Gods
commandments? Think this with thy self, then humble thy self, then pray,
and endeavor a reformation.



First, all Christians should endeavor to be holy in their conversation out
of the due respect which they owe unto God, (1.) Out of love, and in conscience
of duty, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 1. Pet 1.15, 16. 1. Ioh. 3.2^. Mat. 5.16.
because it is the will of God, our sanctification, that we should be holy, as
he is holy. (2.) Because holiness pleases him, and (3.) because he is
glorified by it. Whereas a wicked life, of such as profess his Name, Isa 63.10.
does much grieve his holy Spirit, Isa. 3 8. Heb. 3.10.
and does provoke the eyes of his glory: I was grieved with this generation
(says he.) Also they dishonor him, as he says to the Jew, by breaking the
Law dishonourest thou God?

Secondly, consider that an holy life does adorn the Gospel, Tit. 2.10.
and true religion of God; but a vicious behavior, of men that profess
Christianity, 1. Tim. 6.1
does cause the very religion and doctrine of God to be blasphemed.

Thirdly, consider the different fruits of an holy, and of an ungodly
conversation in respect of our neighbors with whom we shall converse. 1. Pet.
2.12. 1. Pet. 3.1.
A constant good conversation is a means to win, unto the power of
godliness, those which yet are strangers to the life of God; and it does
rejoice the hearts, and does confirm and increase the forwardness in grace of
those which are already the children of God. Moreover, an unblameable life does
muzzle the mouths, 1 Pet. 2 15
and put to silence foolish men; or if they be so maliciously wicked, that they
will needs speak of such holy persons, as of evil doers; they shall be in the
end ashamed, 1. Pet. 3.16.
for falsely accusing their good conversation in Christ.

But the ungodliness of those which profess Christ does much grieve, and often
times does corrupt in part, and infect, even those that be truly good; and
does harden the wicked in evil, and gives them just cause to complain, and
exclaim against them.

Fourthly, consider the good or evil which accrueth, or befalls to a man's
self, according as his life is holy, 1. Tim. 4.8
or sinful, Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. Psalm. 34.9, 10.
Wherefore holiness of life will either keep a man from crosses and
afflictions, and will remove such as are already upon him; Psalm. 34 19 1 Samuel
3.18. Psalm. 119.71. Rom 8.28 Deu. 28.8 Phili 4 11.
or will make him able fruitfully and patiently to bear them, causing all
things to work together for his good. It will likewise procure all plenty and
prosperity, or it will cause contentment in adversity. Also by adding unto a
man's faith, an holy, righteous, and sober life, he does make unto himself his
calling and election sure; 2. Pet. 1.10.
from whence arises peace of conscience, Romans 5.1.
and joy in the holy Ghost in this life, and according to his holiness, Matthew.
^5.28.46.
such shall be the extent of his eternal glory in the world to come. But a
sinful life pulls down Gods judgments upon a man, and makes them to abide
long, and causes impatience under crosses; causing likewise a purblinde
judgment, barrenness, 2 Pet. 1.8, 9.
and much unfruitfulnesse in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. This
careless falling into sin, and lying in it causes, even in the elect,
doubtings of their being in state of grace, Psalm. 77.
and in Gods favor, and of their salvation, as also desperate fears through
horror of conscience. And if a man have only a form of godliness, but
denies the power of it by a bad conversation, he is unto God abominable, Tit.
1.16.
and is exposed not only to be accursed in every thing he puts his hand unto;
Deuteronomy. 28 20.
in the things which concern the outward man; 2. These. 2.11, 12.
but to be further given over to Apostacy through strong delusion, being to
every good work reprobate, that in the end he may be damned, because, though
he made a profession of believing, he yet took pleasure in unrighteousness.

Fifthly, consider holiness it self, in respect of the nature thereof as it
is compared with, and stands opposite, to wickedness. Ephesians. 4.24.
Holiness is a likeness and conformity to God our heavenly Father; it is his
very image renewed in us, which according to him, is created in righteousness
and true holiness. But sin is enmity to God, Romans 8.7. Ioh. 4.44.
a conformity to the very devil. The ways of holiness are all heavenly,
holy, spiritual, equal, Romans 7.12.
and good; but the ways of wickedness are all earthly, unjust, Iam. 3.15.
sensual, and devilish. I refer the judging here of to any that is in his
senses, and has but the use of right reason when he is himself, namely,
whether works of piety, mercy, righteousness, and sobriety, be not far
better then acts of profaneness, cruelty, unjustice, intemperance, and
uncleanness, let any man instance in himself in particulars.

All these motives considered, is there not cause why we should desire and
labor to be holy, namely, for its own sake, for our neighbors sake, for our
own sake, for Religion sake; but chiefly for the honor and glory of our God,
even for Gods sake.

Mean^^ e godly.
For this cause we must learn to know the ways of godliness by frequent
reading, and hearing the Word, which Word as it is the rule, so it is the
ministry and means of obtaining the Spirit of God, which is the Author of
godliness. Moreover, though the Word and holy Spirit dwell in us, we must
stir up this Spirit, and be very circumspect, and watch unto well-doing,
praying unto God to give us both to will and to do that which is according to
godliness; and lastly let us converse much with those that live holily. Who so
does thus, shall be able in some good measure to subdue his wickedness, and
shall increase in true holiness.

Lead thou, and deliver thou, The person prayed unto here to be understood is
God, without whom no man can be delivered from evil. Unto him our Savior
sends his Disciples to make this petition. Whence observe,

Whosoever would be preserved The Lord must give grace, else no man can be
holy, Ioh. 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing, says our Savior, I am the Lord thy God which
teach thee to profit, which leads thee by the way which thou should go,
says the Lord, Isaiah 48.17. It is God which works in you both to will, and
to do, at his good pleasure, says the Apostle, Philip. 2.13. And he says, The
God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.

Man is of himself insufficient to think so much as a good 2. Cor. 3.5.
thought, much less is he able to make himself holy. Before his conversion he
is dead in sins and trespasses; and in the very power of sin and Satan, who
takes him captive at his will. After his conversion, 2. Tim. 2.26.
he is frail, and disposed of himself to return to his former evil
conversation, if the Lord do not support and enable him to stand by his grace.
The way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps, Iere. 10.23. If man cannot order himself in the smaller things which
concern the outward man, much less can he dispose himself in the greatest
which concern the inward, in the matters of sanctification. If God do not
prevent man with his grace, he cannot so much as will that which is good, and
being prevented, if God pursue him not with his grace, he shall but will in
vain; Rom 7.18.
to will may be present with him, and yet he may not find ability to do that
which is good; this was the Apostles case, and the case of Ephraim. Ier 31.18.
For when we have done what we can, and do as much as lies in our power (which
yet we must not be wanting in) yet conversion, actual resisting of
temptation, and new obedience is out of our power, any further then we are
helped by Gods free grace.

The adversaries unto holiness power of Gods might, Ephesians. 6.10, 12, 13.
they will prevail unto ungodliness, man cannot be able to withstand in the
evil day.

As God only is able to overcome prerogative, himself to bestow it. For he
knew well that if man could confer grace, or could attain it by any means
without him, or having obtained some initiall or preparative grace, may then
have the prime stroke in the doing of a good work, by his own free will, then
all the praise thereof would be given to man, and God should have none: and man
would grow so proud, that he would claim heaven by merit; and flesh would
glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.29.30.
if God were not man's sanctification, as well as his redemption.

does bestow the gift of faith, repentance, and perseverance to any man, but
according to their works, at least, according to this work, namely, if they
will, what is this, if not Pelagianisme, condemned by the Orthodox long since?
who opposed those men which held that God gives grace to men according as they
dispose themselves thereunto, for want of which disposition he denies it to
others. Thus making the act of faith either not at all to be the work of God,
any more then by concurrence to the substance of the act, or to make him to be
the less principal worker of it, and withal, that what God in the second
place does, he is held to do it according to man's work preceding; which takes
away the chief praise from God, and gives it to a man's self, because it
suspendeth faith, repentance, and every good work upon the determination of
man^ will. Indeed man neither does, nor can believe or repent until first he
himself determine in his will to believe and repent; but this he cannot do
before that God has wrought this determination in his will by the grace of his
holy Spirit, by which also he enableth him actually to believe, to repent, and
to do the things that are acceptable in his sight. God first does work the
power, then the will, and also the deed. God inclines and swayeth man's will to
follow his; and does not expect and stay until man does will, and then follow
it. It i^ impossible to the working of man's will, that God, having given him a
power to will, should expect that man should first produce the act of willing,
and then should graciously concur to the said act; For what need shall there be
of Gods concurrence to draw forth the act of a man's will, when he has willed
already. Moreover, if God by his grace did only give a man power to will and
to do, if he will, and if God shall there wait, and proceed no further by the
help of his grace, until men have willed; then, the efficacy of man's willing
does depend, not upon Gods purpose, and upon Gods grace given, according to the
purpose of Gods will; but it does depend originally, and principally upon man's
will: and hereby man shall be made a converter of himself, before God have
converted him; and it may rather be said (contrary to the Apostle) that man
works in God the will and the deed: Phili. 2.13.
then to acknowledge that God works in man the will and the deed: and it may
be said that God works in man according to man's good pleasure, and not
according to his own good pleasure. And thus man shall have matter of glorying
and boasting in himself, because he has differenced and discerned himself,
by his willing to believe, to repent, and to convert, and to resist a
temptation, when another who had alike sufficiency of grace, and had God alike
ready to join with him to help him, yet would not believe, repent, convert,
or resist a temptation.

The tru^^ to be maintained touching this point is; that the beginning,
proceeding, and consummation of a man's regeneration, and sanctification is of
the free grace of God in man, without any cause in man moving him thereunto.
And the cause why he gives unto some men faith, repentance, and power, Romans
9.11 16.18. Ephesians. 2.4, 5 1 Pet. 2.10 Act. 19.9.
against temptations, and not to others, this is not because he finds in
some, good dispositions, and such good works which he finds not in others:
but of his mere will and pleasure. For God has mercy on whom he will, that
is, he softeneth hearts, and gives grace to believe, etc. to whom he will:
and he hardens, that is, leaves into impenitencie and unbeleefe, whom he
will.

This Doctrine of Gods free and full grace in the work of sanctification does
also overthrow the merit of works done by men in state of grace. For even then
every good work is done by the continuance and new supply of Gods grace. Now
if the doing of good works, which are fruits of sanctification, be of grace,
how can they merit?

This also discovers the ignorance and that they can repent when they will,
and this they think they will do hereafter; intending to convert, and to be
godly before they dye: thus the devil and a deluded, and deceitful heart does
misleade them; For if God give them not grace to resist a temptation, and if
God convert them not, and give them repentance, 2. Tim. ^.26.
Satan will hold them captive at his will; and they will, by reason of the
hardness and impenitency of the^^ hearts, Rom 2.5.
treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. Moreover, how does any man know that God will
give him grace hereafter, who has refused, and daily does refuse and resist
Gods grace tendered in the Ministry of his Word, for the present. If he do, it
is more then ordinary: for his ordinary dealing with such sinners is, that
because they refuse, and continue long to refuse when he calls, therefore he
gives them up unto their own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81.12
that they walk in their own counsels, and either he never gives them a will
to seek unto him, or if he gives them ever any will to seek him, it shall be
to seek him with a mere selfe-serving, and so, that when they call, he will
not be found of them, Prove. 1.24.28.
For they will not seek him with their whole heart.

We heard before in the prosecution of the doctrine, how much holiness
deserved to be desired; now would we obtain it, then according as we are
taught by this doctrine, we must seek it of God: let us say to him, Turn thou
us, Ier. 31.9.
and we shall be turned. And with David, let us wish, Psalm 11^.18 36.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. Open thou mine eyes, that
J may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. And, Incline mine heart to thy
testimonies, and not to covetousness. And, Set a watch O Lord before my mouth,
keep the door of my lips. Incline not my heart to any evil thing. Psalm.
141.3.4. And, Ps. 139.24
Lead me in the way everlasting. Let us use all those means which he has
ordained to preserve us from sin, let us betake our selves to the Christian
armor, Ephesians. 6.13. and resist whatsoever opposes it self to the will of
God. But this resistance must not be in the power of our own might, but in the
power of GODS might, through whom it is that the weapons of our warfare do
beat down the strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
and do bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. If we
do thus, we shall stand fast in the evil day, even in the day of the fiercest
temptations.

mercy of God to have power to resist temptations, or to recover himself out
of his sin, and, is he made able to do any thing that is good? let him take
notice, that this was of Gods free grace: and that it was wholly of his grace.
He must, to the praise of God acknowledge that all is of God, nothing of
himself. He must acknowledge that God is not only the Author, or beginner,
Heb. 12.2. Phil. 1.6.
but also the perfecter of our faith; and that he is not only the beginner of
the good work of conversion in him, but that he has been, and will be the
performer and perfecter of it unto the day of Christ. And as we praise him for
that he made us, Psa. 100.3.
and not we our selves, so we must praise him for that he has regenerated and
new made us, Iam. 1.1^.
and not we our selves; being moved hereunto not by any thing in us: But as he
of his own will begat us with the word of truth, so of his own will by the
same word of his grace, Acts 20.32
he does build us up further, till he give us an inheritance amongst all those
that are sanctified. If we will do this seriously, it will keep us from
three of the greatest sins which a Christian is incident to, into which he will
certainly fall, if this present consideration, and the like do not restrain
him. These are spiritual pride, contempt of our weak brethren, and
unthankefulnesse to God. For let our graces be never so many, and never so
excellent, how can a man think highly of his own worth, or meanly of his
brother, when he considers that all he has is nothing but what he received?
1 Cor. 4.6.7.
And the more graces we see in us, the more thankful we will be to God
which gave them to us. Let us therefore see God in every good grace we have,
and in every good work we do, then shall we remain low in our own eyes,
merciful to our brethren, and thanekfull to our God. But let us, in our
thanksgiving, give the whole praise of every good work to God; not part to
God, and part to our selves, which is to rob God of all. For, since God
deserves all, if we give not all unto him, he takes it as if we gave him
none at all.

Lead thou us not, etc. but deliver thou us. Here note, that Gods own leading
of men into sin is deprecated, and his delivering out of sin is prayed for:
whence may soundly be collected this doctrine following,

God has an holy, overruling, He can and does restrain, or give men up unto
temptation; he delivers from sin, and out of sin, or suffers men to
fall into, and lie in sin, even as in the holy wisdom of his soveraigntie
it shall please him. And this he does and may do, without any the least touch,
stain, or impeachment of his holiness, or being any way properly the author
of any sin: as shall further appear in the handling of this point.

Genesis 45.8.50.20. Exodus 14.4*
The envious practices of Joseph's brethren against him. The hardening of
Pharaohs heart. Elies sons not harkening to the voice of their father. 1 Sa.
2.25.
Sheme^^ cursing of David. 2 Sa. 16.10
The putting of a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets. 1 Kin 22.23
The deceiving of those Prophets of the Idolaters mentioned in Ezekiel. Ezekiel.
14 9
The blinding of the eyes, Ioh. 12.40.
and hardening of the hearts of the Pharisees. Romans 1.26
The giving up of the Gentiles to vile affections. And the sending of strong
delusion to those which receive not the love of the truth. 2 These 2.11
All these (that I may speak as the Scripture speaks) were of God, or from
the Lord, which things (though sinful) are said to be of God, and he speaks
as if he took all to himself, not for that he works them by an immediate
hand of his providence: For, this were to make God the principal author of
sin, which to conceive is blasphemy; but because in those things he
permits something, does something, and does order and determine all things
thereabout.

God before all times decreed Herod and Pontius Pilate, Act. 2.23.
with the Jews and Gentiles in putting Christ to death, was no other, Act.
4.27.28.
then what Gods hand and counsel determined before to be done.

Act. 17.28
and all actors of evil; in his concourse to the substance of their acts.

Job. 1.12. Job. 2.6. Psalm 81.12.
wicked men, and a man's own evil heart, or lets them loose, and permits
them to tempt, even as he will.



Mat. 13.11 1 Cor. 2.8.10.14. Deuteronomy. 29.4.5.
without which no man can resist the first temptation, or recover himself out
of the least sin: or else does (...) it, both to whom he will, and when he
will, at his pleasure.

The Lord when he pleases, Romans 1.28
he gives many over to a reprobate mind, to a mind void of judgment: from
whence vainness of imagination, darkness of the understanding, blindness of
mind, and hardness of heart, do follow as certainly, as the darkness of
the air does follow the setting of the Sun in the firmament.

God, according as he pleases,

Last of all, God has an hand the manner of committing of them, and directing
them to their set object, and to such good ends, as he in his wisdom pleases.

Thus it is evident that God has a hand in the temptations and sins of men.
Now that he is not blame-worthie, or any way a cause of their sin, shall
further be cleared. For which cause let us consider these five things.

1 First, what God is in himself, and in respect of man.

2 How far only, and no farther, God has a hand in men's sins.

3 What acts come between Gods actions touching the action which is sinful,
and the immediate act of sin, as it is sinful.

4 What are the ends that God proposes, and attaineth in those his actions.

5 How God stands affected to sin, both before and after it is committed.

1 Consider first that God is holiness it self, his nature does not admit of
any possibility of erring, Genesis 18.25. Heb. 6.18.
or of doing any thing which is not holy, equal, and good; God is under no
Law, himself is his own Law; whatsoever therefore he does according to the
counsel of his own will cannot be faulty. Now, Ephesians. 1.11.
God does all things according to the counsel of his will. Moreover God is the
Creator, man is his creature. God is an absolute Sovereign, no way bound to
man to do him good, or to preserve him from evil (except he please to give him
a promise.) He is so absolute, that he needs not give account to man of his
actions: nay, Job 33.13.
because man (when God had made him good) did fall by his own evil inventions
or devices, Eccles. 7.29.
he has deserved that God should do him no good at all, but that he should
punish him with all evil. Wherefore, why may not his will be reason and equity
enough, why he will choose some to be vessels of mercy, and reject others to be
vessels of wrath, Romans 9.18.19.20.21.
and to dispose of all things concerning them, that being left to themselves,
and to manifold temptations, they shall work out their own damnation?

2 If we consider how far God works in evil, all that can be said, that
God does in respect of sin, may (as I suppose) be referred unto those things
mentioned in the reaso^^ of the point, scil. His decree, His support of the
actors, and concurrance of his power to the substance of the act of sin, His
permission, His proposing of external objects, His forbearing to give his
sanctifying Spirit, His withdrawing his common gifts of his Spirit, whereby the
powers of the soul become suspended, and do cease to do those good offices
for man which else they might do, His limitation of sin: and lastly, His
ordering of sin to serve his own ends, as he pleases.

Now touching the counsel and decree of God to permit sin, and then for to
leave man hardened in his sin, and last of all, to punish him eternally for
sin, no man has cause to except against any thing herein: whether we respect
Gods negative acts in not willing to hinder sin, but to permit it; as also in
his not giving grace to some men to rise out of it; or whether we respect his
affirmative acts thereabouts, as his concurrence to the substance of the act,
or his determination of the means whcreby sin should be committed, and of the
ends to which sin should serve after it should be committed.

Which I will make to appear thus, as follows.

God intending to glorify himself in the manifestation of his manifold
excellencies in the attributes of his goodness, wisdom, power, mercy, and
justice, he decreed, and determined with himself to create man, and to make him
good, even after his own image; and withal, to give him power to persevere in
that goodness if he would: Moreover he decreed to leave him to himself,
even to the liberty of his will, and to permit him to fall into sin;
decreeing withal to raise some of mankind out of their fall and sinful
condition, through Christ, by giving them faith, repentance, and grace to
persevere in the way of holiness, and in the end to give them everlasting
life, notwithstanding that by sin they had deserved everlasting death, and
that for the manifestation of his glory in the way of mercy mixed with
remunerative justice: likewise he together decreed, to leave the other some of
mankind fallen into sin, and not to vouchsafe them the grace of faith and
repentance; and withal he decreed, that for their sin he would punish them
with eternal death, and this for the manifestation of his glory in the way of
justice vindicative.

This I conceive to be but one formal decree of means (not subordinate one to
another, but ordained together) tending to one maine end, namely, to the end of
all ends, even to the glory of God, though in different ways, to wit, in the
way of mercy, and in the way of justice, namely, Romans 9.22.23.
to the making known of the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy which
he had before prepared to glory: and also to the showing of his wrath, and
making of his power known on the vessels of wrath, fitted, or made up to
destruction. For God made (therefore it must needs be that he decreed to make)
all things for himself: Pro. 16.4.
not only the godly, who are the vessels of his mercy, for the day of
salvation; but also the wicked, who are the vessels of his wrath, for the day
of evil, even for the day of destruction.

God decreed that sin should be by his permission, through Adams fall. God did
not leave it to be as a fortuitous, or casual thing which perhaps might come
to pass, and perhaps might not come to pass; but foresaw it, as a thing
certain, that sin would be, through Adams transgression of his Law, in as
much as he determined to permit him so to do.

Upon this permission it did infallibly follow that Adam would sin. For this
permission being granted, the thing permitted must needs follow; because Gods
will can neither be changed, nor resisted. And without Gods will nothing can
be. The event also, and man's woeful experience, does too well prove that sin is
in the world.

God likewise decreed to leave some men in state of sin, not giving them of his
saving grace, and also determined for sin to condemn them, as appears
clearly by the Scriptures. For Saint Peter says, that some stumbled at Christ
the cornerstone, and at the Word, 1. Pet. 2.8.
being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed; 2. Pet. 2.9.
And he says also, that God knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished. The Apostle Paul says, We are not ordained to wrath,
1. These. 5.9.
implying that God has ordained some, namely, the wicked, unto wrath. Saint
Jude says of certain men that were ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4, and
13.
to wit, to be left to their own hearts lusts, turning the grace of God into
wantonness; and, also, for that their wickedness, to have the blackness of
darkness reserved for them.

Thus we see what it is which God has decreed touching sin. Now lest God
should have any the least imputation of unjustice or cruelty cast upon him, or
of being the author of sin; which were blasphemous to conceive. I will
therefore in the second place show how, and in what manner he has decreed
sin to be, and to be punished; whereby it shall appear that God is holy, and
blameless, even in this as well as in all other his ways; and will be every
way justified when he is judged.

It is most true that God decreed that six should be; but how? He did not
decree that sin should be, as he decreed that all good things should be,
namely, by his operation, he producing them; but he decreed that sin should
be only by his permission. It must also be considered, how sin came to have
a being by Gods permission. Permission, either is a middle thing between
command and prohibition, and in that sense it imports a kind of allowance; in
this sense God never did, nor will permit sin; for he has most straightly
forbid i^; or else permission is taken for a middle thing between furthering
the being of a thing, and impedition or hindering of the being of the said
thing, in this sense it is taken in Gods decree of sin; he willed it to be,
but so as he did not further the being of it as it is sin, nor yet did he
hinder the being of it, only he did permit it.

Great difference must be put berweene Gods decreeing the things that be good,
and the things that be morally evil. For the decree that good things shall be,
is accompanied always with an effectual operation of God, which causes them
to be; but the decree that evil shall be by Gods permission is not accompanied
with any effectual furtherance or operation of God in the way of a cause to
effect it. God is truly the cause of every thing that is good; but he is not at
all truly the efficient cause of the evil of sin: yet there was good cause
why God might decree to permit man for to sin. For he knew it could be no
wrong done to the reasonable creature, if he should leave him to his own
nature to do according to the nature and freedom of his will; especially, he
having made it only disposed to good, and able to hold it self only to that
which was good, if he would. Besides, he knew that to leave the creature (made
in such perfection) to its own nature, was in it self, not against, but
according to the common good of the creature. Wherefore since God knew how sin
might be, without his causing of it to be, and knew also that, for the
manifestation of his further glory, it did belong to his omnipotent wisdom
and goodness rather to draw good out of evil, then not to permit it; why
might not he in his holy wisdom decree to permit it?

Moreover, there could be no faultiness in such a decree, because that in it
was set such an order, that neither the coming of things to pass by Gods
permission, nor that which should come to pass by his working, should either
offer violence to the wills of the reasonable creatures, or should take away
the liberty or contingency of second causes; but does establish them rather.
For Gods decree does determine the creature to work according to its nature,
that as all natural agents (as that stones should descend, if they be not
upheld, and that fire should burn combustible matter) should work
necessarily; so all voluntary agents should work freely and contingently. The
liberty of the creature, together with the sinfulness of the act of the
creature may and does well stand with the decree of God.

Indeed upon supposition of Gods decree to permit Adam to fall, it followed by
necessary consequent that Adam would fall; yet was it not necessary that Adam
should fall necessarily: But rather upon supposition of Gods decree, Adams
fall, by eating the forbidden fruit which God permitted him to do, came to
pass freely and contingently, that is, with a possibility of the contrary,
namely, of forbearing to eat of the forbidden fruit. This was because God had
made man a rational and voluntary agent, to work contingently, and freely,
according to the freedom of his will; and not to be forced thereto by any
necessity. The decree of permitting sin does not lay any necessity upon any
man to commit sin. Sin has not relation to Gods decree as the effect has
to its cause, but only as a consequent of it, and as an object whereabout the
decree is conversant.

Gods foreknowledge of what shall come to pass, and his will to permit it to
come to pass are sufficient to denominate a necessity, or certainty of event,
that the same thing must needs come to pass: but neither his foreknowledge,
or his will that a thing shall come to pass by his permission, makes God the
author of that which is fore-knowne, or permitted: but, to produce a thing,
that makes God to be the author of it. As for sin, there is no operation of
God concerning it as it is sin, but rather negation, or suspension of that
grace which if God did bestow, would keep man from committing of it. Gods
decree to permit sin, does not destinate any man to sin, for destination is
the ordaining of a person to a certain end: an evil action cannot be the end
to which a man is ordained. And this decree of permitting sin, and of leaving
him in his sin, and then of damming him for sin, all which presuppose that
God decreed to create man, yet from hence it does not follow that God made any
man to the end he might damn him: the end of his creation, and of all the
parts of Cods decree, was the manifestation of his own glory. He made all
things for himself. Prove. 16:4.
Now if man might fall by Gods permission, and yet God is free from being
author of sin: then who can have any color of exception, if after man is
fallen, God do leave him in his sin, and shall condemn him for his sin,
especially, since that, though Gods decree to leave a man in state of sin, and
to reprobate him from faith, and other graces needful to salvation be absolute
and without any cause out of God, but of his mere will and absolute pleasure:
yet he never decreed to reprobate or destinate any to damnation absolutely, nor
yet does he execute or damn any but for his sin. God never does save, or
damn any absolutely: but as they are found to be in Christ, or as they are
found, to be in their sins, out of Christ. For God did not absolutely elect
any unto salvation, nor absolutely reject any to damnation; but he decreed to
save only those which should actually, by his Spirit, believe in Christ,
repent, and persevere in an holy life to the end; if they be of years of
discretion, and such as by secret union of the Spirit should by a way unknown
to us, partake of, and belong to Christ, if Infants within the covenant of
grace. And he decreed to damn only such as should persevere in their sin,
and infidelity. For the promise of salvation, and the threat of damnation is
made respectively only to such. Yet know that God, of his mere will and
pleasure, did absolutely elect some, and did determine to give them the grace
of faith in Christ, repentance toward God, and perseverance in holiness of
life; and likewise absolutely to reject others therefrom, and to leave them in
their sin, and infidelity.

Thus God is cleared from being any author of sin, or, yet, to blame, if he
proceed in rigor in the eternal punishment of some for sin.

I will last of all show that God was no deficient cause in Adams sin, though
he did decree to permit it, and did work accordingly, either by denying his
grace, or by concurring with him to the substance of the act which was sinful.
In all this God did not carry himself otherwise than an absolute Lord, and a
most holy God might rightfully do.

What though God made the forbidden fruit of an alluring nature, pleasant to
the eye, and good for food, as it seemed to Eve; and was called by an alluring
name, a Tree of knowledge of Good and evil? What though God exposed Eve unto
the temptation of the Serpent, and Adam to the temptation of his wife? What if
God restrained the good Angels that they did not, as otherwise they might,
assist Adam against Satan, and against his temptation, by minding him of his
duty to God, and of the falsehood and malice of the devil, and how much he was
but lately beholden to God? And what though God left Adam and Eve to
themselves, without giving the^ actual assistance of his grace, any more than
what he gave them in their creation, to preserve them from falling, which he
gave to the good Angels and denied to others? What has God done in all this
which he might not do?

For notwithstanding all this, there was a natural and true possibility in
Adam and Eve to have forborne to eat of the forbidden fruit in spite of Satan
though he did his utmost that he could. Adam and Eve did eat the forbidden
fruit as freely without compulsion, as ever before they had eaten of any other
tree in the Garden: No compulsion, but bodily appetite leading them to eat of
the common fruit; and partly bodily appetite, and partly affectation of being
like God in knowing good and evil, seducing them to eat the fruit which was
forbidden.

There remained (I say) a true possibility in Adam, to have stood. For, by
virtue of the graee of God received in the creation, he could not only have
abstained from every outward action forbidden him of God, but to abstain from
it in a gracious manner, for that both outwardly and inwardly he was more
disposed, and better accommodated to obedience, then to disobedience, being
made of an holy disposition within, and having the commandment of God from
without, yea an easy commandment given to Adam for his greatest good, and that
from that God who had newly made him after his own likeness, and had made all
the world for him. Wherein now was God wanting in any thing toward Adam which
he ought to have done for him?

Man now being fallen (not through any fault in God, for God made him good, but
they sought out many inventions, Eccl. 7.29.
(which caused their fall) that God should elect whom he will in Christ to give
them grace, and according to their grace to give them eternal glory; and on
the other side, that God shall reprobate others, whom he will, and leave them
in their sins, and for their sins to punish them with eternal death, who
can justly complain or except against it. If any man cannot fully comprehend
these things, and satisfy his own reason herein, yet he is to believe that it
is so. For this is an object of our faith, rather then of dispute how it can
be. It is sufficient that the Scriptures say it is so. That saying of the
Apostle, O man (that art a man of a shallow reach and apprehension, that art a
creature, and now art a sinful creature) who art thou that reply against
God? Has not the Potter power over the clay, to make of the same lump, one
vessel to honor, another unto dishonor? Romans 9.20.21. This should satisfy
every Christian in this point. Secondly, that God by an act of his providence
and power upholdeth the tempters and tempted, giving them life and strength for
action, this is not subject to exception: for herein man is much beholding unto
God, for that, in and by him, Act. 17.28
he does live, move, and has a being. Thirdly, he by an act of his
sovereignty, does let loose Satan, and does not hinder the tempter from
tempting. Qui cum possit non prohib^t, ^ubet.
Indeed, amongst men, he that does not hinder evil when he may hinder it,
becomes accessarie, and is sa^^tie; but this is because the law of nature,
and the law of God requires that no man shall suffer his neighbor to be hurt
or indamaged, if he can hinder in but the absolute Lord God is not tied in any
such bond unto his creature, no not before Adams fall, much less sine^.
Fourthly, God does sometim^^ by an act of his wisdom, propose some object
whereby o^casion of sin may be taken, (...) Bathsheba's washing her se^^e was
ministered unto David's sight: and the wedge of gold and Babilonish garment by
Gods providence was presented to the covetous eye of Achan; and this he does to
discover what is in man's heart, and why may he not? We think we may laysome
silver, or sweetmeats in fit places here and there, to try our servants or
childrens fidelity: may not God do the like much rather? Fifthly, he forbeareth
to give saving grace: but whom does he wrong herein? since he is not bound to
give grace to any man. Sixthly, God does by an act of his justice, giving up a
sinner to a further degree of sin, does withdraw those gifts of the mind
which once he gave; which thing he has just cause to do, if he please: for
what man has not by his sin deserved this punishment? If a man abuse his
hand, why may not God wither it, 1 Kin. 13.4.
as he did Jeroboam's? We hold this to be good justice, and is it not as good
justice, that those that have abused their powers of imagination, of
understanding, and of discerning things that differ, should be punished by
being deprived of the right use of them? There is no less holy justice in this
latter, than in the former. Lastly, that God does limit sin for time and
measure, as he did the sins of the Romans for the elects sake; Mat. 24.22
and that he does direct them to good ends, as he did the sin of Ioseph's
brethen in selling their brother, Genesis 50.20
and sending him into Egypt for the good of Jacob and all his family, here is
matter of praise and glory to God, no matter of exception against God. If God
act no further in sin than has been^ said, I hope it is manifest that he
may act thus far, and (...) be innocent. Now God ha^^ no further act in
sin, Iam. 1.13.
he tempts no man. He is no agent in sin, as it is a sinful act: for he
does not entice, or solicit unto sin; he does not incline man's will unto
sin, by infusing or putting into it any evil, which was not there before:
but only leaves man to the temptations of his own lusts, the lusts of the
world, and of the devil.

The third thing considerable is, what acts come between Gods act and the act
of sin, or who are the immediate and proper actors of sin as it is sin.
These agents and acts are either external or internal; the external are the
suggestions of Satan, and the evil motions of men, which propose, entice, and
persuade unto evil: the internal is a man's own evil heart, upon which the
most blame does lie. For then a man is tempted, says James, Iam. 1.14*
when he is drawn away by his own lusts, and is enticed. Wherefore in those
sins in which God is said to have most to do, the fault was laid upon the
person that wrought himself unto evil, as upon the proper cause, when still
God is cleared. As, where God is said to harden Pharaoh's heart, Exodus 7.3.
the true and proper hardner was Pharaoh himself, for so says Moses, When
Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he (that is Pharaoh) harned his heart.
Exodus 8.15
And whereas it is said, God gave the Romans up to uncleanness, their acts of
uncleanness did not follow as properly caused by any act of God; but from a
cause in themselves, for so he says, Romans 1.24.
the dishonoring their own bodies was through the lusts of their own hearts.
Sin is a concrete compounded of two things, of the fact, and of the obliquity
of the fact; we (...) distinguish between the ^^stance of the act, and the
for^^ thereof, wherein the sinfulness of the act does lie. God he is a cause
concurring to the substance of the act; he concurreth not to the sinfulness of
the act, but only denies his grace, which if he would have vouchsafed to
bestow, it would have hindered it: which grace he is not bound to give to any:
It was enough that he gave a sufficient grace to Adam to stand, if he would.
So that we may truly avouch, that the devil, or man that enticeth another, or
a man's own self that enticeth himself, Deus est ordinator uon author peccati.
are the true causes and authors of sin, but not the Lord, who has only a
permitting, an overruling and disposing hand in sin, as is is sin.

The fourth thing to be considered is, the end which God proposes and
attaineth by permitting and ordering of the sins of men, far different from
those which men propose in committing of them: which ends are holy and good,
namely, to set forth his own glory; and that many ways, as by discovering the
impotency of the creature, what need it has to depend upon the creator, for
that man though perfect, yet could not stand for want of a special grace to
support him: also to manifest his own freedom and absoluteness over his
creature; besides that, his wisdom saw that permitting sin (in such a way as
could no way impeach his holiness) it would make way for the manifestation of
his power in his infinite grace and mercy mixed with justice toward some, and
in his infinite justice toward others. This he did, not that he could not
glorify himself otherwise; but for that in his holy wisdom he held it fitte^^
^o glorify himself thus.

But the end of the proper causes of sin is always naught, namely, envy
against man, and malice against God, was the cause why Satan tempted man to
sin; the satisfying of some vile lust is the cause why man enticeth, and is
enticed unto sin.

Why might not God first permit sin to be in the world, that so a clear way
might be made to the manifestation of his holiness in hatred of sin, and in
his just revenge upon sinners? in which respect though sin was no way good in
acting, yet it was good that it should be acted. And since the fall, his end of
giving up the wicked unto abominable sins, is to show his displeasure, in his
righteous punishing of one sin with another; for this he holds to be a
meet and equal punishment; as he says of the Romans, Romans 1.17.
They received in themselves that recompense of their error a^ wa^ meet. He
does thus dispose of their sins, that it may also appear that he has just
cause to damn them at the day of judgment. Wherefore though sin be evil,
ye^ the punishment of sin is (...) evil, but exceeding good.

The ends of the Lords permitting and disposing of the temptations and sins
of the elect are manifold. First, at the first his permission of sin to be,
through man's fault, made way for an object of his mercy: since the fall he
permits hi^ own people to be tempted unto sin, to show his wisdom and
power in sustaining the^, that they do not fall into evil, notwithstanding the
subtilty of Satan, and the d^ceitfulnesse of their own heart: or if they (...)
into sin, he suffers it, that he might show his grace and mercy in
forgiving, and his almighty power in rescuing and delivering them out of the
power of sin. Also God oftentimes suffers his own children to commit some
great sin, that he might discover unto them which do commit it, that
wickedness of heart which they would never else have acknowledged to be in them.
And this God does, that he might cure them of their diseases of sin, doing
like a skillful Physician, let them fall into one disease, to cure them of a
greater, as they say, they will cast a man into a burning ague, to cure him of
his Lethargy: or like as a cunning Surgeon can gather dispersed humors unto an
head, and there make an issue, whereas he may let out that corruption which
otherwise could not be drawn forth; even so God by suffering his children to
fall into some great sin, lets out that security and pride, which else
would not be cured, and works that humiliation, repentance, and care to
shun sin afterward, which would not else have been wrought in them.
Seeing therefore God has such good ends moving him to permit sin, and to
dispose of it in manner as has been said, he is to be cleared from all
imputation of faultiness in all that he has to do in the sins of men.

The last thing to be considered, is how God stands affected unto sin.
Touching which, be it known, that he hates it perfectly as it is sin, for
he forbids it before it be done: he never approves of it by his approving
will when it is done, yea he is so displeased with it, that he never lets it
go unpunished after it is committed: for he has punished it in Christ for the
elect, and is daily in punishing of it, and reserveth it to be eternally
punished by hellfire upon the reprobate. Thus Gods holiness is every way
cleared, though he permits sin, and has an overruling hand in men's
sins.

God is the cause of the action which is the matter of sin,

Here is no sound consequence: Peccatum est defectus nou effectus
but sin is sin as it is a defect and failing in the action, swarving from
the rule of righteousness: which is not caused by God, nor by any cause which
has any direct subordination from God the chief cause of all things.

God disposes of sin,

Sin has reference unto God as it is an object, unto God as the effect has
to the efficient cause, Peccatum qua peccatum, est objectum operis, nb^ opus
Dei.
to be wrought by him: therefore it does not follow, because he has a work
concerning it, or in it, therefore he is a cause of it, so long as it cannot be
said he does work it.



sine qua non, is (...) truth no cause. And all that ca^ be yielded is, that
God is only a cause by accident: now caus^^ by accident, are properly no
causes. No wise man will say, the warmth of the Sun is a true cause of the
stink of carrion, which does not stink until the Sun did shine upon it:
the cause of the stink is in the (...) thy corrupt matter of the carrion, not
in the warmth of the Sun: for the same Sun shining at the same time upon
violets, occasioneth a sweet smell.

The Scripture does seem to say plainly, The King hearkened not to the people,
for the cause was of God. Now in not hearkening to them, the King sinned.

Cause, Rehoboam to his evil heart, and suffered the young counselors to
give counsel according to the pride of their own hearts, by which means it
came to pass that Rehoboam sinned: the infatuating of Rehoboam, who was of
himself partially and corruptly affected toward his young Councillors; and
the not putting of wisdom into Rehoboams green head was of God; but that
Rehoboam made choice of the worst counsel, that was a most free act of his
own. Now Gods hand was in the disposing of these things, that the thing before
prophesied might come to pass. Thus much the word translated cause does
signify, scil. the thing brought about, or brought to pass was from God. This
act of not hearkening, must be considered in diverse respects: First, as an
evil act of Rehoboam and his evil Councillors; in this respect God did not
cause it. Secondly, it must be considered as a meet punishment of that
kingdom, and as a means to bring to pass the prophecy of Ahijah, in which
respect that God in justice should leave Rehoboam and his young Councillors to
their folly, and to the pride of their own hearts, it was good* and was caused
of God.

Thus it may appear, as I hope, that God has an overruling and disposing
hand in men's sins, without being author of sin, and without any impeachment
of his-holinesse. The uses follow.

They are therefore to blame, Suffer us not to be led, in stead of Lead us
not. Their end may be good, but their alteration is naught, and to no purpose:
for in truth this change of words does not clear Gods justice any more then
Christ's own words. Let the petition therefore remain and stand holy as it is
set down by Christ: for it is presumption to teach Christ how to speak.

This our tenent is an apology say, as this petition teaches us, that God
leads into temptation, and has more to do in the sins of men then a bare
permission.



be otherwise. Such are brought in objecting, Romans 9.
Who has resisted his will? Why does he yet find fault? This they take from
Adam, who before his conversion would have laid the fault on God, rather then
take it on himself: for he says, Genesis 3.12.
The woman whom thou gave to be wiih me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. But take notice, that although he thus extenuated his sin, by laying it
on God, yet God could, Genesis 3.17.
and did curse Adam and the earth; the bitter fruits whereof we feel unto this
day. Know therefore, thou that any way dare put off thy sin upon God, if thou
do not believe in Christ, and forsake thy sin, the Lord will one day show to
thy cost, that he can bring it about, that thou through thine own evil heart
shall sin, he giving thee over unto it, and yet can in holy justice cast thee
into hell for thy sin. For he can say, he deceived the false Prophet, and yet
justly punish the said Prophet, and all that are deceived by him. Ezekiel. 14.9,
10.



1 First make your peace with God by faith in Christ, repent of all sins
past: and having hereby obtained friendship with God, then keep it, by being
good before him; which is then approved, when you shall endeavor to please him,
by doing his will in time to come, which if ye do (for this is to be good
before God, or to please God) then you shall escape the snares and nets, the
hands and bands of the most enticing harlot in the world, (the like may be said
of all other temptations) but the sinner (says Solomon) shall be taken by her.
Eccles. 7.


2 As much as in you is, abstain from all sin; for, since man's fall, Gods
giving over unto sin, is a punishment for some former sin: but especially
shun those particular sins for which God does in special sort give men over;
the chief whereof are these following:

1 First, all refusing, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
or a slight and formal receiving of the truth; For this causes God to send
men strong delusion to believe a lie.

2 Abusing, or not making right use of that knowledge a man has, Romans 1 21.22,
23, 24, 26, 28.
does cause God to infatuate and give him over to vile affections.

3 A willingness of heart to be ignorant of the truth, and a wilfulness to
practice evil: for of such says the Lord, Ezekiel. 14.4
He that sets up his idols in his hea^^, and comes to the Prophet, I the
Lord will answer him that comes according to the multitude of his idols.

4 Presumption of a man's own power of himself to resist temptations: Matthew.
26.33 34.
for this cause the Apostle Peter was given over to fall so fearfully.

5 All willing casting of ones self into the occasions of sin: for this
cause Jehoshaphat's familiarity with Ahab, 1. Kin. 22.
caused him to be given over to believe Ahabs false Prophets, rather then good
Micaiah.

6 Idleness to live without a calling, or negligently in a calling, Ezekiel.
16.49.
does expose a man unto the Lords giving him over unto many abominations: for
this he gave over Sodom to uncleannes

7 Allowance of secret sins: this provokes God many times to give men over
unto some gross open sin, that it may work sense of sin, shame for sin,
and true repentance in the elect; and may work unto shame and eternal
perdition of the reprobate. Shun all sins therefore as much as in you lies,
if you would not have God lead you into temptation; but especially take heed
of those before mentioned.

Let all that believe in Christ, and have thereby true interest winnow us, nor
buffet us; no, Luke 2^.31
he cannot touch us, but as he has leave of our heavenly Father, the Lord of
hosts. This we understand further by the case of Job, Job cap. 1. cap. 2. Luke
12.31
Peter and Paul, Satan could not assault them until od Gdid permit him: and
when he ha^ leave to do his worst, the grace of God was sufficient to preserve
them, 2 Cor. 12.7.
that either they did not fall, or it did recover them out of their falls, and
in the en^ caused them to dye conquer on over Satan, over their own lusts, and
over whatsoever opposed it self to the obedie^^e of Christ in them.

Moreover, if Gods childr^^ do sin, he can order and dispose of their sin
to their good and to his own glory: for many of Gods children have reape^ more
benefit by falling into some sin which through Go^^ mercy has humbled the^^,
then they have by doing some good duties, whereby they have grown exceeding
high minded. Have we not cause therefore to rejoice that we are under the safe
conduct of such a leader? But let no man abuse this comfort, and pervert it to
his harm, by taking liberty to sin, because God can be glorified by it, and
can work good out of it. What though the skillful Physician can make triacle of
poison, and can tell how to apply poison to his patient for his recovery; yet
if the patient hereupon be too busy with these poisons, they will prove his
death. Let us be glad our God can draw good out of evil, but let us not be
doers of that which is evil.

Us: That is, our brethren, as well as our selves, Lead not them, but deliver
them also. Here therefore we learn,

All Christians must desire and Christ Jesus told Peter, that he had prayed for
him, that (whereas Satan would winnow him) his faith might not fail: and does
withal enjoyne him, that when he is converted, that is, when he should recover
himself of his fall, He should strengthen his brethren. Luke 22.32. He does
himself elsewhere pray to his Father, saying, Keep them from evil. Ioh.
17.15. The Apostle Paul says, The very God of peace sanctify you wholly. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. We have express commandment to rebuke our brother, and not
suffer sin upon him. Levit. 19.17. Also the two should edify one another, ^.
These. 5.11.

God our Father is displeased

Sin is every way hurtful Lev. 19 17
and where love is, it will edify. 1. Cor. 8.1.

The sins of others may Osea 4.1.
so that it may go ill with us for their sakes: whereas repentance does prevent
and remove Gods judgments, Psalm. 107.32.
and the holiness of a nation procures blessings to the whole land. Thus
spoke the Spirit of God unto Asa, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him,
but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. 2. Chron. 15.2. Pro. 14.34
Righteousness (says Solomon) exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to
any people. Wherefore in love to our country we should desire and do our best,
that the inhabitants thereof should be godly.

Sin is a common, hurtful, wheresoever it is met with: but grace is a
common, profitable, and amiable benefactour unto mankind, wheresoever it
dwells; therefore it should be our desire to place it every where, where we
may get it heart-roome.

It behooves men, even in true bear their iniquity, Levit. 5.1.
and to partake of their sins, if we should not do our best to restrain
them. Their sins are catching and infectious, it concerns us therefore,
that if the plague and fire of sin be begun in a town, that it be cured, and
quench^^ lest it infect, and spread to (...) own houses. And if throu^^ our
watchfulness the sinne^ others should not infect us, (...) they would be a
continual vexation unto us, if we be righteous; as it was with Lot, 2. Pet
27.8.
Whose righteous soul was vexed daily, with seeing and hearing the filthy
conversation of the men of Sodom. On the other side, if our neighbors be
godly, they are excellent persons in whom our souls may delight, Psalm. 16.3.
they will be examples and provokers of us unto love and good works, Heb. 10.^4
they will exhort, admonish, and comfort us; they will likewise pray for us,
Psalm. 141.5
especially if we have been any means of the conversion, or increase of grace
in them. In doing thus, we shall approve our selves to be converted, and
ingrafted into Christ, and become indeed trees of righteousness, Pro. 10.21
when our lips feed many, even to the winning of souls. Prove. 11.30.

It is therefore a great fault in voluptuousness, vaingloriousnesse; yea
suffer them to lie in these sins, and yet do never bewail their estate to
God in prayer for them, that God would deliver them out of the snares of the
devil; nor ever speak of their sins, except sometimes behind their back to
their disgrace, or to their face by way of girding, railing, and recrimination;
but never do in love and wisdom admonish them. What does this argue, but that
they love not God, they love not their neighbor, they love not their country,
they love not godliness, they hate not sin, neither are they wise for
themselves, that will not quench their neighbors house on fire, whereby their
own houses are in certain danger of being burnt up and consumed with them.

But it is a greater fault to give evil example unto others, and to entice
unto sin; as to profane the Sabbath, to neglect the exercises of religion,
to contemn authority, to be contentious, wanton, drunken, unchaste, theevish,
liars, and such like. And their sin is so much the greater, by how much they
in sayng unto God, Lead us not into temptation, and deliver us from evil,
would seem to desire that all their neighbors should be kept from sin.
This is gross hypocrisy, for which they shall be sure to answer. Besides, the
blood of all those whom they have enticed unto evil, and discouraged from
goodness, shall be upon their heads.

But most intolerable is the sin of those, which notwithstanding they say
this petition, yet do hate all that endeavor to keep a good conscience,
holding it cause sufficient why they should speak evil of them, and persecute
them, because they run not with them to the same excess of riot: 1 Pet. 4.4*
5.
which persons not only do evil themselves, but desire that others may be as
bad as themselves, and do delight in those which are most wicked. Does not God
say, that these shall give an account to him who is ready to judge the quick
and the dead? to which judgment, if by no means they will be reclaimed, I
do leave them.

Also as God gives unto any man a calling, either by virtue of his place of
authority, or by that familiarity and special interest he may have in his
neighbor, or by any other good opportunity, let him exhort, admonish, 1 These.
5.11.14.
and encourage his neighbor, that he may come out, and keep out of the ways
of evil, and may enter in, and walk on in the ways of godliness. For,
whatsoever we must pray for, we must do what in us lies to procure it.
Wherefore except our neighbors show themselves swine, Mat. 7.6.
by open and often trampling these pearls under their feet, and except they
show themselves dogs, by snarling at us, and flying in our faces, we must
never neglect this office of exhorting and instructing one another. And let
this be remembered, that even then when without breach of charity we may count
them as swine and dogs, yet we must never give over praying for them. David
did fast and pray for his enemies: he shed rivers of waters because men kept
not Gods Law. Ps. 119.136
Samuel professes, 1 Sa. 12.23.
he will never cease to pray for Israel. Jeremiah speaking of Gods judgments
coming toward the Jews, says, But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall
mourn in secret for your pride. Ier. 13.17. If a man shall first reform his
own ways, by pulling the beam out of his own eye; Mat 7.5.
if he be wise to observe the fit times and places wherein he does admonish; if
when he does endeavor to restore his brother, he do it with the spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6.1^
he may boldly and with hope of good success instruct his neighbors. If this
duty were thus performed, oh how should one neighbor enrich another with these
holy pearls! and there would not be the thousandth part of that sin
committed that now is, if every man would in wisdom and love be his
neighbors remembrancer. Set upon this duty therefore. I confess, it is a
thanklesse office amongst most men, but it is most profitable to men, and most
praiseworthy with God; and whatsoever effect it take with men, thy work is with
God, and thou shall shine in the end as a star in the firmament.

Do Christians pray one for another, you must consider, you have the benefit of
other men's prayers, yea, of the prayer of Christ, who did not only pray, that
Peter's faith should not fail him when Satan should sift him: but he prayed
that his Father would keep from evil, not only those which did then believe,
but those also which should believe, Ioh. 17.15.20. of which number you are.

Who made thee ruler over me? Look to your own self, Exodus 2.14.
you shall not answer for me: Who made you a controller? You may meddle with
your own matters: you take too much upon you, and such like. But know ye, O
ignorant, unthankful, and foolish men, God has made every one a controller of
another, (if to instruct and to admonish in love be, to be a controller) and
tell me, if the same man should acquaint you with your enemies purpose of
taking away your life, and should dissuade you from going that way in which he
lay in wait to kill you, or should offer you his company to assist you: if he
should tell you of your bodily disease, and withal give you wherewith to cure
you, or should help quench the fire that is begun upon your house; if he should
but help your beast out of the ditch, Exodus 23.45.
or should but untangle your sheep caught in the brambles; would you answer him
with What is that to you? or, I need none of your help; or, Who sent for you?
or, Who gave you authority to meddle with me or mine? I presume you would not:
but mere common sense and civilitie would move you to hold these proffers to
have proceeded from good neighborhood, and therefore you will accept his good
will; you will thank him, and will requite him with the like kindness if he
need. Grace and religion should teach you, that Christian good counsel is a
better fruit of Christian brotherhood, and is a certain evidence of a better
love to you, by as much as your souls are to be preferred before your body,
and your goodness before your goods He is a miserable foolish man, who is wise
in all things except in the case of his soul. Let all men therefore be as
ready to suffer wholesome words of instruction and admonition, as any shall be
willing to offer them. It is their love to perform it, but it shall be your
benefit to accept and follow it. Be of David's mind: he says, Psalm. 141.5
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. And let us when
any Abigal shall dissuade us from sin, 1. Sam. 25.32, 33.
do as David did, Bless God first, for sending them, then bless the advice,
and follow it, and forget not in the last place to bless the persons which
advise us, and labor to keep us from sinning against God. Whosoever shall
receive instruction in this sort, shall never want good counselors, nor good
counsel, nor Gods blessing upon it, when these two meet, namely, Pro. 25.^2*
a wise reprover to an obedient ear, it is both an ornament and an happiness,
in every Christian society.

Us: Even such persons as the Disciples, which were already converted, and had
received the true beginnings of sanctification. Whence observe,

Those which are already converted and sanctified, are yet subject unto
temptation unto sin, and to lie some space of time in it, if the Lord please
to lead them therinto, and do not deliver them from it. Genesis 20.2. 2. Sam. 11.
Mat. 26.78.
Abraham's lying, David's adultery and murder, Peter's denying of his Master, and
that saying of James, 3.2. In many things we offend all, does evidently prove
it.

1. Cor. 13.
they know but in part, and have received but the first fruits of the Spirit.
Romans 8.

There will always be tempters in the best men, and the more holy any one is,
the more malicious the tempter is, and more vigilant to ensnare him.

God has ordered that man

This confuteth that most false Abraham, David, and Peter, were converted at
such time as they committed those sins, (as I hear they do) they contradict
manifestly the holy Scripture: for it is most clear that Abraham had a
justifying faith when he was called out of his own country, Heb. 11.8.
which was before he told any one of his two lies. David was converted before
he was King, for God says of him in the very rejection of Saul, that he had
found a man according to his own heart. Act. 13.22.
Now his honest heart was not given him after he had committed adultery and
murder, but before Samuel anointed him to be King: for when Samuel had thought
that Eliab the eldest son of Jesse, a man of an excellent presence, had been
the man which God would choose, God does tell Samuel that he looks not on the
outward appearance, 1 Samuel ^6.7.
but on the heart, Peter likewise was converted before he denied his Master:
for our Savior says unto his Father concerning all his Disciples (except
Judas) that they kept his word, and says, Ioh. 17.6.14.
They are not of the world. It is to be wished, that authority would
restrain these revivers of old heresies, lest they fret like a Gangrene, and
increase into more ungodliness. 2. Tim. 2.16.17.

This likewise confuteth the

This teaches us what to strong man keeps the house, and that they are like
drunken men wounded, but are not aware of it. For if they were sanctified in
truth, the devil and flesh would ply them with manifold temptations.



which do ten times worse.

Let no man therefore give let him that stands take heed lest he fall. 1.
Cor. 10.12. For the best men may have their slips.

If the Disciples of Christ be but will not be convinced, and whether they
delight in it, or do wilfully lie in it; and whether their temptations be not
by them wrastled with, and resisted ordinarily: for if they resist those sins
of which they are eonvinced, and do not willingly lie in any sin, then they
are in estate of grace, notwithstanding some falls, and many temptations: and
they may in faith, and with a comfortable expectation of help from God, pray
to be delivered out of them.

child of God, if he shall keep close to God, is in a most safe condition,
notwithstanding temptation. For no temptation shall befall them but such as is
common to men: and God is faithful, and will not suffer them to be tempted
above that they are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape,
etc. 1 Cor. 10.13. Either God will keep us from the hour of temptation,
Revel. 3.10. or he will keep us from the hurt of the temptation. For in that
Christ in all points was tempted as we are, he having a feeling of our
infirmities, both can and will succor his own that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.
Heb. 4.15.

Jnto temptation: Our Savior directing his Disciples to pray against sin,
does first will them to pray against temptation. Whence we learn,

Whosoever would be preserved from sin, must pray against and withstand the
temptations thereof. He that is not wary and careful to resist temptations,
cannot live godly. The devil did deceive Eve through his temptations, Genesis 3.
and Adam was likewise drawn into the transgression by the temptation of Eve:
Math. 4.
whereas Christ Jesus the second Adam by resisting the devils temptations,
preserved himself from sin. The youth spoken of in the Proverbs was caught
and ensnared by the subtle temptations of the harlot. Pro. 7.10.21.
But Joseph by resisting the temptations of his Mistrisse, Genesis 39.9.
kept himself chaste, although her temptations were cunning, and most
importunate. Christ says again and again, Pray that ye enter not into
temptation. Luke 22.40.46.

they may be entertained, so as they may but receive any warmth in a man's
heart, there is presently a conception of sin, which will cause him to be in
labor and travail of it, until he have brought it forth into act. Iam.
1.14.15*
There are no creatures so apt to bear issue, nor ground so rank to bear
weeds; no tinder, or gunpowder so ready to take fire, as the heart of man is
to conceive sin, and be inflamed with lust by evil motions and temptations:
wherefore, all that would avoid sin, have cause to resist it in the
temptation. To resist beginnings of the evil of sin, Obsta principijs.
is as needful to be observed for a rule against diseases of the soul, as to
withstand evils of pain in their beginning, is needful in diseases of the
body.

Hereby we may judge what is the cause that sins do abound, is because
temptations are not resisted, which fault deserves sharp rebuke. Yea, many
are so far from praying against temptations, that they willingly foster and
nourish any that shall be offered, and like him in the parable, do sweep and
garnish their hearts, Mat. 22.44
opening the doors, and making it ready prepared to entertain any temptation.
They contrary to the Apostles command, make provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.
still thinking and plodding on wealth, or feeding themselves with high
thoughts, or are always hunting after unlawful pleasure, running always into
those actions, places and companies, which minister most occasions of
temptations. Insomuch that the devil and lust, are not more ready to present
evil motions, then the mind is to plot and contrive how to compass them,
Micah 2.1.2.
or then the hand is to act them: yet these men will mock God, and say, Lead
us not into temptation. And if they be exhorted to avoid the occasions of
temptations, they set light by it, and would make us believe they are not so
simple as to be taken with idolatry, covetousness, whoredom, drunkenness,
pride, revenge, or any such like crime, although they keep company with
idolatrous, or covetous, or voluptuous, or vaineglorious persons. Yea (if we
would believe them) they can wallow in the midst of occasions of sin, and yet
come forth undefiled. Let a man husband his heart as well as he can, and let
him sow into it the best seed he can get, yet he shall find that too many
lusts will of their own accord spring up, and hinder the growth of godliness
in him. We count them ill husbands that will not weed their land: but if we
should see men plowing, and sowing nothing but all manner of weeds, would we
not say they were out of their wits? Such mad men are all those that nourish in
them temptations unto evil. But what men sow or suffer to be sown, that they
shall reap. Prove. 22.8.
If they sow wickedness, they shall reap vanity. At harvest when others
shall have corn, they shall be sent empty away. When in the day of the Lord
the good Wheat shall be saved, the wicked with their lusts shall be cast into
a furnace of fire, Mat. 13.41.42.

avoid the sin. Occasions and tentations are snares, it is much easier to
avoid a snare, then, being entangled, to get out of it. Let us al therefore
watch and pray, that we fall not into them. But it is doubted by some that it
is not lawful to pray against being tempted, thinking it lawful only to pray
that they may not be overcome of the temptation. I answer, I doubt not but the
very temptation it self, as it is a motion and enticement unto sin, is to be
prayed against also. For the Apostle Paul did not only pray to overcome the
prick of the flesh, and buffettings of Satan, 2 Cor. 22.7.8.
but that it might depart from him. And why may not a man desire not to meet at
al with those his enemies which seek his life, as well as when they assault
him, desire to quit himself of them? I confess, request must be made for the
one and the other, with some difference. When we pray that we may not be
tempted, it is always under correction, not absolute, but if it might stand
with Gods will and pleasure: we desire to run the race of Christianity
without meeting with stumbling blocks, or any occasions of our stay or turning
out of the way; but if God will have us meet with these impediments, we pray
absolutely that we may pass over them, and not be let or turned out of the way
by them. And if he will that we must enter into the conflict, we pray that we
may overcome.

Now because resisting of temptations is of great consequent; it will be worth
the pains to consider these four things: First, what is a temptation.
Secondly, who are the tempters. Thirdly, how they tempt. Fourthly, how a
temptation may be resisted.

1 Temptation is any and every motion unto the doing of any thing which God
has forbidden in his word; or to the leaving undone any thing that God has
commanded; or to do any thing otherwise then God has commanded. When a thought
of any evil is presented to the mind to be done, this is a temptation.

2 The tempters are, Satan, called the tempter, Matthew. 4.3. Iam. 2:14.
and men, with whom we converse, when they move others to sin; and also the
lusts of our own evil hearts.

3 These tempters do move a man to sin, by presenting unto the mind,
thoughts of sin to be committed by him. The devil by his suggestions, as he
did to David, putting him in mind to number the people. 1 Chro 2.21.1.
Man tempts by speech, or some outward sign, whereby he gives a man to
think what evil he would have him do. Thus the harlot tempts by her
words, Prove. 7.
by her eyelids, and by her dalliance. A man tempts himself, when the lust
of his own evil heart does minister matter of thoughts of sin to be
committed, or when by the sense of some outward object, the evil heart takes
occasion to present evil thoughts unto the mind. Sometimes all these tempters
conspire together in one and the same temptation, and most commonly Satan and
the evil heart combine in those temptations which are most mischievous. But
we need not so much inquire who tempts, as to know how to resist the
temptation.

These tempters prosecute their temptation in this sort. If the party tempted
be of himself a slave to sin, and is given over unto sin, and is already
disposed to a particular sin, then there needs no more but a bare
suggestion or motion to it; that is enough to cause such a one to commit it.
But if a man be endued with the Spirit of grace, or of restraint, then all the
devices that the wit of man and subtlety of the devil can find out, shall be
used, both in the proposing of the temptation, and prosecuting thereof. Then an
eye shall be had to all advantages that may be taken, either from a man's
natural disposition, or from his sex, or from his different condition of life
and calling; from his estate in the world, be he rich or poor, noble or base;
or from his estate in grace, be he a babe or strong man in Christ; or from
observation in what thing a man is least armed; or from observation what a man
does esteem or disesteeme most; also from place, time, solitariness, company;
and, whatsoever particular circumstance shall fall out, it shall be taken to
the greatest advantage to further the temptation, making use of the infinite
varieties of evil unto which, and of the manifold varieties of means by which
a man may be tempted. In moving a man to like that which is evil, there is
always a face and appearance of good set upon it: and in moving a man to
dislike that which is good, a vizard of evil is put upon it: or if
notwithstanding the motion, the evil to which a man is moved, will appear
sinful, then they will present considerations, that it is but once, or for a
short time that they shall hold that evil course; also, how the best men have
fallen, and have notwithstanding been saved: how that God is merciful, etc.
And withal, motives shall be fetched from the credit, profit, or pleasure,
that shall be attained upon yielding: and on the other side, from disgrace,
loss or pain that may follow upon not yielding to the temptation. It is not in
the power of man to find out the windings and turnings, the sleights and
devices, the cunning reasonings and subtilties that sin by its agents can and
does use to circumvent and ensnare mankind. Sinful inventions are so deep,
that most wise Solomon professes he could not find them out, no not in either
sex: for so he says, The inventions or sinful devices of one man of a
thousand, have J found out; but the inventions or sinful devices (for thus the
supply of the defective sentence is to be made) of one woman among all those
have I not found. Eccles 7.27, 28, 29.
Where the word rendered account, should be rendered reasoning, or invention, or
device of sin: for it is the same word which in v. 25. is translated reason,
(namely of wickedness and folly) and is the same which ver. 29. is translated
inventions, which of necessity must be meant the same which the Apostle 2 Cor.
2.11. calls devices.

Now that it appears what a temptation is, also who are the tempters; and
that sin by her agents Satan and sinful men, is most crafty and cunning in
tempting, it remains that we should chiefly learn how we may be preserved
from being ensnared by it. Now because the tempters are so strong and subtle,
it is necessary that we call unto our aid a stronger and wiser then our
adversaries, which only is the Lord, who can restrain them from tempting, and
deliver al such that are tempted. Wherefore hearty prayer must be made to him,
as our Savior teaches us, that he would not lead us into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. And because he resists temptations in us by his
Spirit, by putting into us good motions to the contrary; prayer must be made
unto God, that he would give unto his holy Spirit, which may work effectually
in us against temptations. Whosoever is good before God, and pleases him,
whosoever shall take heed that he do not grieve this Spirit, and quench the
good motions of it, they praying for it, shall be sure to have it, Luke 11.13.
and shall escape the hurt of the temptation, when the sinner shall be taken by
it. Eccles. 7.26. Yet it is not enough that we be reconciled to God, and do
keep our peace with him, and have his holy Spirit dwelling in us: for though
God could subdue al our sins, and resist all our temptations for us, without
our own help, yet he will have us to resist, by exercising the whole
reasonable man in the conflict against sin: for which cause he gives his
word to direct us, and the manifold graces of his Spirit to arm us, Ephesians. 6.13.
that we our selves may by the power of his might withstand temptation in the
day thereof.

Now that we may withstand temptations, it shall be good to to look to our
own heart, Pro. 4.23.
for that is the hold and fort of the soul; if that be not true to us, we are
sure to be foiled in every temptation: wherefore we must have it in an holy
suspicion, so far as to cause us to examine and search it daily, to find out
those treacherous and deceiveable lusts that lurk there; Ier. 17.9. Ephesians. 4.23.
and when by the light of the word we have found any evil lusts, then we
must not stay till they assault us, but let us assault them, and use martial
law, let us presently accuse them and our selves for harboring of them, then
we must confess and bewail them before God, and condemn and crucify them;
then we must make particular and daily application of the blood of Christ unto
the heart, and it will purify it, and purge the conscience from dead works,
that we shall serve the living God. And let us never leave purging the heart,
until we can say, it is not set upon any earthly thing, either to love it, or
fear it; for if it be, as he that will be rich, so he that will have pleasure,
and will have glory of men, shall fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9.
which drown men in destruction. A man must by the work of Gods Spirit,
through the use of the Word, never leave working upon his heart until he have
brought it to a firm resolution to will in all things to live honestly. When
the heart is thus made sure for God and for our selves, the next care must be
that the understanding, the watchman and intelligencer of the soul, be
rightly informed by the Scriptures of all such things that do belong unto its
office in the Christian warfare. First, it must be able to discern between
good and evil, between things not sinful and sinful: and of good things, to
discern which are good but in part, which every way good; and what things are
good only to sense and in appearance, and what is good in truth: also what is
but in part evil, and what is wholly evil; and what is evil only to sense
and in appearance, and what is evil in truth: that the baits to draw unto
sin, taken from the gain, pleasure, and glory of this world, may not move
us, because we shall know they are but uncertain, transitory, and not the
true riches, pleasure and glory; and that on the other side, the bug-beares to
fright us from doing good, may not remove us, because they are but uncertain,
momentanie, and light evils, in comparison of the certain and true riches of
grace, and of the everlasting true pleasures and glory which is laid up for
those that be constant in keeping faith and a good conscience to the death.
When the understanding is thus enlightened, we must always set the true
danger of sinning, and the true good and glory that follows upon well-doing,
before our eyes; and it will cause the heart to choose the good, and refuse the
evil. Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: the reason was, because his
judgment was sound in discerning between good and bad: for it is said, Heb.
11.25.26.
He esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of reward. If we can but judge
aright of the joy that is set before us in the course of holiness, Heb 12 2.
it will make us with our Savior Christ endure the cross, and despise the
shame which in this world does accompany Christianity; and we shall with speed
run the race that is set before us, notwithstanding the impediments that we
shall meet withal.

Now when the heart is established and armed with grace, and the mind with
knowledge and judgment, there must be a continual watch set, and faithfully
kept; wherefore the eye of the mind must be always awake, to see and observe
what particular temptations do arise against us, either from within or without.
Therefore the Apostle Peter says, 1. Pet. ^.8.
Be vigilant, for your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion, 1 Cor. 16.13.
seeks whom he may devour. Watch, says the Apostle Paul, else there will be
no standing fast in the faith, nor quitting our selves like men. Our Savior
says unto all, Watch, Mark. 13.17. When by watchfulness the temptation is
discovered, then we must buckle all the Christian armor about us, scil.
Sincerity, righteousness, Ephesians. 6.
patience, hope, faith, and the sword of the Spirit, the word of God. And being
thus armed, we must animate and fill the heart with courage and resolution to
resist even unto the death. For which cause, we must make an oration unto it,
such as wise and valiant leaders will make to encourage their soldiers; we
must mind our hearts of the odiousness and hurtfulnesse of that thing to
which we are tempted; how that it is a lust of the flesh, and of the devil;
how it is enmity to our God, and a deadly enemy unto us; how that we must kill
it, or else it will kill us. Let us mind our hearts with this, that it will be
to the dishonor of our King and country to be overcome; that to yield to any
temptation is contrary to our vow of allegiance, which we entered into when we
first professed to fight under Christ's banner. Lastly, let us tell our selves
of the equity of our cause, how that our war is just: think also of the
wisdom and valor of our captain our Lord Jesus Christ, assuring our selves,
that how hard soever our conflict may be, yet if we do not yield, in the end
we through him shall overcome, and be more then conquerours. Romans 8.37
Having thus won the heart to resolution, then let us as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 13.16.
Stand in the faith, quit our selves like men. In the conflict we must avoid
two evils. First, we must not trust to our own wisdom: for then sin will
be too crafty for us. Secondly, we must not resist in the power of our own
might, for then the principalities and powers will be too strong for us. We
must therefore resist by the wisdom of the holy Scriptures, being able to say
with our Savior Christ: It is written, Mat. 4.
I must not commit that sin to which I am tempted: and with Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
shall I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? Resistance of
sin in this sort, is not only a defending of our selves, but a wounding of
our adversaries. We must also be sure in our conflict to entreat Gods aid,
that in the power of his might we may prevail. When we resist by the wisdom
of the word and power of God, if we submit unto God, and be earnest, and
constant in resisting, we shall put Satan to flight: for God says, Iam. 4 7.
Resist the devil, and he will fly from you. But remember always that his
departure will be but for a season: Luke 4.13.
we must therefore always keep on our armor, and keep our watch, and let
our experience of over-mastering former temptations, give fresh courage unto us
to resist all that are to come.

But deliver us. Here our Savior will have his Disciples to ask to be
delivered out of their sin into which they are fallen, as well as to be kept
from falling. Whence observe,

It must be every man's desire and endeavor if he be fallen into any sin, to
be delivered out of it by repentance, and that he may walk before God in new
obedience. Ier. 31.18.
Turn us Lord, and we shall be turned, says the Prophet. The Church of
Ephesus is bid to remember from whence she is fallen, Revel. 2.5.
and repent. And the Minister must wait when God will give repentance, and
recover evil men out of the snare of the devil. 2. Timoth. 2.25.26. Which
place shows that repentance is deliverance out of sin, and does intimate
that it must be desired.

Until a man have repented, Isa. 1.26.18, 19.
Put away the evil of your doings: cease to do evil, and learn to do well:
and then they might come to God, and he would respect them.

Until sin be repented of, a

Sin unrepented of takes and beget other sins.



sometimes God awake them by his judgments, and by checks of conscience, and
does offer them his Spirit to turn them unto him: yet neither his patience,
nor bounty, does lead them to repentance. They will say, Lord deliver us from
evil, but refuse to be delivered. This their hypocrisy aggravateth their
impenitencie, and their impenitencie aggravateth all such sins as are not
repented of: for it is a fault to commit any sin, but when it is not repented
of, this sin is continued, yea doubled, and multiplied; for every day they
should turn from their sin, as ordinarily as they seek their daily bread.
No sin so dangerous as impenitencie; for therefore the sin against the holy
Ghost is unpardonable, not in it own nature, but because they that commit it
cannot be renewed unto repentance. Heb. 6.6.
Impenitencie therefore though it be not the sin against the holy Ghost, yet
it must needs be a fearful sin. For he that lives and dies in
impenitencie is as sure to be damned, as he that sins against the holy
Ghost. Let all that refuse to forsake their sins look for Gods visitation,
Ier. 5.3.7.9
as he says in Jeremy: They have refused to return, etc. How shall I pardon?
shall I not visit for these things? and shall not my soul be avenged on such?
etc.

estate of every sinner until he have repented. But let this repentance be
true, and sound, proceeding from grief for sin, and hatred of sin, not
turning from one sin to another, or a bare leaving of sin, but it must be a
conscionable turning from evil to good. It must be, in the bent and intention
of the soul, and in our whole endeavor, a turning from all sin, as well as
from any one, even from as many as we can come to the knowledge of, as well
from secret as open, as well from beloved sins, and such as are in credit in
the world, as from any other. Ezekiel. 8.31.
We must cast away all our transgressions, says the Lord. It must be speedy,
while it is to day, lest our hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. It must be constant, Heb. 3.15.16.
as daily as we ask daily bread. If we would but enter into our hearts and
consider what we have done when we have sinned, how we have transgressed an
holy commandment, and thereby have grieved the holy Spirit, disgraced our holy
profession, and have offended a merciful Father, and a severe Judge, who yet
if we will turn, will have mercy; but if we refuse to turn he will punish,
and will not pardon; the thoughts of these things would work grief, and hatred
of sin, and hope of pardon, from whence would follow repentance never to be
repented of: if withal we pray heartily, saying, Deliver us from evil: for
with all the means we do use, prayer must be one; for as we cannot repent
without Gods help, so he will not help and give us repentance except we ask
it.

From evil. By evil is meant sin. Our Savior would have his Disciples pray
against sin under the name of evil. Whence we may learn,

Sin is evil, and God would It is called evil. Romans 12.9. where it is said,
Abhor evil. Ioh. 5.19.
The whole world lies in evil. Thus David in confessing his sin unto God,
does affect his heart with shame and remorse, saying, Against thee have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51.4.

Sin is absolutely contrary yea enmity to him, Romans 8 7.
therefore it is the evil of evils.

Sin does separate a man from the Isa. 59.2.
It does separate a man from God. No other evil, be it imprisonment, poverty,
disgrace in the world, sickness, death, does separate a man from God; he may
enjoy God, and may have a blessed communion with him notwithstanding the worst
of these evils; which he cannot do while he lies in his sin. Wherefore sin
must needs be the greatest evil.



Gal. 1.4.
the world is therefore called evil, because it is a sinful wo^ld. Men are
called evil men, 2. Tim. 3.13.
because they be sinful men. And because the devil exceeds all other in
sin, he is called the evil one, Matthew. 13.19.

brings loss to their estate, and shame to their name, and pain to their
body, or some other misery to their outward man: as touching sin, many are so
far from judging it to be evil, that, because they conceive it serves for
their pleasure, gain, or credit, of all courses, they think none so good as
those that are sinful. What man so vile, but thinks his course good, and
thinks all are fools that are not of his mind. The Papist is so well
conceited of his Popery, as he looks to win heaven by it. Ioh 16.2.
The persecutour thinks he does God good service in molesting such as fear
him. The swearer thinks his speech does not sound well, and is without all
grace, if it be not filled up with oaths. The covetous, the voluptuous, the
vainglorious, all of them applaude themselves in their ways as if they were
good, though (as Solomon says) the issue there of is the way of death. Pro.
14.12
It stands sin upon, that the devil and wicked men should transform
themselves, and transform sin, and put some goodly painting upon it to make it
seem good, else no reasonable man could be brought to commit it: for the will
of man does by virtue of its mere nature so perfectly abhor evil, it being
the proper object of detestation, that it would always shun it, therefore
there is put an appearance of good upon it, whereby it may deceive. But woe be
unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness. Isa. 5.2^.

evil? then let us believe him, and not our own lying hearts, nor yet the
father of lies, who would bear us in hand that sin is not evil. But let us
always conceive of every sinful act, as (...) evil, naughty, and hurtful
act, and let it be our greatest care to avoid sin. Oh if we could represent
the acts of sin under the name of an evil act unto our apprehensions, our
will would at the first motion loathe and detest it more then it does a toad
and a serpent, and would either kill it, or run from it. Whenever therefore
we are tempted unto sin, let us see it as it is, a most evil thing; let us
account of it as it is, a most evil thing. And whatsoever colors be set upon
it, or whatsoever good means it is called by, if the thing so called be a
transgression of Gods law, let us call it a most evil and most abominable
thing. Yea, we must conceive of every sinful action, and must account it a
greater evil then the eternal torments of hell. For the least evil of sin
is greater then the greatest evil of punishment: for the greatest punishment
is an effect of Gods righteous hand; but the least sin is contrary to God, it
is very enmity unto his holiness. If sin might appear to every reasonable
soul to be as it is, such an evil as has been said, it would work grief
and repentance of sins past, and hatred and departing from sin for ever
afterward.

magnify the Lord, and say, Who is a God like thee? Mica. 7.19.
who do not only pardon, but wilt subdue our iniquity. And with David, let
us call upon our souls to praise God, because as he forgiveth all our
iniquities, so also he heals all our diseases, that is, Psalm. 103.3
he does sanctify us, delivering us from all evil.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever.

These words contain the reason of all the petitions: it is delivered in an
exact form of thanksgiving: so that it does excellently serve both to confirm
the faith of him that prays, and to give glory unto him that is prayed unto.
The Evangelist Saint Luke does not mention this clause. It is probable that
when our Savior did teach his disciples in private, at the request of one of
his disciples, he did only teach them how to make petitions: but when he
taught them in public, he did add this clause, to teach them as well how to
praise him, and give him thanks, as to pray unto him and make requests. It is
sufficient for our learning that any one Evangelist has recorded it. In this
clause we have the note that shows that these words are a reason of the
former requests, in the word (for.) Then we have the arguments or grounds of
the reason, which are taken from certain respe^^ in God, which do minister
matter of faith, assuring them that they had cause to ask and expect of God
all the former petitions: and do also minister matter of praise, showing what
cause there is why all glory should be given unto him. These respects of God
are three, Soveraigntie, Power, Glory; which are set forth by the appropriating
particle, thine, whereby these three, Kingdom, Power, and Glory, are ascribed,
as proper, to God. Thine is kingdom, etc. and also with the copulative, and,
conjoyning the two latter respects or privileges in God with the former, and
the power and the glory. All which three are illustrated by their continuance,
for ever.

Kingdom, signifies Gods absolute soveraigntie over all things, to whom only
it appertains of right to forgive and to give at his pleasure; therefore they
make their suite unto him.

Power, signifies that all-sufficiencie in God, whereby he is able to do all
things according to the good pleasure of his will. Many have kingdom, so that
it pertains to them to help their subjects, but want power, as it was with
the King of Israel, who said in the famine, 2 Kin. 2.27.
If the Lord do not help, whence shall I help? But as it belongs unto God
to hear the petitions of his subjects, so he has power to grant whatsoever
they shall have need of: hence the petitioner gathers assurance that he shall
have his petitions granted.

Glory, is that high estimation, honor and praise which is due to any person
for their worth and goodness: this is originally in God, as well as
soveraigntie and power, and in that respect is appropriated to him. Wherefore
when it is said, Thine is the glory, thus much is implied, that as all glory
and praise is due to him, so they do now give it to him. And if he shall grant
their requests, it will be for his glory; therefore they are bold to make these
petitions, and hope to speed in their suites: whereas, though it appertains
unto God, and he were able, yet if the things asked were not for his honor and
glory, he would never grant them.

For ever, is to be applied unto kingdom, power, and glory, namely, it does
now and shall always belong to his prerogative royal (because kingdom is
his) to hear the petitions of his people. He is now and shall for ever be able
to help them: he now has and shall for evermore have glory and praise
ascribed unto him for granting their requests; therefore they pray unto him.
The meaning of these words may be thus expressed: O Lord God, which art King
of kings, and rulest over all, we have none either in heaven or in earth to
whom we may make our requests but thee: for thine is the kingdom, it belongs
to thy place of soveraigntie to provide for thy name and honor, by advancing
thy kingdom, by causing thy will to be done, and by preserving and receiving
into favor, and by giving grace to thy people. Thou Lord art able to fulfill
all this that we have asked: and we do yield thee, as is most due, the glory of
thy soveraigntie and power: and if thou shall please to grant these our
requests, as thou shall therein deserve, so we shall be ready to give unto
thee all glory everlasting: wherefore we are bold to ask, and to expect the
granting of them.

For thine, etc. In the entrance into prayer Christ taught his disciples to
represent God to their thoughts, under such titles and names whereby they might
confirm their faith in prayer: and here in the close and end of prayer, he
does wish them to press and urge God from consideration of his soveraigntie,
power and glory, from whence they may encourage themselves by good reasons,
both to ask and look for what they have asked: whereby we learn,

The Lord would have his children Thus did Jacob, when he prayed to be
delivered out of the hands of his brother Esau, saying, Gen 32.9.10.11.12.
O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isack; the Lord which said
unto me, Return into thy country, and to thy kindred, and J will deal well
with thee: I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies which thou have
showed unto thy servant. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother,
from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and
the mother with the children. And thou said, I will surely do thee good, and
make thy seed as the sand of the sea. In this prayer Jacob gathers reasons
from the covenant between God and his fathers, from Gods commandment and his
obedience thereto, from his acknowledgement of Gods mercy and his own
unworthiness, from the relation he had to God, being his servant, from the
condition of his adversary, he being his enraged brother Esau, from the extreme
danger he and his wives and children were in, and lastly from a promise that
God had made to him in respect of his posterity, which could not be fulfilled
if Esau should have destroyed Jacob and all his children. Upon all these
reasons, he does ground that petition, Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand
of my brother, from the hand of Esau. In like manner Solomon confirms his
faith in the beginning of his prayer, 1 King. 8.23.24.25.26. And it is ordinary
with David throughout the Psalms.

either to inform him of their need, or to move him to supply their need; for
he knows every man's case better then himself, and is more readily inclined
of himself to help, then any man can be ready to ask: yet he does delight,
that his children should yield reasons of their requests, because therein they
show proof of their knowledge, faith, confidence, and other graces, which is
much pleasing to their Father.

Reasons in prayer does much

Hereby all praying without must be judged to be faulty: for he that knows
not what he asks, can never give reasons why he asks.



does please God to hear his children reason it out with him. Wherefore he
does sometimes of set purpose seem not to hear, but rather seems to deny
his children that pray unto him, because he would have them answer all doubts,
and resist all impediments, and be more importunate with him in giving reasons
why they should be heard. Thus the Lord dealt with the woman of Canaan: first
he seemed not to hear her; then when he heard, he seemed to deny her suite,
and yielded a reason of his denial: Mat. 15.25 28.
yet all this was but to make trial of her faith; which when she showed by her
importunate continuance of her suit, and wise answering of Christ's objection,
saying, Truth Lord, yet the dogs do eat of the crumbs which fall from their
masters table: she thereupon received of him a commendation of her faith,
saying, O woman, great is thy faith; and withal obtained her request even to
the full, for he said, Be it unto thee even as thou will.

Reasons of our petitions may be taken from Gods nature, from his promise, from
our capablenesse to have our prayers granted, either because we are in Christ,
and are his servants, and do pray in his name; or they may be taken from our
need of help, or from that experience we have had of help in time past, or
from the thanks and glory that we do give, and will give, if it shall please
the Lord to grant our requests. If from these and such like grounds out of
Scripture, we shall wisely make choice of reasons befitting our present
occasions, and shall use them understandingly, not so much to inform or
persuade God what he should give, as to inform and persuade our selves how to
ask, we shall be much helped in our praying, and God will be well pleased
with our prayers.

The reason of the asking the aforesaid petitions is set down in a form of
praise and thanksgiving; from which we may observe,

Christians must in their prayers We must as well give him glory and thanks,
as pray to him to give us grace, or any other good thing. Thus says David,
Thine O Lord is greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and
the majesty. Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above
all. 1 Chronicles. 29.10.11. David calls upon his soul, and all that is within
him, to praise his holy Name, Ps. 103.1.2. The Apostle requires that in every
thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, we should make our
requests known unto God, Philip. 4.6. Also he says. Let us by Christ offer
the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips,
giving thanks unto his Name, Heb. 10.13.

Of him are all things, therefore to him be glory for ever, Romans 11.36.

good, pleasant, and comely, to praise the Lord, Psalm. 147.1. It is good,
because it is the will of God, being a part of his worship. It is the best
means to continue and make good unto us the good things we have. 1 Timothy 4.4
It is the best means to procure those good things which we yet have not. It
is well pleasing unto God: for he says, He that offers praise, glorifieth
me. Psalm. 50.23
It does become the upright to be thankful, Psalm. 33.1. for it does show
their humility, and dependence on God, and acknowledgment that they, in all
things are beholding unto God.

This reproves all those who and admired, and the workman praised of every
one, and he shall be half deified. And if a friend shall save their lives, or
deliver them out of prison, or do any other such special kindness unto them,
they thank him, and acknowledge themselves beholding unto him as long as they
live: whereas God which gave power, and will to the same friend, to do thee
good, and does give them all other good things, who would also deliver them
from the bondage of sin and Satan, a^^ from eternal death, he is forgotten,
and is never thanked by them; yea many of those who in their distress do
seek unto him, and are helped, even they, like the nine Lepers, never return
to give thanks. Luk 17.17
It is ten to one (as we say) if any give glory to God. Most men ascribe the
praise of all good things which they have, unto nature, fortune, luck, or
chance, unto their wit, or to their hands, or to their friends, to any person,
or thing, rather then unto God, without whom they could have had nothing. These
men are wilfully blind, if they do not see that Gods hand does all things:
But if they see that all things are of God, and yet will not give him the
praise and thanks, they do much wrong God in depriving him of his honor, and
do manifest themselves to be utterly unworthy of all good. There is no sin
can be more hateful then ingratitude. There is no sin can be more hurtful
to the committer of it; for it does provoke God, and cause him in wisdom and
justice, to take away from them those good gifts which once he gave unto them.
As he did with his daughter Israel, of whom he says, Hos. 2.8.9
Because she did not know that I did give her corn, etc. Therefore will I
return and take away my corn in the time thereof. And for this cause God
gives men over unto reprobate minds, because they having means to know God,
and cause to be thankeful, Yet they do not glorify God: neither are
thankful, Romans 1.21.28.

David did consider the heavens, and the work of his fingers, he breaks
forth into an holy admiration of God, saying, O Lord our Lord, Psalm. 8.1.9
how excellent is thy name in all the earth. And the Apostle could not speak
of the work of redemption by Christ, but he says concerning God, To whom be
glory for ever, Amen. Gal. 1.5. Ephesians. 3.21.
If we would but consider how little good, and how much evil we deserve at
Gods hands; how that it is his mercy we are not consumed: and if we would
consider how little evil, Lam.
and how much good we receive every day of his mere goodness, we could not
choose but be thankful. Wherefore we must bewail our barrenness of heart,
and with David call upon our souls, and all that is within us to bless and
praise his holy name. Psalm. 103.1
We must call his benefits to remembrance, and tell our souls what great
things the LORD has done for us, recounting one benefit after another, until
we have convinced our hearts of our duty, and have enforced our selves unto
thankfulness. But our thanks must not be verbal only, like that of the proud
Pharisie, saying, Lord I thank thee: Luke 18.11
they must be hearty, and real; which is then, then we show that we do
indeed acknowledge our selves bound and beholding to God for those things for
which we say we give him thanks, namely, when we use his gifts as he has
appointed, to his glory, and when we give our selves both in soul and body to
his service: thus let us give thanks: it is good, it is pleasant, it will
become us. Then this, nothing more pleasing unto God, nothing more profitable
unto us: for every hearty thanks, is a real effectual begging of
continuance, and blessing upon what we have, and of new supplies unto what we
have not: such shall never want good gifts, because God knows he shall never
want hearty thanks.

Thine is kingdom. He says not, thou have a kingdom, but which is more,
thine is kingdom, that is, all kingdom and soveraigntie is thine in original
right, and is not a derived soveraigntie as all other governments are. Whence
we learn,

Absoluteness of authority The Lord made that great Monarch, and earthly king
of kings, Nebuchadnezzar to acknowledge and proclaim that he was a God of
Gods, and a Lord of kings, and that his kingdom was an everlasting kingdom,
Dan. 2.47. and 4.3.

The Lord made, and does

The acts of God do prove it: for he changes times, he removes kings, and
sets up kings. Dan. 2.21. By him kings reign. Pro. 8.15. All powers are of
him. Romans 13.1.

Psalm. 12.4^
Who is Lord over us? This should likewise make all wicked men to tremble; for
he who is an absolute king, whom no policy nor power can withstand, he to
whom vengeance belongs, even he is Lord over them.

One is your Father which is in heaven, and one is your Master, even Christ.
Matthew. 23.9.10. Wherefore the Pope must be held to be an usurper of Gods
prerogative, because he does presumptuously take upon him to give laws, such
as shall properly bind the conscience, whereby he does domineere over men's
faith and conscience, 2. These. 2.4
and does take upon him as God.

Hereby we must be exhorted 1. Cor. 6.
And as for inferior and subordinate authorities of men under him, we must for
his sake submit our selves unto them, but in the Lord only: 1. Pet. 2.13
for if they command any thing that God has forbidden, or forbid any thing
which God has commanded, we must answer them with the words of the Apostle,
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more then unto
God, judge ye, Act. 4.19. To refuse to obey them in this case, is not to resist
authority, but to resist the corrupt wills and lusts of those that abuse and
exceed their authority.

Ezra 1.2
whose is kingdom. Wherefore they must beware that they do not tyrannize over
their subjects, and domineere over their wives, children, or servants, abusing
the authority which God has given them, as if they had no master to whom they
should give account of their government. For the Apostle says unto all such,
Your master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him.
Ephesians. 6.9.

servant and child of God, to consider that their God and father is King, and
Lord of all: for the majesty and soveraigntie of the father is for the honor
and advantage of the children. They cannot be base and ignoble, which have such
a Lord and Father: for as Christ our head is hereby honorable, because he has
such a Father, so we the members are honored, and may rejoice, 1. Cor. 12.26.
because we have such an head, whereby we become one with his father and our
father, to whom absolute soveraigntie does belong. If we lack any thing, we do
hereby learn to whom to repair, even to God, who will not fail his subjects
that depend upon him, Rev. 1.6. Rev. 5 10
but will make them all Kings unto him: for his is kingdom. And if we be
oppressed by the authority of men, we need not be troubled, but may commend
our selves unto God in well-doing, 1. Pet. 4 19
comforting our selves in this, that he that is higher then the highest,
regards us. Eccles. 5.8.

And the power. Since power is ascribed unto God: we may observe,

Power originally belongs unto God. All power is in him, and from him. David
says, Power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. Daniel says, Wisdom and might
are Gods, Dan. 2.20.





Nahum says, that he revengeth, he revengeth, is great in power, and will not
at all acquit the wicked: who can stand before his indignation? Nah. 1.2.2.6.
He is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Matthew. 10.28.

This reproves all that call Psalm. 78.9.
Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Or like those that think their sins
to be so many, and their hearts to be so hard, that they cannot be pardoned or
cured.

This doctrine of Gods power God is able to ingraft them also, if they abide
not in unbelief. Romans 11.23.

If Gods hand be upon any under the mighty hand of God. 1. Pet. 5.6.
There is no contending with God, that can prevail with him, but Jacobs
wrestling, which is humble and hearty prayer: by this a man may have power
over God, and prevail, if he can weep, and make supplication to him. Hos.
12.4.

the strong God, Exodus 34.6.



that they are sons and daughters of God almighty. I, even I, 2. Cor. 6.18.
am he (says God) that comfort you: who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man, which shall be made
as grass? Isa. 51.12. Nahum says, The Lord is good, Nahu. 1.7
a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows all that trust in him.
Have thou not known (says God) that the everlasting God, Isa. 40.28.29.30.31.
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is
weary: he gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he
increases strength. Even the youths (that is, the strong adversaries that
presume upon their own strength) shall faint: but they that wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength. Asa did confirm himself against an host of
more than a thousand thousand enemies, by this point in hand, saying to the
Lord, 2. Chron. 14.11.
It is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no
power. And whereas Gods children are many of them little and weak, and their
adversaries mighty and strong; yet if they lay hold on the power of Gods
might, they shall stand in the evil day, and be sure to overcome. Thus John
encourages all Gods children, saying, Ye are of God, 1. Ioh. 4.4.
little children, and have overcome them, because greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the world. Paul comfort himself in this, when
persecutours went about to take away his life, 2. Tim. 2.12.
saying, I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him. And hereby we know that our vile
body shall be made like Christ's glorious body, Philip. 3.21.
because of that mighty working whereby Christ is able to subdue all things to
himself. And we are assured of that inheritance incorruptible in the heavens,
because both it is reserved for us, and we are kept for it, by the power of God
through faith unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1.4.5.

And thine is glory. In that glory is appropriated unto God we learn,

All glory and praise primarily Therefore the four and twenty Elders ascribe
glory and honor unto him. Revel. 4.11. Likewise all creatures in heaven and in
earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, are brought in, giving glory and honor to him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel. 5.13.

This is, goodness, they have it of God: for of him, Romans 11.36.
through him, and to him are all things, (says the Apostle) to whom be glory
for ever, Amen. Who so would be further confirmed, and would see what use he
should make of this Doctrine, let him look back into the first Doctrine of the
first Petition.

For ever. Here it must be observed, that

All divine prerogatives and properties that are in God, are everlasting. His
soveraigntie, power, and glory, and all his attributes had no beginning, and
shall have no ending. Moses in the Psalm says, From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90.2. The Apostle says, To the King eternal,
immortal, etc. be honor, and glory for ever. 1. Tim. 1.17. who also speaking
of God in another place, says, Who only has immortality, etc. to whom be
honor and power everlasting. 1. Tim. 6.16.

The nature of God is perfect and absolute, without mixture, the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Is God everlasting in every that are appointed for them, are everlasting. If
there might be an end of Gods justice, power, and glory, there might be an end
of torment: but so long as God (whose breath as a stream of brimstone, Isa.
30.33.
does kindle hellfire) is everlasting, Mark. 9.
the gnawing worm and scorching fire made to torment every sinner, must needs
be everlasting. Ah, how can they endure this everlasting burning! Isa. 33.14.

The thoughts of the eternity 1. These 4.17. Psalm. 16.11
is everlasting. By this we may assure our selves, that after the day of
judgment we shall both in body and soul ever be with the Lord, in whose
presence is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore: because he that has
promised and purchased, and which has prepared and reserved an eternal
inheritance in the heavens for us, 1. Pet. 1.4.
ever lives to fulfill and continue it to us.

Since all Gods excellencies are

Amen.

This is the second part of the Lords Prayer, whereby is expressed the right
disposition of the mind and heart of a man when he prays, which is indeed
the very life of prayer. This Hebrew word Amen, remains for the most part
untranslated in Greek, Latin, English, and in all other languages. It is used
either in the beginning or ending of a speech. In the beginning of a speech it
imports an earnest asseveration, whereunto our saying, verily, or indeed, or
in very truth, does answer: in this sense it is often used by Christ in the
Gospel. When it is in the latter end of a speech, as here, and in diverse other
places, it signifies two things, either a wish of the heart to obtain what is
proposed, or else a persuasion of the heart that it shall obtain that which
was proposed. Often times it signifies both. That Amen is a wish and desire of
what was before spoken of, it appears by Benaiah's answer to David, when he
had appointed Solomon to be ruler over Israel, and over Judah, saying, Amen,
which he does explane by these words, The Lord God of my Lord the king say so
too. 1. King. 1.36. That Amen shows a persuasion of faith touching the thing
before spoken of, see Romans 9.5. where when Paul had said of Christ, that he was
over all, God blessed for ever, he adds Amen, that is, he was assuredly
persuaded that it was so.

Amen, in this place, signifies both the assent and wish of the heart, as also
assurance of faith, and expectation of the petitions before mentioned. These
different acts of the soul, scil. a hearty wish, and expectation of what is
wished, are not so different, but that they may in one instant be acted at once
in the heart, and therefore may fitly be expressed in one word, so long as the
word, Amen, does signify both those acts of the soul. As it expresses the
assent and desire of the heart, it implies knowledge, truth of heart, and
fervor in asking. As it expresses faith of the heart, it implies an assured
expectation to obtain the things asked. This sense of Amen may be thus
rendered: O heavenly Father, now that I have asked all these petitions according
to thy will, in the name of Christ, I do heartily wish and desire again and
again, that thou would grant them: and I am persuaded, and do expect that
in the best time they shall be granted.

Amen, As it signifies assent of heart unto what was asked, does necessarily
presuppose the understanding of what was asked. Whence we may collect,

Prayer must be made with understanding. Whosoever prays must know what it is
that he prays for. Sing ye praises with understanding, says the Psalmist.
Psalm. 47.7. I will pray with my understanding, says the Apostle. 1. Cor.
14.15. meaning he would pray so, that both he might understand himself, and
that others might understand him also.

Amen to his own petitions, as well as to the petitions that others do make
for him: for this Lords prayer is to be said in the closet as well as in the
Church. Now the Apostle says, he that occupies the room of the unlearned,
cannot say Amen at the giving of thanks, if he understand not what is said by
another. There is the same reason why a man cannot say Amen to his own
prayers, if he do not understand what he has said.

This confuteth the Popish Amen. Whereas they say, God understands Latin, and
does like of devotion, I answer he must understand what the heart says, as
well as what the tongue utters: and as for blind devotion, (such as that is
which is without understanding) he does abhor it. Yet this is a common fault
not only among Papists, but of the common sort of ignorant professors of the
true religion; for even many of them, if they have said over their prayers, do
think they have served God well, and and are blessed for that day: when poor
souls, they do not understand one half of what they speak. Let all before
spoken of understand, that all uttering of words of prayer without
understanding, are but bare repetitions of words; they are no prayers, but mere
babbling, which God detesteth.

before God, and if he be the mouth of others, that he express his desires
in such words, that those that hear him may understand him, that both himself
and others may indeed say Amen unto his prayer,

Amen, This implies intention, and assent of heart unto all the petitions
before mentioned. Whence note,

The mind and heart must always There must be truth and intention of heart in
all prayers. David says, his prayer did not go out of fained lips. Psalm. 17.1.
The Apostle says, He would pray and sing with the spirit, as well as with the
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. The Lord did dislike the prayers of Israel,
because when they prayed, they cried unto him not with their heart. Hoseah
7.14. He did likewise abhor the prayers of the Pharisees, because they only
drew near unto God with their mouth, and seemed to honor him with their lips:
but their heart was far from him. Mat. 15.8.



Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your
heart, says the Lord, Ierem. 29.13. And Christ says, whatsoever ye desire
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Mark 11.24.

prayers of many men, of whom, albeit it cannot always be said, they pray not
in understanding (for they know what they say,) yet they may be charged with
this fault, that they do not pray in the spirit: for they do not always mind
what themselves or others do utter in prayer, or if they mind it, do not
heartily desire it, or not desire all that is asked: they will say Amen to the
petition for daily bread, but say not Amen to thy will be done, or lead us not
into temptation. These offenders are of two sorts. One sort never take notice
of this their slightness and hypocrisy, and are so far from being humbled
for their faylings, that even for their hypocritical service they expect God
should respect them. Thus did those Jews, Isaiah 58.3. who said, Why have we
fasted and thou see us not? all such are in the power of hypocrisy, who
except they repent, must expect to have their portion with hypocrites. There
are another sort of offenders in this kind, that through drowsinesse of body,
wandering of their thoughts, and through an evil custom of slight and
heedlesse praying, alone or with others, do not mind the things which they
seem to pray for: but either have their thoughts suspended, that they think
on nothing, or else have their thoughts on some other things than what are
uttered in prayer: but these either take themselves in the manner, in the time
of prayer, whereat they grieve, and presently call in their thoughts, and fix
their heart upon the present work, or at least when they have made an end of
praying, they will call their faylings to mind, and humble themselves before
God for them. Albeit this latter sort are Gods children (for the best are
subject to slightness, hollownesse, and many wandering thoughts in prayer) yet
they must judge this manner of praying to be sinful, and must suf^er
themselves to be reproved, and must reprove themselves, and take pains to
avoid this evil of heedlesnesse and hypocrisy in prayer: else, how can they
say Amen to their own or other men's prayers, when they did not give heed or
attend unto prayer: their prayers must needs be without spirit and life, and
therefore displeasing unto God.

This calls upon every one unto God. The heart must be lift up unto God, and
be kept steady upon him, and upon every confession, petition, and thanksgiving,
from the beginning of prayer unto the end thereof, that in the end we may with
firm remembrance of what has been spoken, and with good advisement, redouble
our desires, and testify our hope of audience, when we say Amen. Thus to pray,
is to pray in the spirit.

Amen. In saying Amen, a man repeateth and redoubleth his desire, as if he
said, What I have desired, I do again, and again desire, and wish it may be
so. Whence note,

There ought to be an holy fervor and earnestness in prayer. Good King
Hezekiah showed his earnestness, when he said, Incline thine ear, O Lord,
and hear: open thine eyes, O Lord, and see. Isaiah, 37.17. Daniel is likewise
earnest, when he says, O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do:
defer not for thy names sake. Dan. 9.19. Ask, seek, knock, says our
Savior, Matthew. 7.7. Those prayers which prevail with God, are called
effectual fervent prayers. Iam. 5.16.

For when a man is fervent

It argues that he has faith Mat. 15 22.25.2^.
as it did the faith of the woman of Canaan.

The evils to be prayed against

God only can hear and help, reason therefore why we should be urgent with him.



Amen to their requests; which argues that either they have no hearty desires
of that they ask, or they have little hope to speed: both which faylings in
prayer do much displease God.

Luke 18.1.2
Christ teaches this by the parable of the importunate widow, and unjust
Judge: for by importunity and earnestness she prevailed, even with him.
Wherefore if we would importune the righteous and most gracious God, we
should prevail much more. This fervency commends and gives force to our
prayers, yea, though they be utterred but with unperfect speech and inward
groans, more than the most fine phrases, and most choice words that can be
uttered, if fervor be absent.

Amen does also express that persuasion of faith and hope, which he that
prays has to obtain his requests. Whence we learn.

Whosoever prays aright, This same Christ himself teaches, saying, What
things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them. Mar. 11.24. The Apostle would have men pray every where
without doubting. 1. Tim. 2.8. John says, This is the confidence that we have
in God, that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us. 1. Ioh.
5.14.



Ask and it shall be given you. Matthew. 7.7. Our Savior says, If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you. Ioh. 15.7. Yea, the promise is made with condition of believing that
they shall obtain: therefore they must believe: for Christ says, All things
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive, Matt. 21.22.

ask the Father in the name of Christ, Rev. 8 3.
who is that Angel which has much incense, which he does offer with the
prayers of the Saints, thereby making them acceptable: who has by his word
given all men assurance, that whatsoever they shall ask the Father in his
name, he will give it. Ioh. 16.23.

This discovers the sin of

To such I answer, Let not Satan and a misguided judgment deceive you. For,

First, the cause may be in your selves that you are not heard.

Secondly, though God do not take any exception against your person or prayer,
but likes both well, yet in his wisdom he may see cause why he will not
grant your desire.

Thirdly, God may hear and grant your petition when yet you may think that
you are not heard.

Fourthly, God may for good causes oft-times defer the granting of your
requests, which must not be accounted for a denial.

If the fault be in your self, either through the faultiness of your person,
or action in prayer; then God of purpose forbeareth to grant your prayer, not
because he hears not, but because he would have you to amend what was amiss
both in your self, and in your prayer.

To qualify a man's person that he may have his prayer heard, it is requisite
(1.) that he be the true child of God, that he be ingrafted into Christ by
faith, and that he abide in Christ, and have his word dwelling in him. For,
Abide in me, Ioh. 15.7.
says our Savior, and let my word abide in you, ye shall ask what you will,
and it shall be done unto you.

Or (2.) if a man indeed be regenerate, Psalm. 66.18.
yet if he regard any particular known iniquity in his heart, and if he lie
in any gross sin unrepented of, the Lord has cause not to hear, for this
sin, as a thick cloud, Lam. 3.40.42.44.
causes that his prayer (as Jeremie says) cannot pass through. (3.) He that
would himself be heard of God, and have God to forgive him, must be one that
has put on bowels of mercy, Col 3.13. Mat. 6.14.
and kindness, and readiness to give unto, and to forgive his brother at his
request, else how can he think that God will hear him, Matthew. 18.32.33.35.
so as either to give unto him, or to forgive him. (4.) It is requisite that
he which would have his new petitions granted, should first be thankful for
former and for old mercies received, else this may be a sufficient bar to the
granting of new requests. (5.) He that would obtain his petitions, must be
ready pressed, and be industrious in using those means wherein, and whereby the
good thing asked is by Gods providence, or grace usually bestowed; else, let no
man look to have his prayer granted. He that does ask daily bread, he must
labor, and use the lawful ordinary means of maintenance, else he may justly
starve, notwithstanding his prayer. So likewise a man may pray for knowledge,
for faith, repentance, and for eternal life; but if this be but a sluggards
wish, and be not joined with using the ordinary means of knowledge, faith,
and repentance; as namely, hearing, reading, and meditating of the Word of God,
and a right partaking of the Sacraments. If a man do not heed the Word, if he
do not consider it, and lay it to his heart: If he do not withal improve the
strength which he has gotten in the use of the means of grace, considering
what grounds, and what cause he has to believe and repent, etc. and if he do
not assay, and put himself on to the leaving the sin he prays against, or
to the doing whereof he desired grace of God; let him never think that he
shall obtain the things prayed for. For God never intended to give them, but
in the use of those means which he has prescribed.

If therefore your person be not thus qualified: If either you be not in state
of grace; or if you live in any gross sin unrepented; or if you be not in
charity with your neighbor; or if you have been and are unthankful for old
favors; or if you be failing in not using the lawful means of having what
you ask, you may thank your self if (though you have prayed) yet you have
not your petitions.

Though your person may be in the maine fitly qualified in the former respects,
yet there may be such failing in the particular act of praying; that it may
hinder the granting of the prayer: As (1.) If you pray not to God only. (2.)
If you conceive not of God aright. (3.) If you pray not in the name of Christ,
at least impliedly. (4.) If the matter of your prayer be not good and
warrantable. (5.) If you do not pray with understanding. (6.) If you do not
intend your prayer as a worship of God, and be sincere in it. (7.) If it be not
with a sensible desire. (8.) If it be not with attention of mind. (9.) If it
be not with fervor. (10.) If it be not with holy devotion. (11.) If it be not
to a right and warrantable end. (12.) And if it be not in faith, believing that
you shall have your request put up to God in manner as aforesaid; and if it be
not such a faith which causes you to wait patiently; then, if God have not
heard, you must blame your self; and if you would be heard another time,
consider wherein you failed, and amend it; and particulary take heed that when
you have endeavored to pray as well as you can, that, your not believing you
should be heard, be not the chief cause why you have not your prayers granted.

It will further be objected, of our prayers; then who can believe that ever
his prayer shall be heard; for who fails not in some or other of them.

I answer, first God is many times better to us than our prayers, and if he
please, he may grant our petitions though made with some special failings; if
he do, it is of his mercy; if he do not, the fault was in us. But secondly,
difference must be put between a failing, out of weakness and manifold
temptations, and that which is through wilfulness, and customary negligence.
If a man's conscience can witness to himself, that, when he prays, the
intent, and the bent of his heart is to pray aright, and not to fail; then God
for Christ's sake, in whose name prayer is made, does pass by and forgive such
failings, and does certainly hear. Wherefore, in such cases, we ought, when
we pray, to believe that God will grant our prayers, notwithstanding such
failings in prayer.

Secondly, though we have not offended him in our prayers, yet God may see
cause why he will not grant them. For the general rule of his promise to hear
our prayers does admit of some exception. As, first when, if the thing asked
were granted, it would cross some acts of his eternal purpose, not known to
us, which he has intended for the setting forth of his glory in ways unknown
to us; whether it be in things concerning his Church, or our own selves in
particular. Moreover, we are apt to desire things to come to pass in such or
such a way, and by such or such means, and in such or such a manner, as we
think may stand well with Gods will; when yet God has some other way, some
other means of doing his Church or of doing us good, in another manner then we
expect. Many times we would have it our way; but God holds it best to give
it his way. 2 King. 5.11.
Like Naaman the leper, he would be cured one way; but God cured him by another
way. Act. 27.24.30.44.
God saved Paul and all with him, not as they would by the safety of the ship;
but by the pieces of the ship after shipwreck. We are apt to rest upon such
and such means, and to set the means above God; then it is fit that he should
choose other means, yea he does many times choose weak means to confound
the strong, that all the praise may be given to God, and that no flesh might
glory in his presence. Many want comfort, and other things because they
prescribe to God the means. Mat. 26.39.
In such cases we should always pray with a reservation, namely, if thou will
let this thing be, or let this thing pass, yet not my will, but thine be done.

A second exception is, if the thing asked be not for our good. We many times
ask for things good in themselves, and lawful for us to ask; but God who
knows what is better for us than we do, he knows that if we had them, they
would not be good for us. In this case to be denied our suite is a mercy, and
and a favor to us. God promises that we shall want nothing that is good, Psa.
34.10. Psa. 84.1^. Romans 8.28.
and that he will withold nothing that is good; and that all things shall
work together for good to them that love him.

Thirdly, God does hear and grant our prayers when we think that he does
not. God does grant our requests diverse ways,

Sometimes he gives the same thing that is asked even in the same kind: as
when God gave unto Hannah a son at her request: 1 Sa. 1.27.
Psalm. 21.2.
and gave unto David his hearts desire.

Sometimes God does not give the same thing in kind which is asked; but the
same in effect, or that which is far better. When we ask temporal
blessings, as health, wealth, liberty, or the removal of such and such a
cross, it may be God does not hold it fit that those particulars should be
given; but if instead thereof he shall please to give patience and
contentedness; and more and more acquaintance with God, and a greater
dependence on him: If God shall give strength and grace sufficient to bear the
cross, and to want the thing desired; if God by the want of earthly things
teach us to esteem of and to seek after the true health, riches, and liberty
of the soul. If hereby we be weaned from this present world, and be more
renewed in our minds, and can be brought to have our conversation more in
heaven, than otherwise we should have had if our particular prayer had been
granted, who can say that God has not heard him? who will not say, but that
God has given him more than his requests?

Moreover God does give unto his children their requests in the same kind when
they think he does not; for many think that if they have not humility,
patience, power to resist temptations, and to pray with life and fervor as
they would, and if they feel not that they have faith according to that
measure which they desire: or if they have not the like measure of faith, and
of the gift of prayer and of other graces which they conceive to be in other
Christians, they conclude they have none at all; whereas God having at their
request given these to them in truth, in any measure, he has heard their
prayer, and has granted their requests. God never intends to give to all men
one and the same measure of his saving graces; but as he in the parable gave
to some more, and to some less, so does he in dispensing of his grace. If we
have obtained these graces in truth, as we have certainly, if we continue to
desire them, and do desire to grow in them. We should be now thankful for
what we have, and ready to be glad and more thankful, if we could have more;
and we sholud be careful to improve what we have to the utmost. But we must
not repine against God for that we have so little; nor yet envy others for that
they have so much; nor yet slander Gods gifts by saying he has not heard us,
or given us such and such graces, because he has not given us so much grace,
as he has given to others, or so much as we have desired that he should
give to our selves. This fault must be amended, else know, that we deserve
that God should be so far from giving us more, that in his justice, he may
take away from us, even that which we have. The least measure of saving grace
which he gives to any of his children, the grain of mustard seed, and that
which is called a little strength, this deserves to be acknowledged, and to be
cherished, and, until we can get more, we should walk, and work, and fight
in the strenth thereof: for this little strength, if we put it forth, Revel.
3.8.
will enable us to keep Gods word, and will keep us that we shall not deny
Christ's name. This small measure of grace will uphold us in state of grace, and
by the support of the word of Gods grace, it will build us up, Act. 20.32
and bring us to heaven, even to an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Fourthly, God does often defer the granting of our prayers; this must not be
accounted a denial.

God deferreth to give the thing asked many times, because we are not
sufficiently humbled, Judge. 20.18.23.26.
or otherwise fitted for audience.

Sometimes he deferreth the thing petitioned, for the trial and exercise of
our faith, and patience, Mat. 15.22 unto verse 28.
and hope: for this cause he deferred the woman of Canaan.

Sometimes he does it to quicken our desires, and to make us the more
importunate with him.

Sometimes he deferreth us that we may be drawn to seek him again and
again; he loves to see the faces of his children often, which he should not
do if we might speed at the first asking.

Lastly he sometimes deferreth to give the thing asked, to the end that we
might the more esteem the thing asked, after that it is granted; and may be
the more thankful for it. For such is our corruption and folly, that what is
lightly come by, is lightly set by; and what is easily gotten, is quickly
forgotten: But what we get with many prayers and tears, and with much
wrestling, we esteem it the more precious in it self; and we acknowledge
our selves the more beholden to him that gives it.

Now therefore to conclude this point, let none say, how can I believe that God
hears me, when yet I find that I have not the thing asked? Consider what
has last been written, I will only add this: If you have not yet that
needful good thing which you have prayed for, yet still you must continue to
pray for it: For, know that Gods promise of hearing and granting is not made to
this or that particular prayer, but to a constant course of asking. God would
have us always pray, Luke 18.2.7
again and again, and not faint: therefore Christ says, Mat. 7.7.
ask, seek, knock, then it shall be given, then you shall find, then it
shall be opened unto you.

Christ, to be heard for his sake, be sure that you add this, that you do
believe that you are heard, and believe that in the best time, and in the best
manner, your petition shall be granted: believe this, that you shall have what
you asked, or which is much better, which you should rather have asked.

There is a necessity of faith in prayer, without which we cannot hope to
speed; I mean not only, that faith by which we believe that God is, Heb. 11
6.
and that he is a diligent rewarder of them that seek him, and whereby we do
believe in him to salvation, Mar. 11.24
but that faith whereby we believe that we shall receive in particular the
things which in prayer we do desire of him. Faith in prayer is so necessary,
that Saint James says, If any man lack wisdom, (the same may be said of all
other things) let him ask of God, Iam. 5 6.7
etc. But let him ask in faith; if he do not, let not that man (says he)
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. If we believe, we glorify
God, Ioh. 3.33.
and set to our seal that God is true in his promise; but if we believe not, 1
Io. 5.10.
we make him a liar; and do much dishonor his holy name.

I confess, that a man's faith and expectation may, and must differ in degrees,
it must be more or less, according as the things prayed for, are absolutely
necessary to salvation, or not necessary; and according as Gods promise, the
ground of our faith, and hope, is absolute, or conditional. Our prayer for
things needful, be they things spiritual, or temporal, must be particular
and absolute because a general petition, namely, that God should do with us
as he pleases, as may be for his glory, and for our good, is properly no
petition: for in saying so, a man asks no certain thing, neither does he
know what he does ask: So likewise a conditional petition is no petition. We
may and must truly and particularly desire the things lawfully asked: yet as
we ask temporal things with less earnestness and intension of mind, and
spiritual things with more fervor and intension of mind; so our expectation
of the one is absolute, and more firm; our expectation of the other is less
firm, and always with submission (either expressed or understood) unto the
will of God.

In resolving this Case, 2 Cases whether a man may ask temporal things
absolutely.
Whether a man may ask temporal things absolutely, I will with it, propound
and answer another Case, to wit, Whether when a man has asked temporal
things, he may expect them absolutely. Whether when a man has asked temporal
things he may absolutely expect them.


I answer, difference must be put between asking a thing absolutely, and
expecting a thing absolutely, when it is asked. There are some things may be
asked absolutely, which yet may not absolutely be expected; Gods command is
the ground of our asking; this command to pray for temporal things, is
absolute, for we are as well bid to ask our daily bread, as to ask
forgiveness of sins. Gods promises are the ground of our faith and expectation
of receiving the things asked. Now all Gods promises are not absolute; his
promise of temporal things, and of such spiritual things as are not necessary
to salvation, does admit of reservations and exceptions: that is, he will give
temporal things to us, so far as they may well stand with our enjoying of
those good thing which are spiritual and eternal. Likewise his promises which
concern the giving a specialty of grace, and of comfort, over and above what
is necessary to salvation, upon our asking, are to be understood with this
exception, unless, he holds it best, 2 Cor. 12.8.9.
to keep us humble, hungry and thirsty, watchful and prayerfull, under the
sense of our infirmity, and want of what we desire; which in some cases is
far better for us, than to have our desire. Namely, when if we had such or
such grace and comfort, we should be exalted above measure, and should despise
them that had not the like, or should grow presumptuously secure.

Wherefore when we shall ask for spiritual things absolutely necessary for
Gods glory and man's good, such as hallowing of Gods name, coming of his
kingdom, and doing of his will, also forgiveness of sins, and grace to
convert, repent, and to live godly: these things being asked in the truth of
our heart, we must say Amen unto them with a full and absolute assurance that
our petitions are granted; for of these things the promises are absolute.

But as for petitions concerning our outward man, and state of life, and
concerning such and such degrees, and measure of grace, and concerning the
feeling of comfort, in the assurance of our forgiveness, all which are lawful
and needful to be prayed for; though we must say Amen to these also with true
assurance that God hears, and is well pleased with those our Petitio^s; yet
we must not say Amen, with that absolute expectation of enjoying the things
asked. For these are asked with a reservation still unto Gods will, both when
he shall please, and in what measure he shall in his gracious pleasure think
good. For my part therefore, upon the former grounds, I conceive, that though
temporal good things, as health, liberty, peace, life, and the like, may be
absolutely asked, that is distinctly, and particularly without condition; yet
those things so asked are not absolutely to be expected, in the very
particulars, to be granted. Only this we may and must absolutely expect, when
we pray even for these things, that either we shall have them, or that which
is better, at least that we shall have grace sufficient to sustain us without
them, 2. Cor. 12.9
so as to have matter of comfort in God in this life, and of hope of salvation
in the life to come. For in that we have prayed in faith, this should stay our
hearts.

That we may attain this assurance, our care must be that we make and keep
our peace with God, and that we do get and cherish the spirit of prayer, Luke
11.13.
that we may always pray according to his will in the name of Christ Jesus,
Ioh. 14.13.14.
then we may build upon his promise, and upon his almighty power and
fidelity, and we may confidently say with Saint John, 1. Ioh. 5.14.15.
that we know that God hears us, and that we have the petitions that we
desired of him.

But, to conclude this point, suppose that when you have done what you can in
prayer, yet you do not feel nor find that you have a comfortable answer to
your prayers; yet be not discouraged, nor give over, as your troubled heart,
and your malicious adversary will often suggest unto you; but pray daily, and,
since you have a promise of audience, believe and hope, even above your feeling,
and above hope. For it will not be in vain that you still pray. Prayer is a
duty to God, now if you pray, though for the present you have no other
benefit, but this, the discharge of a good conscience, in obedience to God,
this will give some secret support to the soul; But be you assured, Gal. 6 9.
as in all other well-doing, so you shall find in this, be not weary, and in
due season, you shall reap if you faint not, and give not over.

Thus I have with Gods assistance finished this Treatise upon the Lords Prayer:
in which, amongst many other things, we may see the necessity of prayer, the
excellency of it, and also how to pray. I will add a word or two touching the
difficulty of praying aright.

This doctrine of the difficulty of praying aright, I gather partly from the
need that Christ's own disciples had to be taughe to pray: Luke 11.1.
and partly by the many things required in prayer, of which you have heard
before. And for proof hereof consider that the Apostle Paul professes of
himself and other believers, Romans 8.26
saying, We know not what we should pray as we ought.

The causes of the difficulty are many.



his thoughts are like men's thoughts, Isa. 55.8.
implacable, and unapeazeable; this makes many a man afraid to look God in
the face. This was David's case.

Many because they have prayed

So many things as has before

Satan does Spite nothing in prayer, making him content himself with the work
done; but altogether careless how it be done.





done; and withal it is a most profitable duty, and will quit all a man's
pains; Besides it is not so hard to be done, but that it is possible, nay,
certain that by the help of the Spirit of prayer, it may be done in an
acceptable manner. In these cases, knowledge of the difficulties do whet on
desire and resolution, and does stir up care and circumspection, it is far
from discouraging any from the work.

Wherefore the next use is, let Genesis 32.26. Hos. 12.3.4.
Jacob by much and strong wrestling did prevail at last. Do in the matter of
prayer as men use to do in difficult works. Set to it with all care, and
watchfulness. Set to it with all the strength which you have, and which you
can get. We must do like those which whet and sharpen their tools which are
blunt and dull. We must fetch prayers (as David used to do) out of meditations.
If we shall raise up our minds to heavenlinesse, and get our faith in God
strengthened, and if we pray for the spirit of prayer, and if we will join
with the spirit in prayer, then much of the difficulty will be taken off. The
principal help to prayer, next that of Gods help by his Spirit, is the
strength and exercise of our faith. Yea the Spirit of God does both work it,
and work by it in prayer.

Means to strengthen faith in prayer.
We may strengthen our faith in prayer by these considerations.

First, from Gods general goodness to every creature. He is good to all, Psa
145 9.
and his tender mercies are over all his works. He gives the beasts their
food; he feeds the young ravens that cry. Psa. 147.9.
Will he not much more hear man when he prays unto him? He has heard
wicked men, such as Ahab, Manasses, and others.

Secondly, consider that God is all-sufficient, and able to help.

Thirdly, consider the universality of his promise made to them that pray, and
the extent of his mercy toward them. He says every one that asks,
receives. Thus David strengthens his faith in prayer, saying, Be merciful
to me, O Lord, for I cry unto thee daily; Psalm. 86.3.5
for thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy, (to
whom?) even to all that call upon thee. This warrant to pray, and these grounds
of faith every man, as he is a creature, has in common with all men, whereby
he may be encouraged to pray, and to expect a gracious audience.

But every child of God who believes in Christ, in whom is the Spirit of God
to sanctify and cleanse the heart, causing him to will, and to endeavor in
all things to please God; all such have more peculiar grounds of faith and
expectation to be heard when they pray.

These may and must look into the evidences of their adoption, and sonne-ship.
They must consider whether they do not believe in Christ by such a faith which
works by love, (but they must not say they have not this faith, when their
conscience can tell them that it is their desire that it may workby love, and
that it is their grief when they fail in their duties of love to God or man)
now if they by faith have interest in Christ, then they may know they are the
sons and daughters of God. Now when we can make good our title to God, that
we can call him, by the spirit of adoption, Rom 8.15.16.
Father, when we can with sonne-like affection call him our Father which art in
heaven, we may hereby strengthen our faith, and assure our selves that he will
both enable us to pray, and will graciously hear, and grant our prayers.

Is it so difficult a thing to of, and be thankful to God for his help in our
prayers. Which fault if we would amend, we should find less defect, and more
help from God in our prayers hereafter.

One thing yet remains to be spoken of in a word or two, before I conclude,
which is to answer this question:

Phil. 4.6.7
Be careful in nothing but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving let your request be made known (...) God. Then the peace that we
have in God, and in the conscience, that, at Gods command, we have commended
our cause to God, should cause our hearts to rest quiet. Thus it was with
Hannah after that she had prayed, and by Elies speech had hope to speed, it is
said, she went her way, 1 Sa. 1.18.
and did eat and drink, and her countenance was no more sad. So likewise did
David when he had prayed, he says, I will both lay me down, Psalm. 4.8.
and sleep, for thou Lord only make me to dwell in safety.

Secondly, after we have prayed, we must be diligent in using all good means
which God has appointed for the obtaining thereof. We have a president for the
using of means after prayer, and that according to Gods direction, in the
example of a good Captain, Cornelius: he had fasted and prayed, and (as we
may judge by Gods answer) he prayed to be informed in the way of salvation:
God directed him to the ordinary means; and he most diligently applied
himself unto them, as we may read Acts the 10.5.9. and all with most happy
success.

Thirdly, it shall be good for us after we have prayed, from time to time to
look after our prayers, and carefully to observe how they are answered, and
how God has granted the^; whether in the same particular, or some other way,
either in giving us better things, or giving patience and contentment without
them, or quickening us still to prayer and dependence on him, causing as quietly
to wait on him, till he shall please to bestow them; and accordingly we must
acknowledge Gods goodness to us with thankfulness, as David did, Psalm.
86.18.19.
saying, Verily God has heard me, he has attended in the voice of my
prayer. Blessed be God which, which has in turned away my prayer, not in
mercy from me.

If upon observation we do not find our petitions granted, then we must
consider wherein we failed in prayer, and amend it; but we must not be
discouraged, nor suffer our souls to be too much disquieted: we must pray
again, and wait, Ps. 42.11.
as David did, on God, assuring our selves that in his good time he will hear
us, and that we shall praise him, who is the health of our countenance, and our
God; to whom be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal things contained in this Book.
ASSurance of pardon of sin to be desired. 438. 442. How to be assured that
our prayers are heard. 753 What is to be done if a man cannot assure himself
that his prayer is heard. 754 Of what things only God is the Author. 590 A
large acquitting of God from being an Author of sin, though it be by his
permission, and though he lead into temptation. 576. etc. All things are not
common amongst Christians. 388 In asking forgiveness, a man must confess his
sins unto God. 477 The properties of confessing sins aright. 482 In what case
a man may do contrary to scruple of conscience. 71 Sin does cast men into the
greatest debt. 484 Difference between natural and spiritual desires. 5 After
a man has sought the things that concern God, he may desire those which
concern his own good. 327 Desires of temporal things are to be confined to
the present day. 363 The desires of the things of this life must be moderate.
389 All divine properties in God are everlasting. 710 What is meant by Evil in
the last Petition. 518 What it is to be delivered from Evil. 521 Sin is the
Evil, the worst of all evils. 673 The best examples are to be propounded for
imitation. 301 How far Christ's example does bind to imitation. 8 Primary faith
justifies: Secondary faith gives assurance of Justification. 419. 420 All
true Christians have the Lord of heaven and earth to their Father. 138 What is
meant by Forgive. 403. etc. It concerns all to desire Forgiveness. 437
Motives inducing to ask Forgiveness. 446 It is God only that forgiveth
sins. 447 Danger of deferring to ask forgiveness. 466 We must pray that
others sins may be forgiven, as well as our own. 470 Forgiveness of sin is
to be asked for the living, not for the dead. 475 Jn asking Forgiveness it is
good that a man express upon what grounds he does ask and expect
forgiveness. 494 Who so would have God to forgive them, they must forgive
others. 496 Cautions concerning gestures in prayer. 161 Rules concerning
gestures in prayer. 162 God is an heavenly Majesty, infinite in all holy
excelle^cies. 146 God is not to be represented by an Image, or under the
likeness of any creature. 129. 151 The glory of Gods holy name must be the
chiefest of every christian man's desire and endeavor. 196 Governors of
Families must teach those that are of their charge, the principles of religion.
10 Motives to hallow Gods name. 214 It must be every man's desire to be holy in
this life. 533 Reasons why we should be holy. 540 Motives to holiness. 550
Means to be holy, 556 We must desire that others may be holy as well as our
selves. 621 Holiness is of Gods free grace, not of man's free will. 557
Holiness is the highest title of honor that can be given to any person. 217
Justification freeth a man from the guilt and punishment of sin. 457 Men
already justified must yet ask forgiveness every day. 462 Who so is justified
must be beholding to God for forgivenes of all his sins as well as of any. 492
What is meant by Gods Kingdom in the second Petition. 213. etc. Of Christ's
Kingdom, and the government thereof. 228 Christ's delivering up the kingdom to
the Father, and his being subject to him, is no diminution of his glory. 239.
etc. All Christians must unfainedly desire the coming of Gods Kingdom. 248 In
what cases man may go to law, and how. 531 A man should desire to live upon
his own maintenance. 378 The enjoying things needful for this life, are of
God. 341. 342 What is to be held needful. 392 In heaven is all perfect
obedience. 298 Though Christians cannot be perfect in this life, yet they must
aim at perfection. 312 Means of growing toward perfection. 314 What it is to
pray. 4 Preparation to prayer needful. 30 A twofold preparation to prayer. 32
What preparation is requisite. 37 Requisites in prayer. 33 It is every ones
duty to pray. 40 The use of Prayer, though God have no need to be thereby
informed. 44 Causes of men's slacknesse in Prayer. 51. 53 Motives to Prayer. 55,
etc. Objections against Prayer answered. 60, etc. The Lords Prayer may be used,
and is to be used, as a Prayer. 72 Set Prayers are lawful. 73 All Prayers are
to be made according to the pattern of the Lords Prayer. 79 He that would
make a prayer every way acceptable must be Gods child. 93 Though the Prayers
of the wicked be abominable, yet they are not exempted from the duty of
prayer. 99 Wicked men's Prayers are not altogether in vain, though not
altogether accepted. 101 Difference in the Prayers of the wicked and godly, and
difference in their acceptance. 102 All that would pray acceptably, must be in
charity with their neighbors. 109 Prayer is to be made only to the true God.
113 In the entrance into Prayer, a man must represent God to his mind under
such titles and names as are aptest to induce him to pray, and as may best
help his faith in prayer. 122 In Prayer God is to be conceived of in the
distinction of Persons. 125 Prayer ordinarily is to be directed to the Father,
in the name of the Son, by the holy Ghost. 133. 134 We must not be rash in
Prayer. 150 Man must not needlessly multiply words in Prayer. 157 In what cases
long Prayers may be made, and in what not. 158 Prayer must be made with holy
devotion. 160 Prayer may be made to God in all places. 166 Public places
fittest for public Prayer. 168 Private places fittest for private Prayer. 171
Prayer may be made with voice, or without voice. 179 How far a voice is
fittest to be used in Prayer. 180 Cautions in using voice in private Prayer.
181 When and how a man may pray against others. 268 Bodily welfare is to be
prayed for, both for our selves, and others. 330. 353 Prayers are to be made
daily. 373 How often we must pray. 376 Prayers for things of this life should be
less insisted upon then those that concern the life of grace and glory. 398
How spiritual and temporal things are to be prayed for, and how the granting
of them is to be expected. 749. 750 With Prayer, praise and thanks must be
joined. 691 Prayer must be made with understanding. 716 The mind and heart
must join in prayer. 719 There must be an holy fervor in Prayer. 724 When a
man has prayed, he must expect to have the things prayed for. 727 It is a
difficult thing to pray aright. 756 Means to strengthen faith in Prayer. 760
What a man must do after he has endeavored to pray aright. 764 God would have
his children utter to him Reasons and grounds why they ask and expect the
things for which they pray. 685 When men are fallen into Sin, it must be their
prayer, and ca^^ to get out by Repentance. 6^^ The properties of sound
Repentance, 671 How Saints departed, and Angels in heaven are to be honored by
men on earth. 305 Salvation is of the free grace of God. 451 How a man may
prevent Gods giving of him over to sin. 616 Of the kinds of Temptation: 510
What a good Temptation is. 510 What an evil Temptation is. 511 How far God
has to do in evil Temptations. 513 What is properly to tempt to sin. 516
God has an holy hand in the Temptations and sins of men. 571 The best are
subject to Temptations 633 Who so would be kept from sin must resist it in
the Temptation. 644 How Temptations to sin are pressed by tempters, and how
resisted by the tempted. 652. 678 It must be every Christians desire that Gods
will be obeyed. 285 The chief heads to which Gods revealed Will may be
reduced. 287 Disswasives from disobedience to Gods Will. 28^ Motives to
obedience to God^ Will. 29^ Means to enable us to (...) Gods Will. 29^ We must
desire that Gods Wi^^ be done in an holy manner. 30^ What is requisite in the
right manner of doing Gods Will. 307
Errata.
Page 6 line 5. read from. p. 34 l 4 r. conceiving him p. 243. l. 6. r.
rendition. p. 274 l 18. 19. r. considered. p. 277. l. 9. r come. p. 301. l. 24.
r. shall. p. 322^ l. 12. r. propriety. p. 396. l. 17. r. Th^^ they. p. 396. l.
19. r. That they p. 43^ l. 27. r. unto the. p. 445. l. 26. r use. p. ^^^ l. 3.
r. unto his. p. 656 l. 24. r. resist.

FINIS.

