CHRIST'S POLITICIAN, AND SALOMONS PVRITAN.

Delivered in two Sermons preached before the KINGS Majesty.

BY THOMAS SCOT Bachelour of Divinity and one of his Majesty's Chapleines.

These two Sermons Epitomiz'de.

1
Beware of Men; Of Hypocrites beware.
Who likes not this, no friends but enemies are.
2
Be not too just; Be not a Puritan.
Yet be as pure a Christian as you can.
LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the White Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1616.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Princess ANNE Queen of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc.
THere is a time (says Solomon) for all things. God has his time never
limited; and yet in respect of the execution of his will, he has his time too,
as we see lately by wonderful example. What this age has seen were enough to
make a heathenish Atheist a Christian, and a licentious Christian, a Saint. But
examples nor miracles can make men wise, without grace: that which mollified
the Isralites, hardened the Egiptians.

Since all things have their time, there is a time for thankful
acknowledgment, as well as of importunate use. That God who made your Majesty a
means for my protection against the torrent of violent greatness, makes me now
a trumpet of your praise, and gives me a time (with some security) to sing the
songs of Syon under the shelter of your gracious acceptance.

The last of these Sermons is the first that ever I preached before his
Majesty, when I was sworn his Chaplain. The first is that Sermon for which I
was called in question, and in defense whereof whilst you stood, a great affront
was given you by an Unequal opposite; so that I seemed not to suffer for it
alone, but your Majesty with me. I have now sent it to your Highness, that you
may see wherein it deserved so many great exceptions, or I for it so strict
Amos 7. v. 12. 13.
a censure. The counsel it gives is plain, but true. As it has no relish of
Italian Courtship or Craft, so neither has it any touch of Romish poison: but
proceeds from the simplicity of Gods holy Spirit, which teaches a foolishnes
wherewithal to overthrow the wisdom of all Machiauelists. This is upright and
honest Truth which makes the Christian an everlasting Politician; for the gates
of hell shall not prevail against him to his destruction, nor Uphold Doeg,
Achitophel, and Haman in prosperity. To the patron of this Truth I commend
your Majesty in my daily prayers, and my own innocence I commend to your
Majesty my most gracious Patroness,

Whose most faithful and thankful servant I remain. THO: SCOT.

CHRIST'S POLITICIAN.
MATH. 10. verse. 17. Beware of men.
IF any man should ask me a reason, why at this time, in this place, and
before this royal presence I have chosen to speak of these words, rather then
of any other, I must tell him, that the unfaithfulness of friends in these our
days, the falsehood of flatterers in these our days, the known and apparent
plots of treason, which from time to time have been pretended, and practiced
against the Person of his sacred Majesty, against his succession, and against
the general State of the Nobility, Clergy and Commons of this Realm, are
the causes, that at this time do not only move me to speak of these words,
but to lift up my voice like a Esa. 58. 1.
trumpet, and to cry out aloude to all, that love his Majesty, or their
Country, Beware Math. 10. 17.
of men. They are the words of our Savior Christ spoken first to his
Disciples, forewarning them of the hypocrisy and treachery of the times they
lived in, but yet they are not merely personal, nor belonging only to them,
but they are common to all Christians, continuing a general precept of
Christian policy to be observed of us, aswellas of them, wherein we are to
consider of five things. viz. a preventing policy, which he here calls
wariness, viz. to those, that are harmless and single hearted, which before
he called sheep, it is to them, that he says, Beware: viz of men. they are,
of whom he bids them beware, viz. of those men, whom before he called
wolves. Beware, is not only a word of advise and admonition, but of commination
also, implying peril to their states or persons, that having good counsel
given them by their friends, will not take it, when they give it. Beware ergo.

Beware of men.] The wariness, that our Savior Christ commends unto us,
has no affinity with the wily wisdom, of this world (which confisteth
altogether in the knowledge and practice of ill, and is enmity Pro. 2. 14.
and foolishnes with God) but it is to be understood of that wisdom of the
spirit, which Iam. 3. 17.
teaches us to be wary and wise in discerning and preventing the crafty
wiles of the children of this world, who (though they speak peace with their
mouths) have always wars in their hearts against the children Psalm. 140. 2.
of God. And thus Christ himself does expound the meaning of this same word,
Beware, when he says, Be wise as Serpents Math. 10. 16
and simple as doves, in these two different kind of creatures, exemplyfying,
unto us that wisdom and wariness, which he here commondeth unto us. For as
serpents are of all other beasts reputed the wisest to discern their enemies,
and to save themselves, when any mischief or danger is intended against them,
so would he have us to be wise, to discern between good and ill, truth and
falsehood, honesty and hypocrisy, friendship and flattery, that so we may be
the better able to meet with the tricks and manners of Machauils and
Politicians, that look upon us with smiling faces, and yet do hate us in
their hearts. And as there is no soul that flees in the air, more innocent
and harmless, then doves, who when they are pursued and persecuted by the
hawk, by the ringetaile, the buzzard, the owl, or any other their enemies are
wont to save themselves by flight and not by fight, sometime sitting in their
douecoate, where they see their nests destroyed and their young ones taken
away, and killed before their eyes, never offering to rescue them, or to be
revenged of those, that thus do harm them, which all other foul do seem in
some sort to do, but they alone; even so must Christians do, and such
simplicity must be joined with their policy, that, though they know their
enemies, that hate their persons, and seek their lives, yet must they bear
their malice with patience, and without violence or resistance use all honest
and ordinary means to save themselves not rendering evil for evil against
their enemies. Christ Romans 12. 17.
mixeth the wisdom of serpents and the simplicity of doves together, not
wishing us to be only wise as serpents are, nor only simple as doves are, lest
we should think, that one of these qualities were enough without the other,
but he urges and commends both unto us jointly, as things, that in godly
and Christian policy must both necessarily concur together, and can not, nor
may not be separated a sunder, the one from the other. Be wise, as serpents
therefore, but be not only wise, as serpents, lest taking all of the serpent,
and nothing of the dove, thorough superfluiie and too much subtilty of wit, you
hate where you should love, or do hurt, where you should do good. Be simple
likewise, as doves, but be not only simple as doves, lest thorough too much
simplicity you take hurt by others: but be both, as Christ bids you to be,
viz. wise, as serpents, to save your selves, and simple, as doves, that you do
no hurt to others. Be wise, but not without simplicity, quia prudentia sieve
simplicitate caliditas Hieron: in Oseam.
est: i. wisdom without simplicity is craftiness. Besimple, but not without
wit, quia simplicitas sineprudentia stultitia est: i. simplicity without wit
is foolishness. Be wise as serpents to understand and to eschew evil, quia
malum intelligere laudabile est: because to discern ill deserves praise: but
be simple, as doves to do ill, quia malum facere vituperabile est: i. because
to do evil deserves blame. Be wise in understanding that, which Romans 16. 19.
is ill, as serpents, but be simple in the practice of ill, as doves are. These
are the qualities and the parts of that Christian policy which Christ here
commends to his Church, being only an honest harmless disposition and
forecasting care in Christian men, desiring to prevent and auert peril from
their own estates and persons, without any practice or intention of treachery
to the hurt of those, that are their foes. And this is the meaning of our
Savior Christ, when he says, Beware.

The persons, to whom this precept of policy is commended, are not all men in
general without difference, but only the best sort of Christians, whom a
little before our Savior Christ called sheep, which are a Math. 10. 16.
kind of cattle of all other least prone to hurt and most easy and apt to
take hurt, and least able to avenge any harm, that is done to them.

The Ox, if he feel any hurt, can goare him with his horns, that hurt him,
the Dog can bark and bite him with his teeth, the Horse can strike him with
his heels, the Cat can scratch him with her nails, the Lion can tare him in
pieces with his claws, the snake can stinge with his tail, the serpent can
poison him with his breath, and every other beast can do something to offend
his enemy, that hurts him, but all that the silly sheep can do, is only to
bleare and bleate a little with his tongue, not able to do any other harm, no
not to him that is ready to kill him and cut his throat: such and so
harmless is the disposition of the children of GOD, content to suffer all
kind of crosses and calamities of this life patiently for his sake, in whose
cause they suffer, according to that confession of the Church, surely for Psalm.
44. 22.
thy sake are we slain continually and are counted, as sheep to the
slaughter. For alas, what is the life of the best Christians, while they live
in this world, but a life of daily sufferings? what are Christians in this
life, but the very objects and subjects of wicked men's mouths? how do all
ungodly men clap their hands, and cry, there, there, so would we have it, when
they hear or see them suffer? Is there any thing amiss in the Church or
common wealth, but they commonly are made the Authors and causers of it? Though
the Lion, the Bear, the Bull, the Hog, the Dog, the Fox, the Ass, the
Elephant, and all other beasts of the field do trouble the water, and roile
it with their feet, yet the wily Wolf charge only the poor silly sheep
to be the doer of it, and none but he bears the blame of it. Elias is the
only 3. Reg. 18. 17.
man that troubles Israel, not Achab, nor the Prophets of Baal. None, but
Moses and Aaron Gods ministers and messengers are the causes of all the mutines
and murmurings in Egypt, not Pharao himself nor his socerers. Exodus 5. 4.
Christ and his Apostles, and those, that Luke 23. 2. 5
say with them, are the disturbers of the peace of Jerusalem, not Annas, nor
Caiphas, nor Herod, nor Pilate, nor any of the scribes, Pharisees and Priests,
Deridetur iusti simplicitas. Job. 12. 4.
The godly minded man, that thinks no ill of any man, that says no ill of
any man, that does no ill to any man, is mocked and made a ieering stock in the
mouth of every man. Job and Toby both religious and godly Job. ^. 9. Tob. ^. 14.
men are both cast in the teeth with the sincerity and uprightness of their
lives as though it were a fault in men to live honestly and deal plainly with
men, or to show themselves zealous and devout in the service of God.

Those, that are not of the world, the world will hate them, even as it hated
Christ first. Lot is the most odious man in all Joh. 15. 19. Job. 15. 18. Genesis
19. 9. Genesis 21. 9. Genesis 27. 41. Genesis 37. 28. Exodus 10. 18.
Sodom, Isaac is flouted and laughed to scorn of Ismael, Jacob is threatened
of Esau, Joseph is sold of his brethren, Moses is in ^^aced by Pharao, David
is persecuted of Saul, Achab can 1. Sam. 24. 3. 1. Reg. 22. 8. 1. Reg. 19 2.
Math. 14. 10. Math. 27. 21. Act. 5. 18. 40
not abide Micheas, Iesabel hates Elias, John baptist is be headed of Herod,
Christ is crucified of the Jews; the Apostles are imprisoned and commanded to
be whipped by the high Priest. It is not forse louie, murder or 1. Pet. 2. 19.
treason, that good and godly men are had in such contempt and hatred of the
world, but because they do not conform themselves to the manners of the
wicked, whom they live withal in the world. Because you 1. Pet. 4. 4.
(...) not with them. i. with wicked and ungodly men, in the same excess of
riot, they speak ill of you. Wherefore did Caine kill his brother Abell, but
because his own works were 1. Ioh. 3. 12.
ill, and his brothers good? wherefore did Esau hate Jacob? because of the
blessing, Genesis 27. 41.
wherewithal his father had blessed him; wherefore did all Jacob his sons
donspire Genesis 37. 4.
against their younger brother? because they saw their father loved him more,
then he did them. Wherefore did Achal hate Micheas? I hate him (says he)
because he never prophecieth 3. Reg. 22. 8.
good, but ill unto me. Lot is counted but a lob of his own sons in law,
when he gives them counsel to heave their sins, Genesis 19. 14.
and labors, to save their souls. David 2. Sam. 6. 16.
is flouted of his own Wife, when she sees him extraordinarily zealous in
the service of his God. Those men; that are conditioned and qualited like
sheep; innocent, harmless; simple and single hearted, religiously and
peaceably disposed, not hurtful to any, but ready and willing to do good to
all those, and such like while they live in this world, which is altogether set
upon wickedness, are like sheep among 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
Wolves, mocked, massacred, wrunge and Ioh. 16. 2.
wronged, and put to the worst in every place. It is to them, therefore, that
Christ speaks, when he says, Beware.

The persons, of whom he bids them beware, are Men. For among all creatures
there is not a greater enemy to man, then one man is to an other. Be a beast
never so savage and cruel in his kind, yet if a man come not near him, he
will not hurt him, but the malice of man is such, that, whom he hates, he will
reach him with his heart, with his tongue, or with his hand, though hedwelleth
never so far from him. A serpent, though he be a very venomous and vile
beast, yet stands he in that awe and fear of man, as he dare not bite him,
if he perceive, that he sees him; but when one man is bent to do mischief to
another, he fears the face of no man. If a man anger a snake, she may
perchance hiss at him, but go by her, and let her alone, and she will creep
from him, but anger a man, and by and by his anger turns into rancoure, and
rancoure desires revenge. The Lion, though he be a very fell and feirce
beast, yet will he spare a man and forbear to hurt him, if, when it is in his
power to hurt him, he fall down and prostrate himself before him, but when
one man has advantage against an other, no kind of humiliation or submission
will content him. A Dog though he come of never so currish a kind, he will
commonly bark at a man, before he bite him; but among men, he is commonly
counted the wisest man, that will bite, before he bark. Beware of men
therefore. He does not say, beware of men, that are flatterers, backbiters,
adulterers, drunkards, and others, that are given to such like vices, but
generally without distinctions of their persons or qualities, he bids us
beware of men, meaning, that the very best is bad enough, and sometime as much
to be feared, as the worst of all. There is not one good man Mich. 7. 2. Psalm.
12. 1. 2.
left upon the earth, the faithful are minished from among the children of men,
they, that would be counted faithful in these days, do but flatter Psalm. 12.
2.
with their lips and dissemble in their double hearts. The best of all is as a
bryre, and the most righteous is Mich. 7. 4.
sharper then a thorn. Beware of men therefore. If this watchword were
needful for the Apostles in their time, it is much more needful for us and in
our time, how much apter and likelier we are to be deceived now, then they were
then, both because the number of deceivers is greater now, then it was then,
and the manner of men's deceit also more mystical now, then it was then.

For Christ himself does tell us, that immediately Mich. 24. 5.
before his coming and the end of the world, many will shroude themselves
under his name, carrying his word and Gospel in their mouths, and yet be
dissemblers Math. 24. 24.
and deceivers for all that, and be so cunning and so close in the conueiance
of their collusion, that, if it were possible, the very elect might be
deceived. For of all kind of deceivers they may most easily deceive us, that
seek to deceive us in his name by whom we all trust to be saved, but toward
the latter end of the world, there shall be many such (for many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Math. 24. 5.
Christ, and deceive many). Beware therefore of such men. If they should come
unto us like Angels, we would suspect them, if like Devils, we would be
afraid of them, if like beasts, we would shun them, but coming unto us like
men, and like men of our Math. 24. 24.
own profession, men baptized into the same faith, men confessing the same
Christ, and men hoping to be partakers of the same kingdom that we do, how is
it possible, but that men, which fear no deceit, nor mean deceit, should fall
into the danger of such deceivers? Beware therefore. Christ would Math. 10. 16.
have his Disciples to be like Doves, but alas, there are so many Eagles, so
many Hawks, so many Hernes, so many Buzzards, Wringtailes and Crows, that
prey upon Doves, that every man almost is afraid to be a Dove. If we were, as
we should be, we should be lambs, but alas, there are so many Foxes, that
those that should be like Ioh. 21. 15.
Lambs, they are rather like Lions, and become Cacercosins and Cosingermanes
to Foxes. Christ his flock should be a flock Ioh. 10. 27.
of sheep: but where shall a man find a faithful Christian or a sound
sheep? or if perchance he find one in a whole flock, he shall find ten
Wolves and sheep wurriers for one sheep. Beware therefore of men. If in this
world any sort of people may be trusted, whom would a man think he might
better trust, then those that he takes to be his friends, and yet the Wiseman
wishes every man to be as wary of his friends, as he would be of his
enemies, there is such flattery Ecclesiast 6. 13.
in friendship, and so much falsehood in fellowship. For some man is a friend
but for his Ecclesiast. 6. 8.
own turn, and he will not abide in the day of trouble, and there is some man
that will pretend to be Ecclesiast. 6. 9.
thy friend only to undermine thee and sound thy secrets, and he will one day
become thine enemy, and take part against thee, and then, if he knows any
thing, that will hurt thee, he will tell it out. There is another friend, who
is but a companion at the table, so long, as thou art in prosperity, and
Ecclesiast. 6. 10. 11. 12.
make him good cheer, he will be thy follower and thy friend, but if thou
failest to feed him and fill his belly, he will be as ready to take part
with thine enemy against thee, if he will entertain him to his table, as he
was ready to fawn upon thee, when he was a guest at thy table. If thou get a
friend Eccles. 6. 7.
therefore, prove him first, and be not too rash to give him credit. These are
the days, which the Apostle calls dangerous days, wherein by the testimony
of our Savior Christ, 2. Tim. 3. 1.
a man lives in danger of his own household, his wife, which should be to
him as Math. 10. 36.
Math. 10. 21.
himself, his children, whom he has begotten, and brought up, and his
servants which take his hire, shall be his foes. Beware Eccles. 32. 22.
of thine own children, and take heed of them, that be of thine own
household. Let no man believe his friend (says the Prophet Micheas) nor put his
confidence in his brother, keep the door of thy mouth Mich. 7. 5.
from her that lies in thy bosom. Wherein the Prophet seems to accuse the
whole world of flattery and falsehood, that there is neither faith nor truth to
be found in any calling or among any sort of men, neither among friends, nor
kinsfolks, nor brethren, nor yet in a man's Wife, though she pretend never so
great love and loialtie toward him. For he speaks not of a naughty wife,
nor of such a wife, as gives her Husband occasion to mistrust her, but he
speaks of a good wife, and such a wife as is so near and dear unto him, as
she lies continually in his bosom, the Prophet would not have any wife man
to be so wiuish, and so wedded to the love of his wife, no not of such a Wife,
as to communicate unto her his whole heart in all matters, but to keep his
secrets to himself from her priuitie and knowledge, left he repentit, and wish
he had done it, when it is too-late. Adam was deceived by Eve, that was his
fellow and should have been his friend, Abimelach by Abraham that was his
subject, Lot by his Daughters, Isaac by his Wife, Esau by his Brother, Jacob by
his Uncle, Elizeus by his Servants, and whom may a man safely trust? for if it
be not safety for us to trust our Wives, our children, our servants, our
friends and kinsfolks, much less is it safety to trust those that are
strangers, or our enemies, even those that speak with Jacobs voice, many times
have Esaus hands. Beware therefore of men.

Fourthly we are to consider, what manner of men they are, which of all other
Christ would have us most wary or. For he does not only bid us beware of men,
but using a word of emphasis, he bid does us beware (...), ab illis hominibus.
i. of those men, which word (those) has reference to them kind of men, whom
before he called, Wolves, meaning by Wolves men, that are crafty, cruel,
rauenouse and bloody, as Wolves are. Beware of those men. For of all other
evils in the world such men are the most dangerous evils. Arma sunt enim
diaboli, they are the weapons, which the Devil uses, when he fights against
the Church, and children of God. Et sunt sine armis, nihil Chrisost. in Math 10.
potest homo contra hostem: and even as without weapons a man can do nothing
against his enemy, so without the help of such malicious and wicked men the
Devil can do nothing against the Saints and servants of God. And therefore
whenever there is any ^^ischie^e to be done, that he would have done, and
either cannot do it, or dare not do it himself, that commonly he compasses
and brings to pass by ungodly (...) they dwell, but hang continually over
their heads. Beware of such.

Beware of them, that use art in their words, delighting to speak
doubtfullie, and in a double sense. For as (Augustine says) words were not
ordained, that men should use them to deceive one an other, but that thereby
every man should convey the secret conceits of his own heart to the knowledge
of another. And therefore to use words to deceit, to which end words were not
ordained, is sin in them, that so use them. Beware of such.

Beware of them, that have your persons Jude. 16.
in admiration for lucres sake. For as there is nothing more dangerous, then
honey is when it is mixed with poison, so is there no man more perilous, then a
flattering fair tongued man, that speaks out of a hollow heart. The Wise man
tells you, how you shall know them that are such. They go in Math. 7. 15.
Eccles. 12. 15. 17.
sheep clothing and are sweet in their lips, they will ducke with their
heads. All the while you give, Eccles. 29. 5. Eccles. 12. 17.
and they get, they will kiss your hands. When they will, they can both
wincke and weep with their eyes, as though they loved you and were your
friends, but yet for all that, if you take not good heed, they will like
serpents sting you without hisling, like cur-dogges suck your blound only with
licking, and in the end kill you and cut your throats without biting. In the
days of thy prospcritie (says the Wiseman) they will be, as thy self, but, if
thou Eccles. 6. 11. 12.
be brought low, they will be against thee, and hide themselves from thee, Beware
of these men.

But above all other beware of them, that do acknowledge England to be their
country, but will have Rome to be the randeuoue and rule of their religion,
when notwithstanding it is the opinion of some, that the very name of Rome is
ominous, and propheticallie foresheweth, that seldom any thing can be good,
that comes from thence. For it was at the first called Rome (says one) Quasi
Voaldeby in destructorioviciorum par. 6. cap. 33.
radix omnium malorum: as though that in time Rome should prove the very root
of all evil, and he gathers it from the very letters and etimologie of the
word Rome. For R. (says he) signifies, radix. i. the root. O. signifies
omnium. i. of all, and M A. malorum. i. ill, which joined togethe implies Rome
to be the mistress and mother of all mischief. Omen ab euentu. What notable
treasons have from time to time these many years been contrived and intended
against poor England? and which of them have not been plotted, and taken his
beginning at Rome? And therefore let no man deceive you. They, that favor or
allow the traitorous opinions and plots of the Romish religion, they neither
do nor can love the religion of England, nor those that do profess it. Non
potest eorum fidus esse affectus, quorum diuersa est fides. Chrisost. They
cannot be true one to another in heart and affection, that dissent in faith and
religion. Though Caine be content to talk with Abel, and walk with Abel, yea
and to offer sacrifice with Abel to, yet if opportunity serve him, he will cut
Abel his throat. Though Esau for policy sake makes a fairer show in outward
substance, as though all were well between him and his brother Jacob, yet he
says to himself, the Genesis 27 41. Math. 26. 23.
day of mourning for my father will come shortly, and then I will be even with
my brother Jacob. When Judas sits with Christ at his own Math. 26. 49.
table, and in his own mess, and is one of the next men to him, yea when he
embraces him in his arms and kisseth him with his lips, he betraieth him
into the hands Math. 26. 47.
of his enemies, and has an army of Roman soldiers in a readiness to
rescue him from his Apostles. Talis est consuetudo omnium malignorum, quando
aliquem grauius laedere volunt, humilitatem and amicitias fingunt. Chrisost. It
is the mark and manner of all Machauils, when Math. 2. 8.
they mean worst to a man, to humble them selves to him most, and speak him
fairest. When Herod intended Christ's destruction, he pretended devotion, Quando
gladium acuebat, deuotionem promittebat. Chrisost. Saul hates David in his
heart, and yet because David 1. Sam. 18. 17.
shall have no cause to mistrust him, he is content to make him his son in
law, and to give his daughter to him, that thereby he may make way to his
malice, and that he may have the fitter opportunity to destroy him. Beware of
such men therefore.

It is said of the Jews, that, Christ being at Jerusalem at the feast of the
passover, many Ioh. 2. 23. 24.
of them believed in his name, when they saw his miracles, but, yet for all
that Christ durst not trust them, nor commit himself to them, because he knew
them all. Beware of such beleiuers, and learn to know, whom you trust, before
you commit trust unto them, lest you find them Jews, whom you took to be
Christians. Walk circumspectly not as unwise, but as wise, the days are
evil. Men's faces are Ephesians. 5. 15.
better then their hearts. Be not too credulous, lest thou be deceived in thine
own conceit, and brought Ecclesiast. 13. 9.
down by thy simpleness. A man that means well can promise himself security
in no place nor in any presence, but wheresoever he becomes, he may meet
with a serpent, or a seducer, a Judas or a Jesuit, a devil or a dissembler,
and perchance all together, and at once, and in one place. Beware therefore.

The last thing to be observed in this precept of Christian policy, is the
danger like to ensue upon them, that when they are warned, are careless and
fearelesse of danger, and will take no warning. For this same word Beware, is
not only a watchword of forewarning and friendly admonition, but a word of
commination also, threatening peril to their states and persons, that being too
secure in themselves do either contemn it, or neglect it. Hearken to him
therefore, that in this place says unto you, Beware and take heed. If Eve had
taken heed, she had not been deceived by the Serpent. Genesis 3. 1.
If Dina had taken heed, she had been a Maiden still. If Lots wise had taken
heed, she Genesis 34. 3.
had not been turned into a salt stone. If Genesis 19. 26.
Saul had taken heed, he had not lost his 1. Sam. 13. 13.
kingdom. If Sampson had taken heed, he Iud. 16. 18.
had kept his strength. If David had taken heed, neither he nor his people had
been 2. Sam. 24. 1.
plagued. If Achab had taken heed, he had 1. Reg. 21. 17.
not been seduced. If the Jews had taken Luc. 19. 44.
heed, they had not been destroyed. They that will take no harm, must listen
to the good counsel of their friends, and take heed in time both of those
persons, and places, where they may take harm.

There is no evil in the City, but the Lord Amos. 3. 6. 7.
does it, and yet before he does it, he does reveal the secrecy of it to
his servants the Prophets first, who, when they see the band of the LORD to be
lifted up, and ready to strike, if they Ezech. 33. 6.
blow not the trumpet and warn the people, the people shall die in their
sin, but their blood shall be required at their watch-mens hands. O hearken
to the warning of Moses and the Prophets Luc. 16. 29.
while you have them, and say not secretly to your selves, as the wicked Jews
said to themselves, The warning of the Prophets is but wind, the word of the
Lord is not in them, but beware, and be warned in time, lest hereafter you
wish you had taken warning, when it shall be too late. The good King of Niniae
and his people hearkened to the warning of Jonas, and received his words
Jonas. 3. 10.
not as the words of a man, but (as they were indeed) the words of God, and
what God purposed to do against them, he repented to do it, and did it not.
Lot was content to be warned by the Angels, that were sent to give him warning,
and so fled out of Sodom, and saved his life in Zoar, which he Genesis 19. 20.
had lost, if he had tarried still in Sodom. The wisemen being admonished by
the Lord God in a dream to beware of Herod, would not return unto him, as he
looked, they should have done, but left him and went into their Country
another way. As soon as ever Joseph heard, that Herod, Math. 2. 12.
hunted after CHRIST to kill him, he presently conveyed him into Egypt, and
would Math. 2. 14.
tarry no longer in Jury. Peter had no liking to continue in Caiphas house,
where he had learned to deny his Master, but, as Luck. 22. 62.
soon as ever he heard the cock crow, remembering CHRIST'S warning, he went
out, and wept bitterly. It was GOD almighties express commandment to his own
people, that they should in no wise have any intercourse of friendship or
familiarity with those idolatrous nations, which they were to pass by, as
they went into the land of promise, the transgression whereof was punished in
Iehosophath King Exodus 34 12.
of Judah, who making a league and giving aid to that wicked King Achab, had a
Prophet sent unto him to reprove him, and to tell him, that because he did
help the wicked, and loved them, that hated the 2. Paral. 19. 2.
LORD, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against him, which within a little
while after the LORD also did execute upon him. Since the Lord GOD is so angry
with the wicked, that he holds those for his enemies, that are friends to
the wicked, have no fellowship with their unfruitful works of darkness,
but, if you love yourselues, or desire to have GOD and good men your Ephesians. 5
11.
friends, be as wary of them, as you would be of Wolves, left, if you hold
familiarity and friendship with them long, they worrow you and tear you in
pieces, even as Wolves are wont to worrow sheep, when they get them in their
claws. It is not saftetie for the lamb to dwell with the Fox, nor for the
dove to house with the hawk, it is no policy for the silly Mouse to trust
her self with the Cat, it is dangerous for stubble to lie near the fire.
Joseph had rather Genesis 39. 12.
lose his cloak, then to hazard his credit, or tarry in her company, that
entiseth him to sin against his own conscience. It is the wisdom of
Serpents to stop their ears against Psalm. 58. 4.
the charms and inchauntments of those, that lie in wait to get them, and it
is the property of doves to flee those fowls of prey, that use to pursue
them. Such must be the godly policy of wise Christians, they Ephesians. 5. 7.
must flee the company of the wicked, if they will not be poisoned and
perverted by the wicked. A man cannot touch pitch, but Eccles. 13. 1.
it will foul his fingers, nay, if he does come near it, his very clothes
will smell of it. 2. Cor. 6. 14.
Draw not in yoke with the wicked, let not their precious balmes break your
Psalm. 141. 5.
heads, nay suffer them not to come in your houses, or to dwell under your
roofes. A little leaven is enough to sower 1. Cor. 5. 6.
a great lump of dowe, and to mar a whole batch of bread: one sponefull of
vinegar will soon tart a great deal of sweet milk, but a great deal of
sweet milk will not so soon sweeten one sponfull of vinegar: Such is the
proanesse of our frail natures to ill, that good men keeping company with
wicked, are apter to be perverted by the bad then the bad are to be converted
by the good.

The sons of Seth were very godly and Genesis 6. 2.
well given, till they married with the daughters of Caine, but, as soon as
ever they were joined to them, they changed their manners, and became such
themselves, as their wives were, whom they had married. If the Angels by plain
force had not drawn Lot out of Sodom, he had perished in the sins of
Sodom, as well as others that remained Genesis 19. 16.
in it. Happy are they, whom other men's dangers do make to beware. You are
no better, then Lot was, nor wiser, 2. Pet. 2. 11.
then Lot was, nor loather to offend GOD, then Lot was. Presume not too much of
your own strength, but remember you are men, and beware of your weakness,
that you be not circumuented by wiles. Be wise to discern the dispositions of
all men, with whom you live. If you like not their conditions, as soon, as you
can, flee from them and leave their companies, lest, if you converse with them
too long, you be won to communicate with them in their conditions, and in
the end perish with them in their sins, as Lot had like to have done. If it
pleases GOD to suffer Satan to become 1. Reg. 22. 2.
a lying and a seducing spirit in the mouths of any wicked men, that are about
you, who presuming of your patience and mildness dare put forth themselves
and say unto you, Let us go after other gods, Deuteronomy. 13. 2. Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
and let us serve them, hearken not unto them. For the LORD GOD proves you by
them, whether you love him with all your heart and all your soul, or whether
you will be won to forsake him, and fall from him. Be constant in the truth
therefore, and be faithful in the service of your God to the death, not
suffering your selves like children to be carried Ephesians. 4. 14.
away or turned about with every wind of doctrine through the deceit and
craftiness of wicked men, which lie in wait to deceive you, and woo you from
GOD, but keep your first love, and the love of your Apoc. 2. 4.
first faith and religion to the end, that in the end, and at your end, you may
receive that crown of life, which is promised and prepared Apoc. 2. 10.
for them, that persevere faithful to their end, which grace the God of all
mercy and grace grant to you, to us, and to all others, that are either
Preachers or Professors of his truth thorough Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior, to whom etc. [*]

FJNIS.
Salomons Puritan:
Ecclesiast. 7. 18. Be not too just.
THis Scripture has a double reference: First, to the Magistrate. Secondly, to
every Christian man, that lives as a Subject under the obedience of the
Christian Magistrate. Referred to the Magistrate it is in nature of a
prohibition and a precept, forbidding some things, and commanding other
somethings. The things which are herein forbidden, are two: Cruelty is the
one, and too much Severity is the other, both enemies to Justice, and therefore
both forbidden by the holy Ghost, which speaking here to the Magistrate says,
Be not too just. The things commanded and commanded in a Magistrate are four:
Justice, Equity, Discretion and Clemency. For the same spirit, that faith in
the negative, Be not too just, i. be not extremely just, or just with
extreamitie, says in the affirmative, be just but according to the rules of
equity, discretion, and clemency, which mustbee always the companions of
Justice, when Iusticeis duly executed.

Referred to the Subject and common person, it is in nature of a prohibition
and precept concerning Christian Justice, forbidding him in matters of
Religion, Obedience, Conscience and Zeal; to lean to that which is extreme,
and commanding him, according to the decorum and comeliness of his Christian
calling always to keep the mean, and not to Be not too just. First
therefore of those things, that concern the Magistrate and political Justice;
and then of those things, that concern common persons, and Christian Justice.

The vices that are here discommended and prohibited in a Magistrate, are
cruelty, and overmuch severity; whereof the first is an unmerciful and
beastly passion of the mind, growing (as one says) Ab impotentia and mollitia
animi, and in nature as timidas ignauas, Marcellinus 27. lib.
and degeneres eadit, from an impotency and effeminate disposition of the
mind, always haunting men that are fearful, dastardly, and of a degenerous
nature, such as women are, of whom the Wiseman says, There Eccles. 25. 17.
is no wrath nor vengeance, to the wrath and vengeance of a woman, and they are
always the worst men, and most like to women, that are stained with this vice:
which is never to be found in men of worth, courage and valor, but the manlier
that any man is, the more merciful and milder always he is, and the less he
delights in cruelty, as is to be seen in David, who was grieved to beat of
the death of Soul; and in Iulias Caesar also 2 Samuel 1. 12.
who being one of the greatest Conquerours, and a man of the greatest courage
that ever was, yet, when he had Pompey his head presented to him being his
deadly enemy, wept to it, saying to him that showed it him, Non mihi placet
vindicta sed victoria; Good fellow, I take no delight in vengeance but victory.
Such a mind should be in a man, and such a man is meet to be a Magistrate, as
not only not delights, but abhors bloodshed and cruelty even in his very
enemies, as Caesar did. Legis and Magistratus non est seeler atos, sed seelera
extirpart, the end and office of Law and Magistracy Seneca.
is not to root out the wicked, but wickedness, but cruelty kills the men,
and suffers their vices to live, and therefore is the cruel man unmeet to
be made a Magistrate.

For if all kind of violence be utterly against Justice, and unbeseeming him
that fitteth in the feat of Justice, much more cruelty, which delights to
domineere and tyrannize over men's lives and goods, only and altogether by
violence, and against Justice. Crudeles vero, qui pu^i^ndi causam habe ^^es, in
punienda modum Seneca.
non habent. I call them cruel, that having cause to punish, can keep no
mean nor measure in punishing: whereas the rule of Gods Justice preferibeth
the Magistrate to proportion the punishments of every Offender according to the
nature and quality of his offense, Leuit. 20. Exodus 21. Deutro. 19. Deutro. 25.
Eccles. 4. 30.
and not to exceed: and it is the counsel of the Wiseman to the wise
Magistrate, that will win the hearts of the people, Be not as a Lion in
thine house, destroying thy household folk, and oppressing them that are under
the. For when men in authority will rule and overrule the people by rigor and
oppression, as R^boam did, it opens 1. Reg. 12. 16.
the mouths of men against them, and makes them murinous and clamorous
against them, whom otherwise they might have obedient and obsequious to them.
The holy Ghost therefore in this place disswadeth the Magistrate from this
kind of sin, as an extremity of Justice, and an enemy to good government,
charging him in no wise to be too just, that is, under the color of Justice
to be cruel in the execution of Justice.

The second thing to be condemned in a Magistrate is too much severity, which
differs from cruelty only in this, that cruelty proceeds without Law, and
against Law; and severity according to the precise and straight letter of the
Law, being in it self an inflexible virtue, Quae meritatem legis sequitur,
quando recta racio The. Aquin.
h^c requiris, which follows the truth of the Law, when right and reason
requires so to do. But yet, when severity is too severe, too fierce, too
sower, too bitter and too inexorable, Legibus ^^^nium atrociter obtemperans,
obeying the letter of the Law with too much rigor, without any commiseration
or pity executing the extremity of the Law against those that offend the law,
vertitur in vietum virtus, the virtue of severity is turned into avice. Due
sunt nomina (says Augustine) Augustine.
homo, and peccator. Quod peccator est, corripe, quod homo est, miserere. Man,
and a sinful man are two things, in that he is a sinner, punish him, but in
that he is a man, show compassion and mercy toward him. A good Magistrate
(says Isidorus) should always carry a pair of scoles in his hands, with
Justice in the one Isodorus.
scole, and Mercy in the other, to sentence sin according to Justice, and to
moderate the punishment of sin by the rule of mercy. For Mercy is the eye of
Justice, and Justice without mercy is (as it were) caecus Sagittarius* qui
intendens occidere feram occidit hominem, like a blind archer, who having an
intent to kill a beast, kills a man, as Lamech did. Oportet leges acriter
status, (...) autem, quam ips^^ iubent, poenas su^ere: Laws must he shortly
enacted but the penalties of Laws must not be so straightly exacted, as by Law
is required. It is good sometime to blow a man's nose: but yet (Solomon says)
when a man blows his nose, if he wring it too hard, he may make it to bleed.
It is good Prou. 30. 33.
to punish vice, but to punish it always, and in all with extremity of
Justice, may be a mean to spill much blood, and yet do little good. One
says, that a Magistrate like a Physician should never use extreme medicines
but for extreme diseases. Remissius imperanti melius paretur, the people will
be best ruled, when they are Seneca.
mildly governed, Contumax est animus humanus, and facilius sequitur, quam
ducitur, the stomach of a man is stubborn, and will easilier follow, when it
is least forced to follow. Leniter castigatus reuerentiam exhibet castiganti,
he that is punished with lenity does reverence the very person of him, that
does punish him, but he that is punished with extremity, does stomach him,
that does punish him. Be not too just therefore. Thus much of the vices that
are here condemned in a Magistrate.

The things that are here commended in a Magistrate, and commanded to him are
four: Justice, Equity, Clemency and Discretion. For he that here forbids
the Magistrate to be too just, does in many other places and precepts of his
bid him be just. For Justice vpholdeth the seat of Kings. Justice is the girdle
of Kings. And Prou. 16. 12. Esaias 11. 5.
And Solomon speaking to all Magistrates and Ministers of Law and Justice
says: Love Justice you that are the Judges of the earth, but yet withal, Be
not too just (says he) that is, be just with Equity, Discretion and Clemency.
Sap. 1. 1.
For these three must always attend upon Justice, and upon them that are the
Ministers of Justice, Equity is the Interpreter of the Law, making a favorable
exposition of the intention of the Law, to avoid the inconveniences and
extremities, which may sometime be drawn from the precise words of the Law.
Uerba enim debent deseruire intentions, non intentio verbis, that Greg. in
Antonio. part. 4. tit. 5. cap. 19. 1.
is, Words must serve the intention, not the intention words, and men's in
loquendo potius, quam verba est consideranda. Greg. And therefore one says,
Quod is committit Antonius part. 4. tit. 5. cap. 19.
in legem, qui verba legis amplectens contra legis nititur voluntatem, he
offends against the Law, that sticking to the words of the Law strives and
wrangleth against the meaning of the Law, and he fulfilleth the Law, that does
the meaning of the Law, though he leaves the words of the Law. Abimelech the
Priest did contrary to the words of the law, Leuit. 24. when he gave the show
bread to David, being bread only for the Leuit. 24 9. 1. Sam. 21. 6.
Priests, not for lay persons, and yet Christ himself praises him for so
doing. For if he had denied David the show bread being ready to die for
hunger, though Matthew. 12. 4.
he had followed the letter of the law, yet had ^ee done contrary to the
meaning of the Lawmakers, who in the exposition of all his laws prefers
mercy before Matthew. 12. 7.
sacrifice. The law of the Sabbath does allow no work to be done on that day,
and it was feuerely punished in him, that gathered sticks on that day: and yet
our Savior Christ affirms it lawful to do good on the Numb. 15. 35.
Sabbath day, and that the Sabbath is not broken by doing any work, that is a
work of necessity, a work of charity, or a work tending to the glory of God.
If Matthew. 12. 11. 8
the Lord God himself does allow that his own law should be dispensed withal
in cases of charity, it is lawful for the Magistrate to use the like liberty
in the like matters and cases of the laws of man for charities sake. And even
we that are bound to the obedience of laws, if we keep them not all and
always modo and forma, as may be required of us, it is a fault that may
sometime be excused in us, when it is not wittingly and wilfully done of us.
Aliud enim est non parere legibus, aliud contemnere. Peccat semper, qui
contemnit leges, sed non semper Antonius part. 1. tit. 18 cap. vni^. 2.
peccat, qui non paret legibus. It is one thing not to obey laws, and another
thing to contemn laws. He sins always that contemns laws, but he
does not always sin that does not obey laws. Be not too just therefore in
urging the penalty and extremity of the Law against those that offend the law,
without any intention or meaning to contemn the Law.

A third thing commendable in a Magistrate is Clemency, a virtue which
moderateth the affections of Magistrates, who (as Plutarch says) should be
like a good musician. For as he straineth up one string and lets down
another, thereby to accord them together, so must a good Magistrate sometime be
remiss, and sometime use rigor: but as there is less danger in letting down a
string then in drawing it up, so is there less peril to rule remissely and
with mercy, then with rigor and severity. Magistrates are gods upon the earth,
and it cannot be denied, but they are the best Magistrates that come nearest
the example of God. The Wiseman says of God, that though he has power over
all things, to save and destroy at his own pleasure, yet has he mercy on
Sap. 11. 20.
all, and makes as though he saw not the sins of men, because they should
amend. As the mercy of God is above all his works, and as God is called a God
of mercy, and not of justice, because he delights more in mercy then in
justice, so must a good Magistrate follow him rather in the example of his
mercy, then in his justice. One of the Jewish Rabbines writing upon Exodus
faith, that it was an ancient custom among the Hebrews, that though the
greatest part of their Judges in their public Lyra in 2. Iac.
assemblies had condemned a man, yet would they respite his execution for a
time, and not presently put him to death: but if the greater part at any time
agreed in the acquiting of any man, he was presently discharged without any
further consultation, because they did hold, that in doubtful cases between
justice and mercy, it was always best and safest to incline to mercy. Melius
est errare in modicitate, quant in excessu. It is better to err in the mean,
then in the extremity. It is a Anton. part. 1. tit. 20.
commendation that is given in the Scriptures to the Kings of Israel, that they
were merciful Kings. Moses 3 Reg. 20. 3. Numb. 1^. ^
the best Magistrate that ever was, was the mildest man that ever was. Solomon
the wisest Magistrate, that ever was, was called the Prince of Peace, because
he was the most peaceable Prince that ever was. And as he was, so he writes,
Mercy preserves a King, and with loving mercy Prou. 20. 28.
is his seat and scepter vpholden. Be not too just therefore, but help to hold
up his Majesty's Crown and Kingdom with mercy, that as he has won it with
mercy, so it may still stand by mercy, and so continue to him and his posterity
after him.

A third thing commendable in a Magistrate is Discretion, termed of Bernard,
moderatrix, matter and auriga virtutum, the moderatour, the mother and guide of
men's manners, and specially of the Magistrate. For as a Coachman does not
always drive right forward, nor keep always one pace, but must sometime
stay, sometime turn, sometime drive faster and sometime slower, as the ways
do serve, and as he sees his horses are able to endure, even so neither must
a Magistrate keep always one direct course, nor in all causes carry himself
alike to all men, but must many times conform himself to the diverse
dispositions of diverse men, according to the diversity of their different
humors. Physicians do not always and in all diseases follow the rules of
learning and their books, but they are sometime feign to apply themselves to
please their patients, and suffer them to have their wills against the rules
of physic, so must Magistrates do with the unruly people, when as they are
not all alike, nor all sick of one disease, so neither are they always to be
used alike, nor to be cured after one manner. And though it be a rule in
Divinity, non est facienda mala, vt eueniant bona, that evil is not to be
done, that good may come thereof, yet when men have to do with the common
people, ferenda and toleranda nonnunquam sunt mala. It is the opinion of Brent.
Matthew. (...).
M. Beza, Epist. 4. Quaedam esse cogente necessitate non tantum tacit
toleranda, sed etiam publicis ligibus moderanda, quoniam semel and simul tolli
a mag. propter hominem duritiam non possunt, cuiusmodi est diuortij libellus,
and foeneris Beza in ep^^. 4.
moderatio etc. There are some things, that of necessity are not only to be
suffered with silence, but to be moderated by laws also, because through the
hardness of men's hearts, they cannot at once and together be taken away of
the Magistrate, such as bills of divorce and usury etc. All things are lawful,
but all things are not expedient. All things therefore that are lawful for the
1. Cor. 10. 23.
Magistrate to do, are not always expedient for him to do: Discretion must
teach him the difference. It had been lawful for Moses to deny diuorcements
to the Jews, but because he saw it was not expedient to Deuteronomy. 24. 1.
deny them, he was content to yield to an inconvenience to avoid a mischief.
It had been lawful for Samuel to have denied the people a King when they
required his consent for the choice of one, but yet he thought it not
expedient to stand against them, lest they should have presumed of themselves
to have 1. Sam. 12.
made one without him, Quod non est licitum in lege, necessitas licitum facit,
that which is not lawful by Law, Autonius part. 1. tit. 20. cap. vnie.
necessity many times makes lawful without law, Nonnullos toleramus, quia
corrigere and punire non possumus. Augustine. Anton. part. 2. tit. 9. cap. 5.
and 4. part. tit. 5. cap. 13.
We suffer some men, because we cannot conveniently correct and punish them.
There are three causes (says one) for which a Magistrate may and must sometime
forbear to punish. The first is, when the offenders are hidden and unknown,
in which case sanctius est nocentes absoluere, quam innocents condemnere, it
is better to absolve the nocent, then to condemn the innocent, lest in
gleaning out the tares, the wheat be plucked up also, and the good be punished
for the bad. The second Matthew. 13.
is, when the fault to be punished, is an offense of infirmity or ignorance,
and not of malice, when it may be probably presumed of their amendment that are
the offenders. For the end of punishment is the reformation of him or them
that are to be punished, which when it may be wrought without punishment, the
punishment may be spared, quia medici non indignantur egrotis, sed morbo
medentur. For Physicians are not angry with their patients, but they desire to
cure their diseases. The third cause is, when the offenders being many or
great men, cannot conveniently be punished without danger of schism in the
Church, or sedition in the commonwealth. In these and such like cases and
causes, Discretion says always to the Magistrate, Be not too just. And thus
much of those things, that concerns the Magistrate to take knowledge of out
of the words of my text.

The second sort of people to whom Solomon speaks, are private men and common
persons, that live as Subjects under the obedience of Christian Magistrates. To
these also that are such, Solomon says here, Be not too just, therein giving
direction to every private man, how to guide himself in his obedience, in his
religion, in his conscience and in his zeal, in all which things Solomon would
have no man affect to be too just, but rather to conform himself and his
conscience to the equity and example of Gods Justice. First, touching religion
he forbids us to be too just, either in words or terms of doctrine, or
questions of discipline, in both which he would not have you that are the
common people to require every thing, that is taught you out of the Scriptures
to be proved by express words of the Scripture. For although the word of God
is and must be the lantern of our feet, and the light to our paths, and the
sole and only rule of our Justice, which must direct and guide us in all
matters of religion, yet are there many terms of doctrine both taught and
believed of the Church, which are not there to be found in plain and express
words, but only drawn from thence by way of consequence, and yet received as
agreeing with the Scriptures, and with the anologie of faith. Nazianzen says,
that studium litterae est pallium impietatis, the sticking too much to the
letter Lib. 5. de Theologia.
is the cloak of iniquity. The Arrian heretics refused the word (...), and
denied Christ to be (...), that is, of the same substance with his father,
because it was a word no where found in the Scriptures. The answer of
Athanasius is, Etsi hac vox in Scripturis non reperitur, habere tamen eam
sententia^, qua^ Scripturae volunt, that though the word it self be not found
in the Scriptures, yet that it has that sense, which the Scriptures do allow
off. Cyrill likewise being challenged after the like manner, that what he said
was (...), that is, not written, answered, rem ipsam, qua per illud vocabulum
significatur, habere certissima Scripturae testimonia, that the matter it self
signified by the word, had most sure and certain witnesses out of the
Scriptures. There were certain heretics likewise, that denied the holy Ghost
to be God, terming him Deum peregrinum and Scripturae verbis nusquam expressum,
a strange God, and no where mentioned in the express words of the scripture;
whereunto Nazianzen answers, that all things that are taught to be believed
in the Scriptures, are not in the proper and in the self same words always
expressed in the Scriptures, but if (says he) I use a peculiar word to
express any thing implied in the sense of the Scripture, though the very word
it self be not found in the Scripture, recte facio, I do well: even as when I
say bis quinque twice five, I say not ten, and yet if I join five and five
together, and call them ten, recte dico, I speak rightly and truly, and it
is good consequence. The like I may say of childrens baptism, and the Cross
used in baptism, and many other points concerning the doctrine, discipline and
ceremonies used in our Church, wherein though there be some things taught and
used, which be not expressly commanded in the Scriptures, yet being implied in
the sense of the Scriptures, or nor disagreeing from the sense of the
Scriptures, they are not to be accounted contrary to the Scriptures, and for
this very cause I term the sign of the Cross a holy sign, not that it is so
of it self, but for the significations sake, representing unto us the precious
death and passion of our Lord and Savior Christ, whereof he himself terms
it a sign Matthew. 24. when he says, Then shall appear the sign of the son
of man in Matthew. 24.
the heavens. Be not too just therefore to urge the very words of the
Scripture for proof of every thing drawn and delivered for doctrine out of the
Scripture, and much less for matters of discipline and indifferency, wherein
the rule that Ambrose gave to Augustine and his mother is to be followed, Ad
quamcnnq veneris Ecclesiam, eius morem serua, ficuiquam non vis esse scandalum,
nec quenquam tibi, to what Church soever you come, in matters of indifferency
follow the use of that Church, if you will not be offensive to others, nor have
others offensive to you. Be not too just.

The second thing wherein we must not be too just is our obedience, wherein we
must give honor and reverence to all God Almighties Magistrates, first to the
1. Pet. 2.
King as having the pre-eminence, and then to other inferior rules sent of
him, and set over us by him, whom we must obey in all things that are in their
powers to command, and in ours to perform. For some things are not to be
commanded by them, nor obedience to be performed of us. Modus obedientiae sic
tenendus Augustine.
est, vt bonis in malo scienter non obedias, nec malis in bono contradicas. The
manner of they obedience must so he observed, as that willingly thou neither
obey good men in that which is ill, nor oppose thy self against evil men in
that which is good, and herein the nature of those things also wherein
obedience may be required of us, must be considered of us. For there are some
things which are pura bona merely good, somethings pura mala merely ill, and
some things are media in the mean between both. In things merely good or
merely ill, nulla debetur homini obedientia, quoniam nec bona Destruct.
vieiorum part. 6. cap. 59.
omittenda sunt, cum prohibentur, nec mala co^mittenda, cum iubentur, no
obedience is due to man, because neither good things are to be neglected, when
they are prohibited, nor evil things to be done, when they are commanded.
Things merely good are faith, hope and charity, and such like, Quae nec male
iuberi, nec male toneri possunt: which neither can euilly be commanded, nor
euillie observed. Of such things we have a commandment, cleave to that which
is good. And 1 Thessalonians. 5. Follow and Romans 12.
keep that which is good. Things merely ill are theft, idolatry, sacrilege,
and all sorts of sins whatsoever, quae nec been praecipi nec perfici, nec
male prohiberi, vol non fieri, which can neither be well commanded, nor well
performed, nor euilly prohibited or neglected. Nullius enim prohibitio diuinis
valet obuiare praeceptis, nullius iussio praeiudicare prohibitis: for no man's
prohibition is of validity to forbid that which God commands, neither is any
man's commandment, of force to preiudicate those things which he forbids.
Between these two extremes, there are other some things of an in different
Destruct. viciorum part. 6. cap. 59.
nature, which in regard of the manner of doing them, the time, when they are
done, the place, where they are done, the persons, that do them, or command
them to be done, may be either good, or ill. In his lox obedientiae posita est:
the law of obedience consists in these things. For when God would teach the
first man obedience, prohibuit ab ear, qua non erat mala, Amb. In such things
nec iussio nec prohibitio principum aut praelatorum est contemnenda: neither
the commandment nor prohibition of Princes or Prelates is to be contemned.
For (as Bernard says) quic quid vice Dei praecipit homo, quem pro Deo habemus,
tanquam Deum audire debemus, whatsoever in things of this nature man commands
in the place of God, whom we houlde as God, we are bound to obey as God. If
this doctrine be agreeing to the rule of justice in obedience, then are they
too just, that refuse to obey their Princes in these things, that are of this
nature under a pretense of obedience to God, who does hold himself disobeyed
of them, that in such things disobey their Princes. Non ea reiecerunt, sed me:
they reject not them (says the 1. Sam. 8. 7.
Lord God himself) to the Magistrate, that is so disobeyed, but me. Be not too
just therefore.

The third thing, wherein we must not be too just is conscience, when our
conscience is erroneous. I term that an erroneous conscience, that is either
too strict, too stiff, or too scrupulous in matters of in differency, when
obedience is required of us in such matters. The causes inducing conscience to
error are many. In some it proceeds from the malice of Satan, who, when he
can not tempt them to great and gross sins, he seeks many times to vex
them with scruples of conscience, troubling them in their imaginations, and
sometime perverting the judgment of their minds only through abundance of
melancholy humors, that reign in their bodies, Mill surgunt apud aliquos
scrupuli Antonius. part. 1. tit. 3. cap. 10. 10.
(...) oblatrantes, and lacerare minantes eos, qui volunt ire per viam Dei: A
thousond doubts barking within them like Dogs do arise in the hearts of some,
and threaten to tear them in pieces, that have a desire to walk in the right
way of God. Berson.

Gregory in this case does resemble the Devil to a Lion, that scareth little
beasts, which are weak and fearful at his own pleasure, but, when he
encountereth with great beasts, is many times put to the worst himself, even
so when the Devil deals with those, that are fearful and weak, he
puts many intricate questions and doubts into their heads to the great
disquiet and trouble of their consciences, wherein notwithstandieg he does
seldom or never prevail with men of judgment and understanding, but they
prevail against him.

In some error of conscience proceeds of mere Anton. part. 1. Tit. 3. cap.
10. 3.
negligence, when a man standing doubtful of any thing, wherein he ought to be
resolved, or being ignorant of any thing he ought to know; neglects to take
counsel in time of them, that are able to inform and reform him in his
doubtfulnesse and ignorance, and so it was with Nicodemus, before he came to
Christ.

In other some it proceeds of the proud conceit they have of their own
learning and wit, thinking scorn to humble their understanding to men of
greater judgment and knowledge then they are themselves, which Augustine in
his confessions acknowledges to have been his fault many years, whereby he
remained obstinate a long while, and would neither be brought to baptism nor
belief, but being morallie learned in the seven liberal sciences he defended
his errors against all men, and would not be removed, till at last by hearing
of Ambrose he was brought to change his mind, content to subject his reason
and learning to the obedience of faith, which (as he says himself of
himself) if he had not done, he had still lived and died in error, and never
been saved.

In othersome it proceeds from a certain singularity of mind, a vice, that
delights to be opposite to authority, and makes a man to carry himself
different in opinion and judgment from other men, desiring to be noted and
pointed at prae caeteris, because, as the Poet says of such, they think it a
kind of credit and glory to them notarier and dicier, hic est, to be a noted
man, and to have it said of them, this is he, which was a thing, that the
proud hipocriticall Pharisees much delighted in, wherein also they have many
followers even at this day.

In othersome it proceeds from a certain inordinate affection and admiration
of their persons, from whom they have received their opinions. Nimius enim amor
and nimium odium in errorem inducunt and peruertunt iudictum, Senec. Extreme
love and extreme hatred lead men into error and pervert their judgment, as is
to be seen in the Church of Corinth, where some held of Paul, some of Apollo,
and some of Cephas, every man, as he fancied the man, whom he followed, which
is likewise one of the greatest causes of schism and contention in our
Churches, wherein some humerous persons delight to draw disciples after them,
and other some having itching ears do turn their hearing from the truth, and
delight to hear only those, that will 2. Tim. 4.
preach novelties and pleasing things unto them, whereby the Gospel is ill
spoken of, Et facta est fides Euangelioru^ Hilarious ad constantinum in lib.
quem illi exhibuit ab Arrianis decepto.
fides temporum, faith of the Gospel is become the faith of time. Nam aut
scribuntur fides, vt volumus, aut, vt volumus intelliguntur. For either faithes
are written, as will, or, as will, they are understood. Et cum secundum vnum
Deum, vnum Dominum, vnum baptisma, fides etiam vna esse debeat, oo pone ventum
est, vt nulla sit. And whereas according as there is but one God, one Lord, one
baptism, there ought to be but one faith also, it is almost come to that pass
now, that there is none at all. From these and such like causes proceed all
errors in conscience, for reformation whereof we are here forbidden to be too
just in these extremes, and bidden to suffer our consciences to be guided by
those rules of Justice, which ought to direct our consciences, whereof there
are many.

One and the first is this, In indifferentibus plus obligat praeceptum
principis. and pralati, quam propria conscientia, Anton. part. 1. tit. 3. cap.
10. 4.
quia in his conscientia habet supra se principem and praelatum. Tho. Aquin. In
matters of indifferency the commandment of a Prince and a prelate, does more
bind man, then his own conscience, because in these things the Prince and the
Prelate has pre-eminence above conscience. The ground and foundation of this
rule are Christ's own words, when he says, Quaecunque dixcrint Matthew. 23.
vobis, facite: whatsoever your Magistrates bid you observe, that observe and
do.

The second is this, Conscientia nun quam obligat in virtute propria, sed in
virtute praecepti diuini: conscience never Anton. part. 1. tit. 3. cap. 10. 4.
binds in it self, but by virtue of some commandment from God. Quia
conscientia non dictat aliquid esse faciendum, aut non faciendum hac ratione,
quia sibi videtur Tho. Aquin. in 2. sent. distinct. 39.
vel non videtur, sed sub hac condition, quia est a Deo praeceptum vel
prohibitum: Because the conscience tells not a man, that any thing is to be
done, or not to be done, in regard that it seems good or not good to it
self, but for that the same is either commanded or forbidden of God. If a man
makes a conscience of any thing not commanded or forbidden, and yet does it,
he may seem in some sort to do praeter conscientiam, besides his conscience,
but not against his conscience. Anton. part. 1. tit. 3. cap. 10. 4.

The third is, in things indifferent, when a man doubts of any thing
commanded him, whether it be bonum and licitum good and lawful, obedire debet
he is bound to obey it and to do it. Nam etsi reum fortassis faciat
Destructorium viciorum part. 6. cap. 59.
superiorem imper andi iniquitas, innocontem tamen ostendit orde seruiendi
inferiorem: for although the iniquity of commanding may make the Superior
guilty, yet order of obedience shows the inferior to be innocent.

The fourth is, In dubijs bonorum vita alijs debet esse Anton. part. 1. tit. 3.
cap. 10.
viuendi regula: in things doubtful the life of good men should be the rule of
living to others. For by the counsel of Solomon a man should never lean to
much to his own wit nor make a conscience to himself in matters Prou. 3. 7.
of indifferency against the judgment of other men wiser, then himself. And
therefore old father Toby advised his young son always to ask counsel of
the Tob. 4.
wise, and the Wiseman faith, Gonot from the doctrine of thine elders, that
are men of judgment and understanding. Eccles. 8. and 6.
And 22. Pro. Re^^^^ not the ancient bounds, which thy forefathers have set,
the allegory whereof does Prou. 22. 28.
teach us neues rashly to innouate any thing, in the Church or common wealth
contrary to that, which we have received from godly antiquity, when the same
also is commanded and confirmed by authority.

The fifth is, Ubi in rebus dubijs diuersae sunt iudicia and diuers^ opiniones,
humanior and aequior est preferenda: where Auton. part. 1. tit. 3. cap. 10.
in matter of doubt men are of diverse judgments, and diverse opinions, that
which inclimeth most to humanity and equity is to be preferred, as you may
see in 5. Act. where the whole counsel of the Pharisees and Act. 5. 40.
other learned men approved the opinion of G^^^^^ial alone touching the
punishment of the Apostles. These are the rules of equity tending to the
information and reformation of the errors of the conscience iniquestions of
obedience, all agreeing and concluding with that which Solomon says here, Be
not too just.

The fourth thing, that we must not be too just in, is zeal, which when it is
in measure, seasoned with understanding and knowledge, as the Apostle requires
Romans 10. 2.
and is desirous of the glory of God, as it was in Elias, and in Phineas 25.
Numb. then is it good, and commendable 3. Reg. 19.
in us, but when it is kindled in us through the fire and fury of our
passions, and tends to the glory of our selves, then (though the cause and
quarrel be Gods) yet is it not rightly to be termed zeal, but passion,
indignation, wrath and vengeance, as it was in the Apostles, when in the
quarrel of their Master they were ready to desire, that fire might come down
from Luc. 9. 54.
heaven against the Samaritanes. Quic quid lacerato animo quis dixerit,
punientis est impetus, non charitas corrigentis: whatsoever a man speaks with
an angry and revenging mind, it is a violent passion desiring punishment, and
not a charitable affection seeking amendment. For though sin be to be hated
and zealouslie reproved both of us, that are Preachers, and you that are
professors of Christ, yet must it be done with modesty and moderation of
zeal, and with due consideration of our selves, and our own frail natures.
Galath. 6. Gregory.
Aegros, quos pot us fortis non cur auit, ad salutem pristinam aqua tepens
renocauit: many sick folks, which could not be cured with strong potions,
have been recovered with warm water. We therefore, that are Preachers, if we
be zealous of the health and salvation of souls, and desire to win men to
repentance, we must carry our selves kindly to them, but yet without flattery,
improuing, rebuking and exhorting them with all patience 2. Tim 4. 2.
and long suffering. Facilius penetrant mollia, quam asper a verba: mild and
gentle words do easier pierce and persuade, then bitter speeches. The modest
and Acts 26.
mild zeal of Paul preaching Christ before Agrippa being a heathen man did by
his own confession some thing move him to become a Christian.

It is good for us, that are Preachers to be zealous in God almighties cause
but with modesty and mercy in meckenesse instructing them, that are contrary
minded, that by ones ministry God may give them repentance, and 2. Tim. 2. 25.
bring them to the knowledge of his truth. Be not therefore too just. The like
also I may say to you, that are professors of Christ, it well beseems you to
have the zeal of God and his glory as well as we, that are his Ministers, and
your pastors: but yet though you understand more then others, you must not for
all that rashly and under color of zeal condemn all others, that are not
grown to that measure and height of knowledge that you are, but you must bear
Romans 15.
with them that are weak, and seek to conform them with love, lest the Lord
God in his anger quench the zeal of his Spirit in you, and kindle it in them
that are contemned and condemned of you. Remember that Christ will not have the
bruised reed to be broken, nor the smoking flax to be quenched. When the
Apostles in zeal of their Master were ready to call for Esaias 42. 3.
vengeance against them that were his and their enemies, Christ reproved this
their zeal, and told them, Luc. 9. 55.
it came not of the Spirit of God: For the son of man came not to condemn,
but to save: and these Samaritans being then sauedby Christ from that
destruction which the Apostles in the heat oftheir zeal desired against them,
within a few years after, were some of the first that received the faith of
Christ by the preaching of the Apostles. The wind blows where it will, and
when it will, and the Acts 8. 5.
spirit of God works in the hearts of men to their conversion, when it will,
and not when we will. If God in his justice had destroyed the Samaritanes, when
the Apostles would have had them destroyed, how should they afterward have
been saved by the preaching of the Apostles?

If Dimas had been hanged as a thief, as soon as ever he played the thief,
how should he have been converted to Christ on the cross, or how should
Christ have been glorified by his confession on the Luc. 23.
cross? If God had taken away Paul, when Paul begun first to persecute the
Church, how should the Church have been confirmed in the says of Christ by
the doctrine of Paul, as now it is? God is a gracious God, jealous of his glory
and yet mindful of his mercy, not desiring the death of sinners, but rather
that they should beconuerted and live. Let the same zeal be in you that is in
God, who in his anger thinks of his mercy, and shows himself gracious to
every man. Vbi pater familias largus est* dispensator ^ius non debet esse
tena^e, Where the Master of the house is liberalls his steward should not be
hold-fast and miserable. Vbi Deus benignus est, home non debet esse austerus.
Aug. where God is merciful man should not be cruel. Even in the works of
virtue (says one) which consist the mean, to exceed the mean, is to decline
from the right hand, and to fall into an extreme. Be not too just therefore,
no not in Justice it self, but just in due measure of Justice, and use a
moderation in all things. Be just, but without cruelty, just without over much
severity, just with equity, discretion and clemency. Be just in your religion,
but be not too just, leaning too much to the letter of the Scripture, as
though nothing were to be allowed, which is not found in the very letters and
sillables of the Scripture: but what soever is agreeing in sense to the meaning
of the Scripture, though it be not in the express words of the Scripture, or
is deduced from thence by necessary consequence, let it be received for
doctrine, and whatsoever is used in the practice of the Church not disagreeing
from the Scripture, let it go current for discipline. Be just in all duties of
obedience, but not too just, but just only according to the equity of
obedience, which requires you to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
but not the things that are Gods, and to God the things that are Gods, but not
the things that are Caesar's, but to every man, that which of right belongs
unto him, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, and honor to Romans 13.
whom honor is due. For this is just, and required of us that are Subjects and
live under the obedience of laws. Be just likewise in your consciences, but be
not too just, be just without fear, just without pride, without singularity,
without contempt of law and authority, be just according to those rules of
Christian equity and plety, which serve to guide the conscience. And to say
all, and end all in one word, be just in the whole course of your lives, as
Joseph was, and as Zachary and his wife Luc. 1. 6.
were, studying always to have a clear conscience (as Paul did) both toward
God and the world. And whatsoever Act. 24. 16.
you would that men should do unto you, do you to them, and what you would
not, that men should do unto you, never Matthew. 7. 12.
do you to them. For what measure you meet to others, the same shall be remet
to you again. Vnusquisque talem indulgentiam accepturus est a Deo, qualem ipse
proxuno suo f^r^^^it, every man shall receive such favor from God, as he
himself shows to his neighbor. The hundred pence therefore that your
neighbors do owe to you, Matthew. 18.
forgive them, that the Lord God may forgive you the ten thousand talents that
you owe to him. For if you forgive men their offenses; your heavenly father
shall for give Matthew. 6.
you: but if you forgive not, neither will he forgive you. He that seeks
vengeance of his neighbor, shall find vengeance of the Lord, and he that will
show no mercy to him Eccles. 28.
that stands at his mercy, he shall have judgment without mercy at the hands
of God. Be not too just therefore, bu^ Iac. 2.
let mercy have pre-eminence in all things, and in all the ^ctions of your
lives above justice. Melius est read arationem Deo de nimia misericordia, quam
de nimia seueritate. Chrisost. It is better to render an account to God of too
much mercy, then of too much severity. As God Almighty therefore at all times
and in all his works enclineth more to mercy then to justice, so I beseech
you, as the children of God, be merciful, as your heavenly father is
merciful, that when mercy and justice shall meet together, and every one be
rewarded with the one or the other, according to his works, you may escape the
dreadful sentence of Gods most severe iuiustice, which then shall be
pronounced against all unmerciful and cruel hearted people, and hear that
most joyful and comfortable sentence of grace and glory which then shall be
given to the vessels of mercy prepared to glory from the beginning of the
world, by and thorough the precious death and passion of Christ Jesus the son
of God, and the only Savior and Redeemer of men, to whom with the Father etc.

FINIS.

