A DECLARATIOVN OF THE KINGS MAJESTY'S INTENTIOVN AND MEANING TOWARD THE LAIT
ACTIS OF PARLIAMENT



Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Thomas Vautroullier. 1585.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S DECLARATIOVN
FOR samekle as their is some evil affect it men, that gois about, so fare as
lies in them, to invent lies and calumnies, to stanie and impair the Kings
Majesty's fame and honor, and raisis brutis, as gif his Majesty had declynit
to Papistrie, and had, made many actis, to derogate the fry passage of the
gospel, good ordour and discipline in the kirk: Quhilk brutis are nurishit and
interteneit be rebellious subjects quha wald glaidly cover their seditious
interprises, under Pretext of Religioun (albeit their can be na godly Religioun
in sic, as raisis armor, and disquietis the estate of their native Souerane,
and periuritly hes contrauenit the aith, band and obligation of their faith,
quhairvnto they have sworn and subscryuit.) Thairefore, that his Majesty's
faithful subiectis be not abusit with sic sclanderous reports, and his Hienes
good and affectionat friends in other countries may understand the verity of
his vpricht intentioun, his Hienes hes commaundit this brief declaratioun of
certain of his Majesty's actis of Parliament haldin in Maij 1584. to be
publishit and imprentit, to the effect, that the indirect practices of sic as
sclanderis his May. and his lawis, may be detectit and discouerit.

IN the first act, his Majesty ratifeis and appreuis the true professiou^ of
the Gospel, sinceir preaching of the word, and administratioun of the
Sacramentis, presently be the gudenes of God establishit within this Realm:
and allowis of the confessioun of the faith set down be act of Parliament the
first eir of his Majesty's Regne. Like as his Hienes not only professis the
same in all sincerity, bot praysit be God, is cum to that maturitie of
judgment, be reiding and heiring the word of God that his Hienes is able to
convince and ouerthrawe be the doctrine of the Prophetis and Apostles, the most
learnit of the contrary sect of the adversaries: Sua that: as Plato affirms
that co^moun wealth to be most happy, quhairin ane Philosophour regnis, or he
that regnis, is ane Philosophour: we may mekle mair esteem this country of
Scotland to be fortunat, quhairin our King is ane Theologue, and his heart
replenishit with the knawledge of the heavenly Philosophy, for the comfort not
only of his good subjects and friends in other countries; bot of them that
professis the gospel eueriequhair: He being ane King of great expectatioun, to
quhom his birthricht has not only destinate and prouydit great kingedomes, bot
mekill mair his Hienes vertew, godliness and learning, and daily incresse of
all heavenly sciences, dois promeis and assure him of the michtie protection of
God, and favor of all them that fearis his holy name.

IN the secou^d act, his Majesty's royal authority ower all estaites, both
spiritual and temporal, is confirmit. Quhilk act, some of malice, and vtheris
of ignorance dois traduce, as gif his Majesty pretendit to be callit the heid
of the Kirk, Ane name quhilk his May. acknawlegis to be proper and peculiar
to the son of God, the Savior of the world, quha is the heid, and bestows
life spiritual vpoun the members of his mystical body: and he having
ressauit the holy spreit in all abundance, makis every ane of the faithful
pertakers thairof, according to the mesure of faith bestowit vpoun them. Of
the quhilk number of the faithful under the heid Christ, his May,
acknawlegis him self to be ane member, baptizit in his name, partaker of the
mystery of the croce and holy communioun, and attending with the faithful
for the cumming of the Lord, and the final restitutioun of Goddis elect. And
notwithstanding his Majesty surely vnderstandis be the Scriptures, that he is
the chief and principal member, appointed be the law of God to see God
glorifiit, vice punishit, and virtue mainteinit within his realm: and the
sovereign judgment for ane godly quietness and ordour in the commoun wealth, to
apperteine to his Hienes cair and solicitude. Quhilk power and authority of
his hienes, certain Ministers, being callit before his May, for their
seditious and factious sermonis and steiring up of the people to rebellion
aganis their native King, be the instigatioun of sindrie unquiet spirits, wald
in na ways acknawlege, bot disclamit his May. authority, as ane
incompetent Judge. And specially ane callit M. Andro Meluile, ane ambitious
man, of ane salt and fyrie humor, usurping the pulpit of Sandrois without ane
lawful calling, and privy at that time to certain conspiraceis attemptit
aganis his Majesty and Croun, went about in his sermon upon ane Sunday, to
infla^me the hartis of the People, be odious comparisons of his Majesty's
progenitors and counsale; Albeit the dewtie of ane faithful Preachour of the
Gospel be rather to exhort the people to the obedience of their native King,
nor be popular sermonis, quhilk hes been the euersioun and decay of great
cities and common welthis, and hes greatly in times bygane disquietit this
estate, to trouble and perturbe the country. The said M. Andro wllit before
his Hienes, presumptuouslie answerit, that he hald not be iugit be the King and
Counsale, because he had spok in the samein pulpit, quhilk pulpit, in effect,
he allegit to be eximit from the Judgment and correction of Princes. As gif
that holy place, sanctifeit to the word of God, and to the brekking of the
bread of life, micht be ane cullor to any sedition in word or deid, aganis the
lawful authority, without punishment. Alwayis his Majesty (being of him
self ane may gracious Prince) was not willing to have vsit any rigor aganis
the said M Andro, gif he had humbly submittit him self* acknawled git his
offense, and creuit pardon: quha notwithstanding affrayit of his awin gyltines,
being privy to diverse conspiraceis of before, fled into the Realm of England.
quhais nauchty and presumptuous refusing of his Hienes judgment, was the
occasioun of the making of the secound act, That nane soulde declyne his Hienes
authority: in respect that the common proverb beiris, Ex malis moribus bonae
leges natae sunt, that is, Of evil manners good Laws proceed. And in very
deid it laketh not ane richt intolerable arrogancy in any subject, callit
before his Prince, professing, and authorizing the samin treuth, to disclame
his authority: nether do the Prophets, Apostles, nor vthers conductit be the
spirit of God, minister the like example. For it is a great error to affirm,
as money do, that Princes and Magistrates hes only power to take ordour in civil
effaires, and that Ecclesiastical matters dois only belang to the ministry. Be
quhilk meanis, the Pape of Rome he exemit him self and his clergy from al
judgment of Princes, and hes made him self to be Judge of Iuges, and to be iugit
of na man: quhair as, be the contrair, not only be the examples of the godly
gouernouris, Iuges and Kings of the ancient Testament, bot also be the new
Testament, and the haill history of the primitive kirk, in the quhilk, the
Emperors iugeit over the Bishops of Rome, deposit them from their seats,
appointit Judges to cognosce and decyde in causis Ecclesiastical, vindicat
innocent men, as Athanasius, from the determinatioun of the concile haldin at
Tyrus, and be infinite good reasouns, quhilk fall be set down, be the grace of
God, in ane several work, salbe sufficiently prouen and verifeit. Bot this
appears at this present to be ane untimely and unprofitable questioun, quhilk
hes no ground vpoun their part, bot of the preposterus imitatioun of the
pretendit jurisdiction of the Pape of Rome. For gif their were any questioun in
this land,, of heresy, quhairby the profound mystereis of the Scriptures
behouit to be searchit forth, his Majesty wald use the samin remedy (as may
expedient) quhilk the may godly Emperouris hes vsit: and his Majesty,
following their example, wald conuene the counsel of learnit pastors, that be
conference of Scriptures, the verity micht be opinnit, and heresy repressit.
Bot, praisit be God, we have no sic controversies in this land, nather hes
there any heresy taken any deep rute in the country: bot certane of the
ministry, joining tham selfis to rebellis, hes trauellit to disquiet the
estate with sic questiouns, that the people micht embrace ane sinistre opinioun
of his Majesty's upright proceidinges and factiouns micht be nurishit and
intertenyit in the cuntrye. Nather is it his May. meaning nor intention in
any sort to tak away the lawful and ordinary judgment in the Kirk, quhairby
discipline and good ordour micht decay: bot rather to preserve, maintene, and
incresse the same. And as their is in the Realm Justices, Constables,
Shirreffis Prouestis, Bailleis, and vtheris Judges in temporal materis, Sa his
Majesty allowith, that all things micht be done in ordour, and ane godly
harmony may be preserved in the haill estait, the synodall assembleis, be the
Bischoppes: or commissionaris quhair the place vakis, to be conuenit twyse in
the eir, to have the ordinary tryell of materis belonging to the ministry and
their estait: Always reserving to his Hienes, that gif they or any of them do
amiss, neglect their dewty, disquiet the estate, or offend in sic manner and
sort, that they in no ways pretend that immunitie privilege and exemptioun
quhilk only was inuentit be the Papes of Rome, to tred under fute the sceptres
of Princes, and to establish ane Ecclesiastical tyranny within this country,
under pretext of new inventit presbyteries, quhilk nather sold answer to the
King, nor bishop under his May. bot sold have ane infinite jurisdiction, as
nather the law of God, nor man can tolerate. Quhilk is only his May.
intentioun to repress, and not to tak away any godly or solid ordour in the
Kirk, as heirefter sall appeir.

THe ferd act of his May. foresaid Parliament, discharges all iugementis
Ecclesiastical, and all assembleis quhilk are not allowit be his May. in
Parliament, quhilk act specially concernis the removing and discharging of that
form lait inuentit in this land, callit the presbytery: quhairin ane number
of ministeris of ane certane precinct and bounds, accompting them selfis all
to be equal, without any difference, and gaddering unto them certane
ge^tilmen and vtheris of his Maiesteis subiectis, vsurpit all the haill
Ecclesiastical iurisdictioun, and alterit the laws at their awin appetite,
without the knawledge and approbation of the King or the estate. Ane form of
doing without any exampill of any natioun, subject to ane Christian Prince. The
perrell quhairof did sa incres, that in case, in dew seasoun it had not been
repressit and forbidden be his May. laws, the samin had troublit the haill
cuntrie. And it being tryit be his Hienes to be the ouerthraw of his May.
estait, the decay of his Croun, and ane reddie introductioun to Anabaptistrie
and popular confusioun in all estaites, his Majesty hes contramandit the same.
And that the Reidar may understand the danger thairof be money inco^uenientis
quhilk thairby insewit in this land, I will only set down ane, quhairby e may
understand quhat perrell was in the rest. The Ambassador of France returning
hame to his own cu^trie, the Kings Majesty co^mandit the Prouest, Bailleis,
and Consale of Edinburgh to gif him the ba^ket, that he micht be dimissit
honorably, according to the amity of ancient times betuix the two nationis.
This command was geuin on settirday be his Hienes: and the banquet appointit to
be on the mounday. A number of the foirsaid pretendit presbytery understanding
thairof, convenit them selfis on sunday in the morning, and presumpteously
determinat and agreit, that the Ministeris of Edinburgh should proclaim ane
fasting upon the samin monunday, quhair thrie several Ministeris, one after
ane other, made thrie diueris sermonis invectiues aganis the Prouest, Bailleis,
and Counsale for the time, and the noble men in the country, quha assistit the
banquet at his May. command. The foirsayd presbytery callit and persewit
them, and scarslie be his Maiesteis authority culd be withhaldin from
excommunicating the saidis Magistratis and noblemen, for obeying only his
Hienes lawful command, quhilk the law of al cuntreyis, callit Ius gentium,
requyris toward Ambassadors of foraine cu^treis. And not only in this, bot
innumerable other things, their commandment was opponit directly, under the
pane of exco^municatio^, to the K. May. and his laws. Quhilk form of doing
inge^derit nothing bot disquietnes, sedition, and trouble: as may manifestly
appeir, in that, the special authoris of the inuenting, promoting, and
assisting of the foirsaid pretendit presbytereis, hes ioynit them selfis with
his Majesty's Rebels: and fleing forth of the realm, in respect of their
giltines, hes discouerit quhat malicious practices was de uysit ama^gis them,
gif God had not in time prouidit remedy. The other form of Judgment quhilk
his Majesty hes dischargit, is the general assembly of the haill Clergy in
the Realm: under pretense quhairof, ane number of Ministeris from sindrie
Presbitereis did assemble, with sum gentlemen of the country, quhairof sum for
that time malcontents of the estate, socht that color as fauoriseris of the
ministry, be the quhilk they have practisit money interprisis in the realm:
quhair there was no certane law in Ecclesiastical effaires, bot all dependit
upon the said general conuentioun, quhair the laws of the Kirk were
alterabill after the plurality of votis, quhilk for the may part succedit
unto the may vnlearnit of the multitude. This general assembly ama^gis
other things did appoint and agrie with his May. regentis in his Hienes
minority, that the estate of bishops (quhilk is one of the estates of
Parliament) should be maintenit and authorisit: As it is registrat in the bukes
of counsel, and subscryuit be the commissioners for the time. Quhilk order was
obseruit many eiris, and Bishops be their consentis, appointit to the dioceis,
quhill within this lait time, in assembleis haldin at Dundie and Glasgovv,
respective, the foirsaid ministers and assemblies, tuke vpoun them, contrary to
their awin hand writ, to discharge the estate, and to declare the samyn to be
unlawful, in their pretendit manner. And there co^mandit the Bishops of the
country to demit and leave their offices and jurisdictions, and that in na
ways they sold pas to the Kings Majesty's counsel, or parliament, without
commissioun obtenit from their assembly: That they sold vote na thing in
Parliament and counsel, bot according to their actis and Injunctions. And
farther, they directit their Commissioners to the Kings Majesty, commanding
him and the Counsel under the pane of the censuris of the kirk (quhairby they
understood excommunication to appoint no Bishop in times to cum, because they
had concludit that estate to be unlawful. And notwithstanding, that quhilk
they wald have deiectit in the bishops, they contendit to erect in the^ selfis,
desyring that sic commissioners as they should send to parliament and counsel,
micht be authorisit in place of the estate, quhairby it should have cu^ to pas,
that quhair as now his Majesty may select the may godly, learnit, wise and
experimentit of the ministry, to be on his Ma.estate, his Hienes should have
been be that means compellit to accept sic as the multitude, be ane od vote of
the may vnlearnit sold have appointit: quhilk could not tend bot to the
overthrow of the Realm, quhairof that estate has been ane special stoop.
After they had dischargit Bishops, they aggreit to have Superintendentis,
Commissionaris and visitouris: bot in the end, they decernit that their should be
no difference amangis the Ministeris: and imaginit that new form of
presbytery, quhairof we have spokin before. Nether was there any other
appearaunce that they sold have stayit from sic daily alterationis in the
commoun wealth, quhilk could not bot continually be disquiettit, quhair the law
of conscience, quhilk they maintenit be the sword of cursing, was subject to
sic mutationis, at the arbitriment of ane number, quhairof the may part had
not greatly taistit of learning. Attour the foresaid assembly was accustumit
not only to prescryue the law to the King and estate, bot also did at certane
times appoint general fastingis throughout the Realm, specially quhen some
factioners in the country was to move any great interprise. For at the fast,
all the Ministeris was commandit be the said assembly to sing one song, and
to cry out vpoun the abuses, as they termitit, of the Court and estate for the
time: quhairby it is may certain great alterationis to have ensewit in this
land, quhill at the good pleasour of God, and his blissing towardis his
Majesty, the pretext of the last fast was discouerit, and his Hienes delyuerit
from sic attemptatis: quhairby his Majesty has been justly mouit to
discharge sic conuentionis quhilk micht importe so preiudicially to his estate
Bot specially his May. had no small occasion, quhairas the samin assembly
being conuenit at Edinburgh, the (...) day of (...) did authorize and avow the
fact perpetrat at Ruthve^, in the taking of his Hienes may noble person. The
quhilk deid, notwithstanding his Majesty with the advise of his estates in
Parliamenthes accounted to be tressonable, the said assembly esteming their
judgment to be the sovereign judgment of the realm, hes not only approvin the
same, bot ordanit all them to be excommunicat quha wald not subscryue and
allow the samin. Sua the actis of this assembly, and the laws of the estate
directly fechtand in civil materis, with the quhilk the assembly sold not
have midlit, it behouit his Hienes, either to discharge him self of the Crown,
or the ministry of that form of assembly, quhilk in very deid, in the self,
without the Kings Majesty's license and approbation culd not be lawful. Like
as general councilis at no time could gudely assemble, bot be the commandment
of the Emperor for the time: and our King has no les power within his own
realm, than any of them had in the Empire. Zea, the Bishop of Sancta^drois
had not, in time of Popery, power to convene the bishops and clergy, out of
his own Diocese, without license impetrat before of his Hienes most noble
progenitors of good memory, and the eausis thairof intimat and allow it.
Notwithstanding, that his Majesty's intentioun and meaning may fullelie be
vnderstaund, It is his Hienes will, that the Bishop or Commissionar of any
diocese or province, or part thairof, sal at their visitatioun appoint in every
paroche, according to the gretnes thairof, sum honest, virtuous and discreit
men, to concur and assist the Minister, and to have the ouersicht, and censure
of the manners and behavior of the people o that parochin. And gif their be any
notable offense worthy of punishment, that the Bishop and Commissionar be
aduertisit thairof, quha shall have ane officer of arms, to concur with his
decreit, for the punishment of vice, and executions to follow thairvpoun: that
they quha conte^nis the godly and lawful ordour of the kirk, may find be
experience his majesty's displeasure, and be punishit according to their
deseruings.

And forder, his Majesty vpoun necessare occasiouns, quhilk may fall forth be
diverse manners of wayis amang the clergy, vpoun humble supplicatioun maid unto
his Hienes will not refuse to grant them license to co^uene: To wit, the
Bishops, Commissioners, and some of the may verteous, learnit and godly, of
their dioceis, quhair sic Ecclesiastical matters, as appertenis to the
uniformity of doctrine, and conservation of ane godly ordour in the kirk, may
be intreatit and concludit in his Majesty's awin presence, or some of his
Maiesteis honnorable counsel quha sal assist for the time. Quhair, gif
necessity so require ane publict fast throuchout the hail Realm may be
decernit, and be his May, authority proclamit, to avoid the imminent
displeasour and danger of the wraith of the Lords judgments: quhilk is the
richt end of publict humiliatioun: and not under pretext theirof, to cover sic
interpryses, as hes heirtofore greatly disquyetit and troublit the peax of this
commonwealth.

THE xx. act ratifeis and approuis, and restablisis the estate of the bishops
within the Realm, to have the ouersicht and iurisdictioun, every one in their
awin dioceis. Quhilk form of gouername^t, and reule in Ecclesiastical
affairs, hes not only continuit in the kirk, from the dayis of the Apostles,
be continual successioun of time, and many Martyrs in that calling shed their
blude for the treuth: bot also, sen this Realm imbracit and resauit the
christian Religioun, the same estate hes been maintenit, to the weilfair of the
kirk, and quyetnes of the Realm, without any interruptioun, quhill within their
few eirs, some curious and busy men have practisit to induce in the Ministry,
ane equalitye and paritie in althings, alsweill concerning the preiching of the
word, ministratioun of the Sacraments, as lykewayes in discipline, ordour and
policy. The quhilk confusion his Majesty finding be may dangerous
experience, to have been the mother and nurish of great factions, seditions and
troubles within this Realm, hes with advise of his Hienes estates, maturelie
and aduysitly concludit the said pretendit paritie in discipline, ordours and
policy in the kirk, to be na langer tolerat in this country: bot the
solicitude and cair of ma kirks of ane diocese, to apperteyne to the bishop
and commissionar thairof, quha sall be answerable to God, and his Majesty, and
estates, for the richt administratioun and discharge of the office of
particulare Ministers, within the bounds of their jurisdiction. For as it
becu^mis his Majesty, as Euselius wrytis of Constantinus the great, to be ane
Bishop of Bishops, and universal Bishop within his Realm, in sa far as his
Majesty sold appoint every ane to discharge his dewtie: swa his Hienes can
not, his country being large and great, take him to every Minister that sall
offend, and transgress aganis dewtie, or querrel with the haill number of the
Ministry: bot it behooves his Majesty to have Bishops and owersears under
him, that may be answerable for sic bounds, as the law and ordour of the
country hes limitat and appointit unto every ane of them. And that they
having acces to his May. parliament and counsel may interceid for the rest
of the brethren of the Ministry, propone their greifs unto his Hienes and
estatis, and ressaue his May. favorable answer thairin. The quhilk form
dois preserve ane godly harmony, unity, concord, and peax in the estate, and
ane solid ordour in the kirk.. As contrariwyse, the pretendit equality
deuydis the samin, and under pretext of equality, makes some of the most
crafty and subtle dealers to be aduancit and inrychit: and in pretending of
paritie, to seik nathing bot their awin ambitioun. and advancement above the
rest of the simple sort. And notwithstanding that his Majesty hes restablishit
the said estate, it is not his hienes will and intention, that the foirsaid
bishop, sall have sic full power, as to do within his diocese quhat he pleasis.
For as his Majesty ca^ not allow of ane populare confusion, quhairin* as the
proverb witnessis, Nulla tyrannis aequiparanda est tyrannidi multitudinis,
That is, No tyranny can be comparit to the tyranny of ane multitude, having
commandment and power in their hands: Sua vpoun the other part, his Ma. will
is, that the Bishops authority in any grave matter, be limitat, and
circumscryuit to the counsel of XIII of the may ancient, wise, and godly
pastors of his diocese, selectit forth of the haill synodall assembly of the
province: be quhais advise, or at the least the may part thairof, the grave
and wechtie effairis of the kirk may be conductit and gouernit, to the glory
of God, and quyetnes of the realm. Forther, it is his Hienes will, and expres
commandment, that their bishops, or commissionars, twyse in the eir, to wit,
ten days after the Pasche time, and the sext of September, hald their synodall
assemblies, in every diocese, for the keeping of good ordour thairin. And gif
any be refractar or contemnar within their bounds, of the good ordour of the
kirk, they may be declarit unto his Majesty, and punishit, in exemple of
vthers, according to their deseruings. Nather is it his May. meaning or
intentioun, that sic bishops or commissionars, as sall be appointit, sall
ressaue their only and full commissioun of his Majesty, without admission
ordinar, be sic as are appointit to that effect, in the kirk: bot having his
Hienes nominatioun, presentatioun, and co^mendatioun, as lawful and only
patroun, they to be tryit, and examinat, that their qualiteis ar sic, as they
are able, and sufficient to discharge their cure and office. And gif it sall
happin any of the saidis bishops, or commissionars, to be negligent in their
office, or to be sclanderous and offensive in their behavior, life, and
manners, in any time cumming, it is not his Hienes will, that they sall be
exemit from correctioun, nochtwithstanding of any privilege of his Hienes
estate, counsel, or parliament, bot their labouris, trauellis, diligence, and
behavior, to be tryit in the general assembly, not consisting of ane
confusit multitude, as it was before, bot of sic worshipful personis, as is
heirtofore prescryuit in his Hienes own presence, or his Maiesteis deputeis to
that effect. Last, his Majesty* geuis commissioun to the said bishops, or
commisioners at their visitations to considder, in quhat pairt of the country
the exercise, or interpretatioun of the Scripture, be conference of ane certane
number of the Ministry within that bounds, may be may commodiously, anis in
the xv days. For as his Majesty inhibitis al unlawful conuentionis, quhilk
may engender trouble and contention in the country, swa his Majesty is well
affectit, to sie the Ministry incres in knawlege and understanding and be all
means to fortify and advance the samin. Quhairin his Hienes commandment is,
that ane grave, wise, and sage man, sall be appointit President, quha may have
the over sicht of that bounds, and be answerable thairfore to the bishop his
counsel and synod, and he to be respectit resonablie for his panes, at the
modificatioun of stipendis: that all things may be ordourly done in the Kirk,
peax, and queetnes maintenit in the Realm, and we delyuerit from the appearand
plagues, and the blessing of God continewit, to the comfort of our posterity.
And in the mean time his Hienes inhibitis and expressly contramands, under the
panes contenit in his Majesty's actis of Parliament, and all other panes
arbitral, at his Maiesteis sicht and counsel, that na Minister tak upon hand,
to conuene them selves, for the foirsaid cause, without the appointment and
ordour taken be the said bishops or commissioners: quhairby his Hienes may
be certainly informit, that the foirsaids Ministers conuenis not, to middle with
any civil matters, or effaris of estate, as was accustomit before, bot only to
proffeit in the knawlege of the word, and to be comfortit ane be ane other, in
the administratioun of their spiritual office: quhilk his Hienes wishes them
faithfully to discharge, and them to call to God, that his Majesty may in ane
prosperous Regne enjoy good and lang life, and continue and incresse into the
fear of the Almightye.

FINIS.
THE KINGIS MAY. INTENTIOVNIS.
HIS Majesty's intentioun is, be the grace of God, to maintene the true and
sinceir professioun of the Gospel, and preiching thairof, within this Realm.

2 His Maiesteis intentioun is, to correct, and punish sic as seditiously
abuses the chyre of truth, and factiously appleis, or rather bewrayes the text
of the scripture, to the disquyeting of the estate, and disturbing of the
commoun wealth, or impayring of his Hienes and counsellis honor.

3 His Majesty's intentioun is, gif any questioun of Faith and doctrine arise,
to conuocate the may learnit, godly, wise, and experimentit pastors, That be
conference of scriptures, the verity may be tryit, and all heresy, and shisme
be that means repressit.

4 His Majesty's intentioun is, that for keeping of good ordour in every
Paroche, certane to be censures of maneris of the rest, be appointit at the
visitatioun of the Bishop, or visitour, quha sall have his Majesty's
authority, and officeris of arms concurring for the punishment of vice.

5 His Majesty's intentioun is, to maintene the exercise of prophecy, for the
incres and continuing of knawlege amongis the Ministry: In the quhilk, anewise
and grave man selectit be the bishop or co^missioner at the synodall assembly,
sall preside, and rander ane count of the administratioun of that bounds quhair
the exercise is haldin for the quhilk cause, some respect of leuing sall be had
unto him, quha sustenis that burding.

6 His May. intentioun is, not to derogate, unto the ordinary judgment of
matters of the Kirk, be the ordinary Bishops, their counsels, and synodis: bot
gif any of tham do amiss, and abuse their calling, to tak ordour for
correcting, amending and punishing theirof.

7 His Majesty's intentioun is, not to hinder or stay any Godly or solid
ordour, groundit upon the word of God, and ordour, of the primitive kirk: bot
that the Ministeris of the word middle them selfis only with their awin
calling, and judge not temerariously of the estate.

8 It is his Majesty's inte^tion, that the presbytereis, consisting of many
Ministeris and Gentilmen at landwart or otherwise, be na forder tolerate in
this Realm: bot the exercise of jurisdiction of ma kirkis to be in the hands
of the bishop or commissionar, and their counsalis and synodis.

9 It is his Majesty's intentioun, that the bishops or co^missioneris convene
not ane general assembly out of the haill Realm, without his Majesty's
knawledge and license obtenit thairvnto: quhilk upon supplication his Hienes
will not deny: that ane uniform ordour may be conseruit in the haill realm,
and the bishops and their diligences there tryit and examinat, and the
complaints of every particular hard and discussit.

10 It is his Majesty's intentioun, to assist this assembly his self, or be
ane noble man of his counsale, his Hienes depute.

11 It is his Majesty's intentioun, that quhen any parochin finds necessity
of ane fast, they intimie the occasioun to the bishope or commissioner their
counsale, that they may understand that the cause is lawful, as likewise the
bishop of the diocese finding lawful occasioun, may within the same with his
counsale prescryue ane public humiliatioun.

12 It is his Majesty's intentioun, that ane general fast throughout the haill
realm sall not be proclamit bot be his Majesty's commandment, or be that
general counsale, quhairin his Majesty or his Hienes deputy is present.

13 It is his Hienes intentioun, that the bishops in the Realm in every
diocese with their counsale, preside into the Ecclesiastical government, bot
as said is, with ane counsale, that both tyranny and confusion may be evitit
in the kirk.

14 It is his Hienes intentioun, that Commissioneris be directit universally
throughout the haill realm to establish ane godly ordour, and that his
Majesty's commissioneris tak ordour presently for the translation of sic
Ministeris, quhais travels they esteem may mair conveniently and proffitablie
serve in ane other place.

FINIS.

