News out of Yorkshire: OR, AN ACCOUVNT OF A IOVRNEY, IN THE TRVE DISCOVERY
OF a sovereign Mineral, Medicinal Water, in the West Riding of Yorke-shire,
near an ancient Town called Knaresbrough, not inferior to the Spa in Germany.

Also a taste of other Mineral Waters of several natures adjoining.

BY M. S.

ECCLESIAST. 38.4. The Lord has created Medicines out of the Earth: and he
that is wise will not despise them.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for George Gibbes, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1627.

TO TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE virtuous, and religious Lady, the Lady
Katherine Stanhope, wife to the Lord Philip Stanhope, Baron of Shelford.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
THis short ensuing Discourse (begotten and brought forth in the silent hours
of a solitary retirement) I intended at first for the use of some private
friends, whom I desired to satisfy in the particular discovery of an English
Spa water. It pleased some of them upon view hereof to move me to publish it,
for that in the whole passage, I personate my self an eyewitness of all
circumstances; which they persuaded me would give a better gloss unto the
subject, than any here-say relation. A diffidence of whatsoever passes my pen,
caused me a while suspend my resolution; when suddenly my humble thoughts
reflected upon your Honor, and then in an instant I apprehended a fair
Sunshine of occasion, to publish unto the world my vowed respects.

Amongst the unlimited variety of your Ladyships rare endowments, I have
observed your spacious understanding to reach, not only to a singular measure
of the divine Concernments of the souls saving knowledge (your obseruable
practice simpathizing with the Theory) but with an extraordinary curiosity to
search into the Cabinets of Natures choicest secrets, especially those which
concern Medicinal and Physical use, wherein your succesfull hand has
vouchsafed to administer in time of need with blessed event. Hence is it that I
have presumed (not omitting the tie of many noble refreshments, and honorable
favors) to appropriate this subject (which presents unto the world one of
Natures choicest Jewels) unto your Honor; under the Sanctuary of whose
virtuous protection, I am bold to promise to my self inviolable safety from
the rage of all snarling detraction. It may be, your noble Lord (to whose
immerited support of my weak fortunes I shall ever owe a grateful memory)
might expect the address of my first fruits unto his Honor, but I purposely
reserve my self till a more ample occasion be presented, wherein my pains may
be more enlarged.

I have no greater hope to animate my assurance of a gracious acceptance, than
the pleasing remembrance of your favorable eye formerly cast upon some
dawnings of my weak endeauoures. Fail I not herein, I have arrived (next unto
the public good) at the wished Ports of my desires, which as they have ever
prized, so shall they continue restless in the pursuit of your Ladyships
allowable esteems, never to be sufficiently valued by

Your Honors most humble servant, M. ST.

To the Reader.
AT what time this relation of our English Spa was (though cursorily) composed,
the title of News out of Yorke-shire (which like a Sign I fixed at the
Portall of the discourse) was not improper. That many Months are past, since
it was capable of the Character of the Press, and ready dressed to encounter the
public view, it shall suffice there are diverse can witness, with the casualty
of its protraction. There are (I confess) many by-circumstances enterlaced,
which though they aim at lapsed time, yet are they not altogether misappliable
to the present. In substance I differ not much from the Spadacrene lately
published by a grave Doctor, the garb only of my particularising I challenge
as mine. As for such pedanticke Formalists, who happily may tax me for
digressing from the proposed subject, let such know I hold it the greatest
slavery in the world to be tied to their unnecessary rules. But for thee
(gentle Reader) be but pleased to observe the occasion of the liberty I take,
and then I hope (the dullness of the times considered, which had need of a lash
to be rowzed) thou will not think I roaue very impertinently. Yet before I
leave thee, I must crave thy patience (as one tendering the common good)
whilst I offer to thy consideration some cautions in the use of these Waters,
which (if I mistake not) are of such real consequence, that neglected, their
expected effects are made frustrate.

That the worth and excellency of Physical helps consists not in the
remedies themselves (as one well observes) but in their wise and prudent
dispensation, is so undoubted a position, as none but such as scorn the clew
of reason should guide their understanding in the Labyrinth of so many
uncertainties as are abroach in the world, will deny. And hence it is, that
Medicines iudiciously dispensed, are said to be as Angels of God sent for the
good of men; but inconsiderately used, they are Messengers of death. Yet such
is the giddy precipitation of many, especially the meaner sort of people, that
they no sooner hear of a secret, (be it a medicinal Water, or what else that
promises health) but (all fit circumstances set apart) they violently rush
upon it, persuading themselves (out of a passionate desire to be refreshed) a
sudden laying hold upon any nouelty, to be the most aduantagious course. Nay,
how many are there who upon notice of a newfound medicinal Spring like this
of ours, question not the infallibility of its curing all manner of diseases?
the sottishness of which fancy is so gross, that I will not do it the grace
of opposition.

Nor are the vulgar only bleared with this misty conceit, for I have heard of
our Empericall hyperbolists (who take a pride (as one says) to Monopolize
cures unto the prerogative of one Secret) who have avouched it as a thing
feasible, to compose a medicine able to cure any disturbance incident to
Nature. But I leave these with their quaint cratchets to themselves, and worse
company I know not how to wish them; and come to the obseruances I desire may
duly be considered of such as intend the use of this our Water. And first I
wish, that whosoever the parties be, before they attempt the use of the water,
they repair to the learned Physician, especially such as have been conversant
in the use and quality of the water, and make known to him their distemper,
that so consideration may be had of the aptness of the waters faculty, how it
stands qualified to the affected part, which is of such conducing sequel, that
the omitting hereof has proved fatal to many. For who but the Physician
(whose profession it is) is fit to judge of the multitude of causes in
diseases, what varying differences arise in the manner, quality, quantity, and
times of remedies? wherein the party either ignorant, or mistaken, medicines of
saving and curing power, out of time and place disposed, bring forth mischief,
and many inconveniences instead of help.

It being granted then in the first place that the water is of probable use, in
the next succeeds a preparation of body, according to the nature, quality, and
seat (as I may say) of each humor, which observance how much it avails, let
the common experience of those, who submit themselves to advise, testify in
the difference of the effects found from irregulars. For the manner of using
the Water, there is no question but a sudden glutting of the stomach, with a
surcharge of any thing, wherewith Nature is not acquainted, is a most
preposterous course; yet that this is ordinary also (especially amongst the
vulgar) who knows not, that has observed the pressing of people to these like
waters? Soft fire (says the old proverb) makes sweet Malt, and a gentle
acquainting of Nature by degrees with any thing makes it more grateful, and
steals as it were a kind of familiarity with Nature. The time of the year by
the observance of the learned as most proper, is thought to be June, July, and
August, as also, the morning best allowed for the circumstance of the day.
Ordinary repasts, and the liberty at other times taken of eating and drinking,
would now be forborne, for three or four hours space after the drinking of
the water, that so Nature may finish her task with more ease, having the water
only for a subject to grapple withal.

A temperate diet by abstaining from meats of gross and melancholicke
substance, must take place as a rule amongst the rest worthy of remembrance,
whereunto as a fit companion moderate exercise would be joined. Nor let such
think (whose bodies especially are the seats of radicated ancient diseases) to
find ease suddenly by the use of these watters; such must come armed with a
well-grounded patience, and expect by degrees a lessening of their maladies,
who though happily they have stayed the ordinary prescribed time of the waters
use, and yet are not sensible of any great change, yet let them not despair,
for that a second years, trial may bring forth an happy issue of their
desires, whereunto this had only the power to make the way. And (which is
strange) it has been observed, that some who have by grave advise been
induced to drink of these waters, and have not in any fit circumstance
digressed from the Physicians rule, though during the time of their abode at
the place, they have not perceived any apparent amendment, yet after their
departure have been restored to perfect health. The reason hereof the learned
give to be, that (after the drinking of the Water) there remains in the more
sollide parts of the body (by which the water did pass) the hidden faculties
and powers thereof, which commonly produces the effects within the space of
40. days. This has been observed as a thing of frequent experience.

I had not embarked my self into these cautionarie aduertisements at all,
(knowing they are more punctually set down by others, especially in the late
Spadacrene) but that at my being this Summer at our new Spa, I did observe
diverse to take a most preposterous course in drinking of the Water. Some came
thither, rather expecting a Miracle than a cure; having been desperately
diseased for many years, and yet conceived hope of a perfect recovery by two
or three days stay. Others at the first approach to the water stick not to
drink (besides the omitting of preparation) as large a quantity as would
require (by due order) the rising to of ten or twelve days, and it may be
within an hour forbear not to please the palate with any ordinary refection.
Hence (omitting a world of other errors) comes these waters (which in
themselves methodically used are of excellent effects) to be so much
disparaged, their worth traduced, and their admiral operations obscured by the
brutish precipitation of most that have recourse to them; whereof if others
warned will not take heed, let the failing of their desire in the cure, nay
perhaps the disease made more desperate, or extraordinary symptoms happening, be
the just reward and guerdon of their wilful unadvisedness.

I am loath to leave thee before (for thy encouragement) I add an experiment or
two which (amongst others) this Summer 1626. brought forth at this our new Spa.
A man about the age of 50. years (being of an extraordinary bulk of body, but
especially his belly of an unseen greatness) who partly by the surcharge of
that great mass of flesh he carried, and partly through a stoppage of the
passages of respiration, could not of twenty years before go many paces
without a pause, and the benefit of a seat, having drunk of this Water
orderly about a fortnight, his belly did fall to a competent size, and he was
able to go from the Town of Knaresbrough to the fountain (which is little
less than two miles) and most of it up the hill) without any desire of rest,
or easing. I also saw a Youth, and spoke with him, about the age of twenty
years who for the space of three years before had been miserably afflicted
with a kind of Epilepsie, yet differing from the ordinary manner of that
disease, in some strange and violent distortions which for the most part
affected his right side. It was ordinary for him to fall three or four times
in a day, in which fits he lay groueling upon the ground, a miserable
spectacle. This poor creature had continued the use of the water not above ten
days, during which time he had but two fits, and those exceedingly moderated.
A strange alteration, and not easily admitting belief, and shows that this
Water is of an admirable composure, and transcendent faculties, and worthy the
curious indagation of the learned. I hold my self much to blame, that I did
not require their names, and abode, for the more full satisfaction of those who
are of nice belief. It remains, that of what is past, and does follow, if thy
observance procure thee any benefit, that thou bless the Fountain of all
fountains, from whom all Creatures derive both being, and whatsoever is in them
of worth and efficacy.

M. St.

NEWS OVT OF YORKE-SHIRE.
THere are two Treatises, the one written by Philip Gherinx a German Doctor,
the other by Mounsieur Pigrag, Chirurgian to Henry the Third of France, which
do sufficiently express the qualities both manifest and specifique of the Spa
water in Germany, the order of using it, and for what diseases it is proper.
What credit it has gained in most parts of Christendom, the great confluence
thither of all conditions of people does make good. How many personages of
great quality of this our Kingdom, have made their repair thither, is also
obuious to the understanding of many. But as it is to be feared, that some from
amongst us have pretended the use of that water, the better to color other
intentions not very allowable: (the place affording all wished means of private
converse with Priests, Jesuits, etc.) So it may be suspected (such is our
noted folly) that had we as effectual a blessing in this land, we would be
gadding abroad through a vain estimation of whatsoever is foreign. Nahaman
the Syrian, being advised by the Prophet to wash in Jordan, disdainfully
replied, Are not Abana and Pharpar Rivers of Damascus better than all the
waters of Israel? Such are we, to whom though God has pointed out waters of
health amongst our selves, yet we will not be persuaded but Pohox and Sauanir
(the two Fountains of the Spa) do exceed all the Springs in England. But as
he being better advised, upon repair to Jordan, was restored to health, so
there is no doubt, but if we will make use of our own waters, and other
blessings at home, we shall have little need to crave the aid of any foreign
soil. What so much in request as the Indian Drugs, and Spiceries of the
Islands, procured by so many hazardous and tedious voiages; the opinion whereof
has so besotted us, that compared with them, we vilify and disesteeme what
our own Nation does afford, as if Nature had forgot to suppeditate this our
famous I Will with necessaries, either for the continuance of our well being, or
for the rectifying of any bodily decay, or peccant humor? Yet has Doctor
Bright (that learned Physician) proved in a Tract (called the Practice of home
Medicines) that our own Country is of sufficient competencie, to supply us
with all useful Commodities, either for Diet, or Physic, parallelling our
ordinary native Simples, with the choicest drugs, and farthest fetched Spiceries.

To come a little nearer to our purpose. It is (as I am credibly informed)
about 50 years since first notice was taken of a Spring (in the West Riding of
Yorke-shire, near a Town called Knaresbrough) called at this day by the
country people, Tuit-well, it seems for no other cause, but that those birds
(being our green Plouer) do usually haunt the place. Of this Spring (I have
heard) two neighboring Gentlemen of ancient descent, the one Slingesbey, the
other Inglebey, did for many years ordinarily drink, for that it was
supposed, as in taste, so in effect, it did agree with the Spa in Germany. I
doubt not but their long continuance of the use of it, did proceed from a
sensible effect found in their embettering: Nor do I doubt also that they were
sparing worthily to report of it: yet (such is our Lady-like humor, that we
prize nothing but what is farre-fetcht, and dear bought) I cannot perceive it
gained any great credit, but has since their decease been altogether inuolued
in silence, and for no other cause (as I conceive) but that it is within the
girdle of our own Kingdom. Thus has it happened that partly (as I said
before) through a capritious affectation of foreign trash, and partly through
a drowsy humor that does inuellope us, not endeavoring to search into the
riches, and opulentie, which Nature (far from sparingly) has crowned us
withal; this, Tuit-well (I fear the poorness of the name, has not a little
disaduantag'd it) has been most grossly neglected, as if it were a place only
worth the notice of that silly bird.

It is about two years since I first heard of it, at what time not meeting
with any that could punctually inform me of it, I let it pass as
uncertainty, yet so as I found in my self a kind of itching desire of
visiting the place.

In the latter end of the Summer 1625. being casually with Doctor Deane (a
Physician of good repute at his house at York, one who is far from the strain
of many of his profession, who are so chained in their opinions to their
Apothecary shops, that they renounce the taking notice of any virtue not
confined within that circuit) he took occasion to make a motion to me (the
rather for that he remembered I had been at the Spa in Germany) of taking the
air, and to make our rendez-vous at Knaresbrough, to the end we might be the
better opportuned, to take a view of the Tuit-well, (whereof he had sparingly
heard) for that it was by some compared to the so much famed Spa in Germany.

I was not nice to give way to the summons of his desire; the match was soon
made, and the next day, accompanied with a worthy Knight a judicious admirer,
and curious speculator of rarities, and three other Physicians of allowable
knowledge) we set forwards for Knaresbrough, being about fourteen miles from
York. We made no stay at the town, but so soon as we could be provided of a
guide, we made toward the Well, which we found almost two miles from the
Town. It is situate upon a rude barren Moore, the way to it in a manner a
continual ascent. Upon our first approach to the Spring, we were satisfied
that former times had taken notice of it, by reason it was encloased with
stone, and paued at the bottom, but withal we plainly perceived that it had
been long forgotten, which the filth wherewith it was choked did witness,
besides that through neglect the currents of other waters were suffered to
steal into it. Before any peremptory trial was made of it, it was thought fit
first to cleanse the Well, and to stop the passage of any other waters
intermixture, which within the compass of an hour we effected. The bottom
now cleared, we plainly descried where the water did spring up, and then the
Physicians began to try their experiments. But first I drank of it, and
finding it to have a perfect Spa relish, (I confess) I could not contain, but
in a tone louder than ordinary, I bade them welcome to the Spa. Presently they
all took essaies of it, and though they could not deny, but that it had a
different smack from all other common waters, most confessing that it did leave
in the palate a kind of acidenesse, yet the better to be assured whether it
did partake with Vitrioll the prime ingredient in the natural Spa, they mixed
in a glass the powder of Galls with the water, knowing by experience, if this
Mineral had any acquaintance with the Spring, the powder would discolor the
water, and turn it to a Claret die: wherein they were not deceived, for
presently (to their both wonder and joy) the water changed color, and seemed
to blush in behalf of the Country, who had amongst them so great a Jewel and
made no reckoning of it. Thus pleased (having every one taken a draught, or
two) we returned to the Town, yet not the same way we came, for our guide
directed us another way, being a mile further up into the Moore, to see another
Spring, giving it a stinking Epithet, (as indeed it did deserve) whereof, and
of others, all bordering within a small compass, I will hereafter give a taste.

You may suppose (being met together at our Inn, where we found our selves
very well accommodated for our provision) we could find no other talk but of
this our new Spa, the Doctors (as occasion served) reasoning among themselves,
of the nature of Mineralls, and of the probability of this waters excellency,
and now and then would ask me, whether I did seriously speak when I gave my
verdict for a Spa taste: Which I confidently auerring, we resolved the next
morning (if the day proved clear) to give the Spring a second visit by way of
farewell for that year, Michaelmas being now at hand, a time very unapt to
give a peremptory judgment of these kind of waters.

The next morning we were awaked with the glad tidings of a bright sky, (
Apollo with his cheerful aspect seeming to smile upon our enterprise) which
opportunity was so welcome to us, that we were no sooner out of bed but were
ready, and no sooner ready but on horseback. Upon our reuisit of the Spring,
we found it (being by our former days care discharged of all incombrance)
very clear, and about three quarter of a yard deep of water. The taste of
the water was grown more lively and brisk than it was the day before, and
much more perceptible in its acidenesse. Once more we mixed the powder of Galls
with the water, which made such haste to satisfy us by a rubicund color, that
now we were ready to color too for shame, that we had not trusted nature upon
her first word. There remained now no scruple of the waters quality, so that we
began freely to take our mornings draughts, which we doubled and redoubled,
for there were of us who drunk 15. glasses, and who took least had eight or
nine.

After a compass taken in visiting a Spring in Bilton Park, as also another
called Pigeon Spring, we came at a seasonable hour to our dinner, which we
found attending us in a plain, but plentiful form. I may not forget to tell
how that about an hour after that we had drunk of the water, it came so
freely from us, that (me thought) we were like so many walking Conduits, so
that for the space of two hours, scarce a minute past, but some of us were
ready to vie it, which was presently seen, and reuied by a third. But to
return to our dinner (which for my part I had such a desire to be grapling
withal, that I thought the very sitting down too long a parenthesis) it will
not be denied but the sight of our meat was a very pleasing prospect to us all,
so that in a few words (for we were not able to hold out a long Grace) we
thank't God for a great deal of good meat. We were all friends, and yet who
so had seen us all suddenly draw at once, could not but suppose a quarrel.
But (God knows) the limits of our malice extended only to a sort of
prostrate dishes, which presently yielded to our mercy, or rather fury, for
within a small space we had so pittilesly mangled them, that it was not
possible to know any of them by their former face. In brief, we all played
the men; and had this water no other effect than this unexpected experiment, of
setting so sharp an edge upon the stomach, it were not to be disreputed. It
put me in mind of my being at the Spa, where though we had plenty of all
manner of provision, yet (I profess) I did seldom rise from table but with a
craving appetite.

According to our entendment we returned that night to York, whither we came
in good time, not any of us repenting, but rather resulting in our bestowed
labor. The nouelty of this discovery (for though it had been formerly known,
yet the memory thereof was in a manner lost) was so pleasing to us, that we
were not mealy-mouthed to trumpet in most places where we came this our
adventure, as if it had been an other America.

Dr. Deane (whose thirst of knowledge is not superficially to be satisfied)
about three days after our return (by the consent of the rest of his fellow
Physicians) sent for a great quantity of the Tuit-well water in large violl
Glasses, entending partly by euaporation, and partly by some other Chimicall
way to experiment it. Upon return of the messenger, opening a bottle to raste
it, he found it lastlesse; he then assaid to try it again with the powder, but
it denied to perform what formerly it had done, as if it skorned to show its
Majesty out of its own proper throne. And had it not reason (think you) to
look pale for anger, in despite of Art, to be thus brought prisoner to so
unworthy Neighbors, who durst never attempt to look it in the face but upon
so great an advantage? This accident did not a little a mate the good Doctor,
fearing there would lie an aspersion upon us all, by reason of our former
report. But after he had recollected himself, he (willing to vindicated it
from all detraction) did (like a good Be) draw from this alteration a firm
and undeniable conclusion of its worth and excellency, to the confounding of
all such virulent Spiders, as would make it a proof of poverty and
worthlesnesse: To wit, that since it is the spirits which gives these waters
life, and that at his being at the Fountain it self, the taste was apparent,
and the conclusion tried with the Galls formerly infallible, this change did
manifestly demonstrate, that the water is repleate with nimble, aerie, vertuall
spirits, which will endure little or no translocation, but by their subtilty
steal away, and so leave the water insipid, and in a manner void of the taste
it retains in its natural seat. This (though a truth) is so far from
satisfying some (if there be any truth in experience) that tell them of the
inter mixture of spirits with the water, you may as well persuade them it is
full of Hobgoblins. But it matters not for the vulgar, who had rather spend
their penny in good Ale, than go from the smoke of their Chimneyes, to see
never so great a wonderment of Nature, which does present unto their senses
(which like brutes they take care only to please) and that suddenly, some
flash of astonishment. Such as are of more elevated spirits, who move in a
Sphere above the rabble, whose blessed minds are sed with intellectual
raptures, will easily admit of the probability of this change. I might add
hereunto a carelesnes in the Messenger, who was sent for the water, who if he
did neglect the careful stopping of the bottles, this alone were sufficient to
cause a maine difference. For if in liquors of a more terrene, and gross
composure, as wine, let the bottle wherein it is kept, be altogether vnstopt,
or but loosely, it much abates in one night of its generousnesse; much more
this water, whose bravery, viuacity, and only faculty consists in the spirits.

Thus far was proceeded that Summer 1625. the Doctors entending (the prime
time of the year being June, July, and August ouerslipt) the following Summer,
at a more apt season to examine all fit circumstances belonging to the water,
when the Sun by his vigor shall have clarified the air, and by virtue of his
comfortable beams, and enlifening rays, gives the height of splendour to all
sublunary creatures.

I have more largely than I intended discoursed of the reviving of this our new
Spa's knowledge, whose virtue (I am persuaded) will be found so far to
transeend, that the native Inhabitants of the Spa, will soon find this our
discovery to draw from them no small commodity; for that this once diuulged,
will be a means not only to enduce those of our own Country to forbear
their recourse thither, but is like to prove very effectual to inuit many
strangers to us, who with more safety may reap the benefit of this our water,
than the distracted, and disioynted affairs of Germany will suffer.

And why should any doubt that this water of ours should not as amply and
effectually work in the cure of infirmities that are of an obstructiue nature,
as the Spa? That it has a most apparent sensible Spa taste, I dare (besides my
own experiment) refer it to the judgment of any, whose palate has not
lost, the remembrance of that water. That vitrioll has the predominancy in it,
besides the taste, infallible conclusion has proved. That it works in the
same manner with the Spa, has also been satisfactorily tried. If any one
reply, that they deny not but that this our supposed Jewel may have a little
alliance with the Spa, but it must needs be in a poor degree, for that the
place is naked of Mineralls, compared with the Spa, whose territory does so
abound with them, that extraordinary commodity is drawn daily from the
substantial Mines themselves: I answer, first it will not be denied but that
this our water does pass by Mineral veins, which causes it to retain a
taste which differs it from other waters: which being granted, I demand who is
so wise, or rather foole-hardy, as to dare to proportion the quantity of so
hidden a mystery, which Nature has secreted to her self as a priuacy (like
many others) inscrutable? How came our inexhaustible Mines of Iron, Lead,
Copper, Alum, and why should I not name Coal, which not only furnish us, but
with their surplusage, are transported to other Kingdoms, with no small gain,
to be first known? Were they revealed in a dream, like S. John Baptists head,
or rather skull, which was made known (as it is fabled or Legended) to a
devout Monk in his sleep, and is to be seen at Amiens? No sure, industry and
pains (the price which the Heathens could say the Gods did set upon whatsoever
is excellent) first gave them light and life. The same industry (there is no
doubt) would also make known to us many new treasures, which is only wanting,
and not matter. To make this good in the particular in hand.

The Spa (I know) does boast of her Mineralls of Iron, Vitrioll, Sulphur, and
others, of whose faculties they have several waters that do taste, and
operate. You may remember I gave a touch before, that besides this our new Spa,
we took a view of other Springs of differing natures, of which I will briefly
relate, whereby it shall appear, that (unless we will believe nothing but
what we see) we are not unfurnished of several sorts of Mineralls (how
secretly soever yet hid from us) and that within the circle of the Moore, where
the Tuit-well is seated, and the bordering places thereabout.

In our first days view of the Tuit-well, we were conducted by our guide a
mile and more beyond it, to look upon another water, which he with much ado
found, for that it is very obscurely placed. It breaks forth in the skirt of
an hill, close by a Riuolet. We were no sooner come near it, but we were
(unmannerly) taken by the nose with a most insufferable Sulphurie fume, at the
first not easy to be endured. The first thing we did, was to give the water a
more free passage than we found it had; which done, we took of it into a
glass to view. It was transparently clear, but of so strong and intolerable a
sent, being held near, that a more suffocating smell could hardly be devised.
Both by the taste and sent it was apparent, that it is of a sulphurous nature,
and that in a high degree, but withal exceeding brackish and salt. The day
wayning would not give us leave to stay long in the place: for conclusion-sake
only, we put an eye-cup of silver into a glass of the water, which within a
little space turned it into a Copper tincture.

The next day (being our second of visiting the Tuit-well) we were drawn aside
into Bilton Park, which bordereth upon the Moore, where in the declination of
an hill, we came to a Spring, much of the same condition with the former, the
smell as violent, and the taste the same, save that it is not perceiueably
salt. An vnder-keeper of the Park, whom we asked what use was made of the
water, told us, that not long before, finding himself all out of tune, so that
no ordinary labor, nor abstinency could set him right: he made bold to drink
of this water a glass, or two. It purged him (not without violence) both
ways, driving forth of his body much venomous matter, which after by washing
in it dried up and healed. He showed us also a poor man-seruant to his
Master, who being for the space of two years troubled with a grievous pain in
one of his legs, together with a numnesse and swelling, being advised to wash
in this water, was within an unexpected time restored to health, and strength,
and has continued firm and sound ever since.

From hence we were brought to another water, distant from this place about a
mile, called Pigeon Spring, of the continual haunt they have about it. This is
also of a Sulphury quality, and salt, but in a more remiss and moderate degree
than either of the other.

It were a great daring in me (who acknowledge my self ignorant in the least
rudiments of Art) to affirm any thing peremptorily of the true nature of these
sulphurous Springs, their proper use, or what intermixture they may have of
several Mineralls. Nay, it were a touch of boldness in any (be they who they
will) positiuely to set down the certain effects of these waters, because
(the three last named having apparent differences) their faculties have not by
any (that I can hear) been seriously tried and examined. Yet that by
probability (seeing they are sulphurous, and that in a high degree) they are
useful, none (who will not absolutely deny the virtues of Mineralls) will
deny. Why they are so exceeding strong of sent, and taste, and yet not hot, as
are the waters of the Bath in Summerset-shire, partaking both of the same
coniectured nature, I leave to the discussing of Chimists and Minerallists.
Some undertake to affirm, that the Mineral matter which feeds the waters of
the Bath, and makes them operative, is fiered. These affirm, (grounding
themselves upon Aristotle) that there are certain hot and dry exhalations
included in the cauernes of the earth, which seeking passage forth, and vent,
and not finding any, they are violently carried up and down, in which motion
by degrees they ratify, and at length are fired. If so it happen (say they)
that where such vapors are included, and incendiated, there be any By tuminous
or Sulphurous matter, by this means it comes to be fired: and look how long
there remains any of the Mineral to feed the fire, so long the fire lasts.
And since (say they) these Mineralls have a perpetual regeneration, it must
needs follow, that the fire fed by them must also be durable, unless it find
passage forth, and so vanish. If this heat thus enclosed in these hollows be
great and intense, the matter of the Mineral plentiful, and that the water
which passes by them in a continual succession makes no long course before it
break forth, then is the water in its issue very hot. But if the heat be
small (whereunto the abundance of matter gives force, as we see in our common
experience of our ordinary fuel) and the passage of the water long before it
issue, then comes it to pass, that the water is either of a moderate warmth,
or cold; for that in so long a journey it passes by stones, and cold places,
losing by degrees the heat it received.

For my part, I am more apt to admire Nature in the rarity and variety of her
producements, than willing to trouble my brain in searching into things (it
may be) not knowable. If such as are judicious would take the pains by any
artificial coutse, to examine the difference of these waters of ours, and
those of the Bath, secundum magis and minus, whereby their due use might be
known, it were a labor which might merit applause. We make no bones to expend
great sums in pastimes of momentary continuance, and suffer our ears to be
inculcated with rare and useful wonderments of Nature, and pass them by as
matters belonging only to Mechanicke knowledge; whereas (truly weighed) these
high mysteries would better become both our charge and speculation. And
whosoever they are, whose ouerflow of fortunes does inuit them to leave to
posterity an allowance (whereby they worthily express a laudable and Christian
aim at the common good) be it in erecting Schools, Hospitals, or what else
soever of that kind; if such would please to weigh the benefit of these waters,
they could not possibly devise (their use being first assuredly known, and
experimented) any means more apt to endeare themselves to their Country, than
in bestowing a largess, in fitting such places as these (where medicinal
waters by the goodness of God are offered unto us) for their commodious use.
For, although the greatest Subjects of this Land may be forced to crave the
aid of these waters (for where Art is at a nonplus, Nature oftentimes
supplieth) yet it is the poorer sort, to whom they are like to yield the
greatest relief, many of whom often perish for want of outward means. How
many distressed souls lie languishing in fearful infirmities, whom the
Northern parts do distance so far from the Bathes in Summerset-shire, that
they sink under the burden of their disease, either through debility of body
to make so long a journey? Or, if their bodies would give them leave, the
weight of their poverty presses them down, and keeps them back: whereas a
reasonable charge bestowed on these our waters (which are yet but like
Beare-whelpes, and want the licking of Art to give them useful form) might
prove as memorable an act as most are in these times. I know the Bathes in
Summerset-shire (which I once saw) have in a reasonable proportion (being
happily seated in a place which draws from the recourse of strangers no small
commodity) been looked into, and indifferently accommodated: Yet compare them
with others of the like kind beyond the Seas (which I have heard by
authentic report to be excellently ordered) they are but poor and of mean
value. Those of Akan, Aix, or Aquisgrane (call the place which you will, for
they are all one) I have seen, being about 15. miles from the Spa, and beheld
them with great admiration; the structure about them being so commodious, that
they may be tempered at pleasure according to the habit of the patient. They
may also be let forth in an instant, (and every day that they are used they
are) by which means they are freed from the ordure and filth which they
attract from putride bodies, which (no question) might prejudice those of sound
temper. There are some kept private for women, where unseen they may (without
the least prejudice to their modesty) enter for their benefit. This is far from
our (I may well say heathenish) custom, where men and women do mutually
entermixe in the Bath, whereby there is too great an occasion administered of
begetting lustful fires, causing the souls of many to run a doubtful hazard.
But I leave this disorder to the consideration of those, whose authority is
able to rectify this gross abuse, and return to our waters.

Opposition (I know) they shall not want (Worth and Envy being inseparable
companions) for there are some so betroth't to their particular, and so ingulft
in avarice, that they have vowed never to know any other love. These, if they
perceive the least dram of profit, to be drawn from their profession (I speak
of such whose liuelihood consists in physical directions, or manual cures) by
any extraordinary discovery, let it never so apparently benefit the general,
they rack their brains to invent any means of disparaging it, and bedlem-like
rail at whatsoever may bring diminution to their profit and practice, their
private gain being dearer to them than their Country, nay than the whole
world. But let the galls of such greaten, till sweld with envy, they burst; the
testimony of one approved man will be of sufficient weight to out-ballance the
fuming froth of a thousand such.

It did not cost us above one entire day in this our perambulation of visiting
these waters, but by what we had seen, we thought it more than coniecturable,
that upon diligent search there may many others be found within a small
distance of several intermixed natures, which may afford admirable use both
for outward and inward cure, dispensed by the appointment of a careful and
judicious Artist.

Can we then be so simple as to question, where there are such variety of
Mineral waters, whether the soil does afford commodious veins, or no? I am
persuaded, if those same Belgicke Pismires (as one not unfitly calls them) were
masters of so fair an opportunity as this does promise, they would leave no
angle of the place unsought, till they had found out the beds where these
Mineralls sleep. But we (like Carriers horses) will not out of the tract way
of ordinary commodities. Peace the mother of plenty, and this the nurse of
case, or rather idleness, has so enthralled us, that we hug our selves in our
own security, and neglect many blessings which the liberal hand of the
Almighty has showred upon us.

O that their example (I mean the Hollanders) might move us to consider, what
blessings do attend a laborious life. How have they (confined within a bog (as
I may say) and that of no great compass) advanced their heads above many
States, that possess large and fertile Dominions? What Cities of magnifique
structure do they inhabit? How do they abound in all manner of profitable
Manifactures? Into what place of the habitable world have the not traffic?
How have they bearded that same Christendome-threatning-Monarch the Catholic
King, and done him more shame (maugre all his Indian Bullion) than all his
farre-fetcht conquests have gained him credit? And whence comes this their
prosperity, and increase of potency, if not from a general circumspection, and
sagacity in their affairs, cherishing all manner of useful Arts, and
aduantagious knowledge, and not suffering any unprofitable weeds, I mean idle
persons, to harbor amongst them? Whereas we (by what conniuence I know not)
give way to more loytering droanes, and common able beggars, to swarm in our
streets, than would serve to people a larger circuit of ground than they
possess.

Whence is it that our Alehouses and Tauernes are in such request in all good
Towns, but that they are so frequented with idle companions that their custom
is thought now adays a constant fair revenue? And hence it is that most of
our Townes-masters (observing the humor and current of the times) howsoever
they make a show of some bundles of Flax, a few bars of Iron, or such like
stuff in their shops, yet (the plain English is) Corn is the maine prop of
their estates, and of Corn, Barley, which they know will off, when all other
commodities stick fast. Thus come Tipling-houses to be in such request, and so
countenanced in their excess of riot, and abuse of measure, those who are
appointed Gouernouts (but may more properly be termed Overseers) wincking at
disorder, because (like Flies) they derive a great part of their Being from the
corruptions and sores of the times. Indeed we do but too much abound in all
necessary comforts, and this is it which has so infected us with a lazy
Lethargy, that through a long habit of ease, we are grown incapable of
sustaining any pains. Has not our long continued peace, brought us to a
strange pass (being neither employed at home in fit labor, nor suffered to
pass abroad but with strange restrictions, and limitations) when we are
become the prostitutes of foreign derision? It Is how the golden Age was, when
we were held a terror to the proudest of our neighbors, our alliance was
sought unto as a shelter, and they were safest, whom the wings of our amity did
shadow: but we are now so far from being remembered with the least phrase of
respect, in regard of our present stupidity, and base sufferings, that a
beggarly base fisher-Towne (fit to be nothing but what it is, a Cacus his den,
and receptacle of pilfering Pirates) dares brave us at our own doors, so that
not a Merchant but fears to put forth his head, to pass from one of our Ports
to another. We are daily defied upon the skirts of our own coasts, so that not
a week does pass, which brings not forth some sad tidings, even in our
view, to the undoing or hazarding of many a poor family. O the benumbed temper
of these our days, when we who were the great Masters of these our Seas, are
now grown such fordide slaves, that we are scornfully trampled upon, and
beaten at our own weapon! We sit by our fires side, wish all were well,
scatter now and then a few words of fear, as if our hearts did mis-giue all
were not well, but that some terror were at hand; and yet none so bold, of so
Roman a resolution, or so loving to his Country, as to proclaim our hazard,
or give warning of a storm; which whenever it shall break forth, (which God
auert, and yet considering our too wellknowen weakness, and supine
carelessness, besides the deluges of many crying sins, it may be feared it is
not far off) we shall be found but an amazed sort of staggering slumberers,
scarce awake. Yet I hope in this our Israel (I was about to have said Sodom,
for in fullness of bread, if not in other her abominations, we may be suspected
to have too great a share) there will be found some faithful Abraham's, who
will make bold to speak unto the Lord again, and again, that he will not
destroy the righteous with the wicked. We have lately smarted under the hand of
the Almighty by a grievous visitation, and we see (blessed be his name) he has
caused his Angel to s;tay his hand, so that there is mercy with our God, O
that we had grace to fear him! If this will not warn us, but that we will
still go on in a careless course, we cannot but expect (which he who was
according to Gods own heart, did tremble to make choice on) to fall into the
hands of our enemies, whose swords have long thirsted after our blood. Yet
since (most mighty Lord God) thy providence has hitherto miraculously watched
over us: O (howsoever our sins do most justly provoke thee to hide thy face
from us) be not far off (thou preserver of man) when we call upon thee.
Ever preserve, and graciously defend our dread Sovereign. Keep far from him
such as were the young Counselors of Rehoboam; when they would whisper into
his sacred ears the increase of our burdens, or the doubling of our taxes,
let their tongues cleave unto the roof of their mouths. Let those be dear
unto him, who sincerely tender the glory of thy great Name, that so Religion
may first in all consultations be advanced and established, Antichristian
Matchiauellia^s may be extirpated, the public good by a careful providing for
our safery at home, before we embroile our selves abroad, may be secured: that
other Nations, seeing our prosperity, may be forced to say of us, Blessed are
the people who are in such a case.

The issue of this long digression (besides that a sudden apprehension of our
threatening hazard, by the tolerated multiplying of Romish Locusts, and the
extreme weakness of our coasts did transport me) is only to show, that if we
were so cautelous as befits us, and so solicitous as we should be, of the
public good, this our happy I Will, does afford matter sufficient of useful
consequence, partly by a free and equal trade abroad, and partly by exercise
at home, to employ all the rusty hands, and idle moldy brains amongst us;
which till it be with more care advised on (than it has been long, but
especially of late) let us never expect to return to our pristine farre-spred
glory.

It was pity this our new Spa did not first fall into the hands of some of our
iugling imposturing, Romish Priests: for if they (by their Mountebank tricks)
are able to draw from most parts of the Kingdom, to one of their Sainted
Wells, a world of people, some whereof they cure merely with conceit of their
waters sovereignty; others (ayling little or nothing) they can persuade to
publish of themselves stupendous cures, of desperate diseases (which being for
the advancement of the Catholic cause (though in it self a base lie) yet with
them is but a venial peccadelio) if I say these brazen faced Empericks, are
able to go so far with an ordinary plain water, what a shame is it for us
who have such a real, vertuall Spring, nay many, and that within a small
distance, thus to be out-stript with their legerdemaine?

In the latter end of this Summer there was another Spring discovered by Dr.
Leake, a Physician of York, a mile nearer the Town of Knaresbrough, than is
the Tuit-well. It is held to be as good as the other, of the same taste, and
consequently of the same faculty. So that now we may boldly challenge the Spa
in Germany: for as they have their two acide Fountains, Sauenir, and Pohon, we
equal them, and want nothing but names to give ours the greater sound.

But it is time to strike sail. I might (and not unaptly) take occasion,
before I conclude, to publish many rarities which the Town of Knaresbrough,
and the bordering places does afford, as the variety of stone Quarries, the
several sorts of Earths, rare Plants, and other most obseruable specialties.
Here also might I not impertinently insist a little of the famous chronicled
dropping Well, seated under the Town, which turns whatsoever is cast into
it, or casually falls in, as sticks, leaves, and moss, into a firm stone;
which shows it to be of a most astrictiue quality, and of appliable use. A
proof hereof was made the precedent Summer by a stranger, who casually passing
this way (having been long troubled with a flix) was counseled to drink of
this water, which (other means failing) he willingly did, and within a few
days was perfectly cured of the disease. That these Fountains also arc
conveniently seated near a Town of ample receipt for strangers, is not to be
omitted. Yet these and many other remarkable advantages I am content to slip
over, hoping some generous spirit will undertake their more ample discovery,
which would be an act well-becomming any one, who desires to perpetuate his
name in the Catalogue of such as have given luster to their Country. By this
means the wonderments of this place seriously related, and divulged, we may
have just cause to glorify God, who amongst other his vnnumbered favors, both
concerning our souls, and bodies, has added the knowledge of these waters,
and his undeserved mercies considered, we may truly confess, He has not dealt
so with any other Nation.

FINIS.

