The most excellent History of the Merchant of Venice.

With the extreme cruelty of Shylocke the Jew toward the said Merchant, in
cutting a just pound of his flesh: and the obtaining of Portia by the choice of
three chests.

As it has been diverse times acted by the Lord Chamberlain his Servants.

Written by William Shakespeare.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Thomas Heyes, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1600.

The comicall History of the Merchant of Venice.
Enter Anthonio, Salaryno, and Salanio. An. IN sooth I know not why I am so sad,
It wearies me, you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff it is made of, whereof it is borne,
I am to learn: and such a want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know my self.

Salarino. Your mind is tossing on the Ocean,
There where your Argosies with portlie sail
Like Signiors and rich Burgars on the flood,
Or as it were the Pageants of the sea,
Doc ouer-peere the petty traffiquers
That cursie to them do them reverence
As they fly by them with their wouen wings.

Salanio. Believe me sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Piring in Maps for ports, and peers and rodes:
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

Salar. My wind cooling my broth,
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy howre-glasse run
But I should think of shallowes and of flatts,
And see my wealthy Andrew docks in sand
For saying nothing; when I am very sure
If they should speak, would almost dam those ears
which hearing them would call their brothers fools,
I Will tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgin, this opinion:
Come good Lorenso, faryewell a while,
I Will end my exhortation after dinner.

Loren. Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

Gra. Well keep me company but two years more
Thou shall not know the sound of thine own tongue.

An. Far you well, I Will grow a talker for this gear.

Gra. Thanks in faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neates togue dried, and a maid not vendable.

Exeunt. An. It is that any thing now.

Bass. Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing more then any man in all
Venice; his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chafe:
you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are
not worth the search.


An. Well, tell me now what Lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage
That you to day promisd to tell me of.

Bass. It Is not unknown to you Anthonio
How much I have disabled mine estate,
By something showing a more swelling port
Then my faint means would grant continuance:
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly of from the great debts
wherein my time something too prodigal
Has left me gagd: to you Anthonio
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warrantie
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

An. I pray you good Bassanio let me know it,
And if it stand as you your self still do,
within the eye of honor, be assurd
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.

Bass. In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the self same flight
The self same way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth, and by aduenturing both,
I often found both: I urge this childhood proof
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and like a wilful youth
That which I owe is lost, but if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard bake again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

An. You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance,
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Then if you had made wast of all I have:
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am pressed unto it: therefore speak.

Bass. In Belmont is a Lady richly left,
And she is fair, and fairer then that word,
Of wondrous virtues, sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia, nothing vndervallewd
To Catos daughter, Brutus Portia,
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
which makes her seat of Belmont Cholchos strond,
And many Iasons come in quest of her.
O my Anthonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate.

Anth. Thou know that all my fortunes are at sea,
Neither have I money, nor commodity
To raise a present sum, therefore go forth
Try what my credit can in Venice do,
That shall be rackt even to the uttermost
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently enquire and so will I
where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.

Exeunt. Enter Portia with her waiting woman Nerrissa. Portia. By my troth
Nerrissa, my little body is awearie of this great world.


Ner. You would be sweet Madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as
your good fortunes are: and yet for ought I see, they are as sick that
surfeite with too much, as they that starve with nothing; it is no mean
happiness therefore to be seated in the mean, superfluity comes sooner by white
hairs, but competencie lives longer.


Portia. Good sentences, and well pronounced.


Ner. They would be better if well followed.


Portia. If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, Chapels had
been Churches, and poor men's cottages Princes Palaces, it is a good divine
that follows his own instructions, I can easier teach twenty what were good
to be done, then to be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching: the
brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leapes ore a cold
decree, such a hare is madness the youth, to skippe ore the meshes of good
counsel the cripple; but this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a
husband, o me the word choose, I may neither choose who I would, nor refuse
who I dislike, so is the will of a living daughter curbd by the will of a dead
father: is it not hard Nerrissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none.


Ner. Your Father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good
inspirations, therefore the lottrie that he has devised in these three chests
of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, will
no doubt never be chosen by any rightly, but one who you shall rightly love:
But what warmth is there in your affection toward any of these Princely
suitors that are already come?


Por. I pray thee ouer-name them, and as thou namest them, I will describe
them, and according to my description level at my affection.


Ner. First there is the Neopolitane Prince.


Por. I that's a colt indeed, for he does nothing but talk of his horse, and
he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoo him
himself: I am much afeard my Lady his mother played false with a Smyth.


Ner. Than is there the County Palentine.


Por. He does nothing but frown (as who should say, and you will not have me,
choose, he hears merry tales and smiles not, I fear he will prove the
weeping Philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in
his youth,) I had rather be married to a deaths head with a bone in his mouth,
then to either of these: God defend me from these two.


Ner. How say you by the French Lord, Mounsier Le Boune?


Por. God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man, in truth I know it
is a sin to be a mocker, but he, why he has a horse better then the
Neopolitans, a better bad habit of frowning then the Count Palentine, he is
every man in no man, if a Trassell sing, he falls straght a capring, he will
fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I should marry twenty
husbands: if he would despise me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to
madness, I shall never requite him.


Ner. What say you then to Fauconbridge, the young Barron of England?


Por. You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he
has neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the Court and
swear that I have a poor pennieworth in the English: he is a proper man's
picture, but alas who can converse with a dumb show? how odly he is suited, I
think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet
in Germany, and his behavior every where.


Nerrissa What think you of the Scottish Lord his neighbor:


Portia. That he has a neyghbourlie charity in him, for he borrowed a box
of the ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when he was
able: I think the Frenchman became his surety, and sealed under for another.


Ner. How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxonies nephew?


Por. Very vildlie in the morning when he is sober, and most vildly in the
afternoon when he is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse then a man,
and when he is worst he is little better then a beast, and the worst fall that
ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.


Ner. If he should offer to choose, and choose the right Casket, you should
refuse to perform your Fathers will, if you should refuse to accept him.


Portia. Therefore for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep glass of
Reynishe wine on the contrary Casket, for if the devil be within, and that
temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing Nerrissa
ere I will be married to a sponge.


Nerrissa. You need not fear Lady the having any of these Lords, they have
acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their
home, and to trouble you with no more suit, unless you may be won by some
other sort the^ your Fathers imposition, depending on the Caskets.


Por. If I live to be as old as Sibilla, I will die as chaste as Diana, unless
I be obtained by the manner of my Fathers will: I am glad this parcel of wooers
are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I doat on his very
absence: and I pray God grant them a fair departure.


Nerrissa Doc you not remember Lady in your Fathers time, a Venecian a Scholar
and a Soldier that came hither in company of the Marquess of Mountferrat?


Portia. Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think so was he called.


Ner. True maddam, he of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon,
was the best deserving a fair Lady.


Portia. I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.

How now, what news?


Enter a Seruingman. Ser. The four strangers seek for you maddam to take
their leave: and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Moroco,
who brings word the Prince his Master will be here to night.


Por. If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the other
four farewell, I should be glad of his approach: if he have the condition of a
Saint, and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shriue me then
wiue me. Come Nerrissa, sir go before: whiles we shut the gate upon one
wooer, another knocks at the door.


Exeunt. Enter Bassanio with Shylocke the Jew. Shy Three thousand ducates, well.


Bass. I sir, for three months.


Shy. For three months, well.


Bass. For the which as I told you, Anthonio shall be bound.


Shy. Anthonio shall become bound, well.


Bass. May you sted me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer.


Shy. Three thousand ducats for three months, and Anthonio bound.


Bass. Your answer to that.


Shy. Anthonio is a good man.


Bass. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary.


Shylocke. Ho no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man, is to
have you understand me that he is sufficient, yet his means are in
supposition: he has an Argosie bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies, I
understand moreover upon the Ryalta, ^ee has a third at Mexico, a fourth for
England, and other ventures he has squandred abroad, but ships are but
boordes, Sailors but men, there be land rats, and water rats, water thieves,
and land thieves, I mean Pirates, and then there is the pe^rill of waters;
winds, and rocks: the man is notwithstanding sufficient, three thousand
ducats, I think I may take his bond.


Bas. Be assurd you may.


Jew. I will be assurd I may: and that I may be assured, I will bethink me,
may I speak with Anthonio?


Bass. If it please you to dine with us.


Jew. Yes, to smell porke, to eat of the habitation which your Prophet the
Nazarit coniured the devil into: I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with
you, walk with you, and so following: but I will not eat with you, drink
with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Ryalto, who is he comes here?


Enter Anthonio. Bass. This is signior Anthonio.

Jew. How like a fawning publican he looks.
I hate him for he is a Christian:
But more, for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of vsance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred Nation, and he rayles
Even there where Merchants most do congregate
On me, my bargains, and my well-wone thrift,
which he calls interrest: Cursed be my Trybe
if I forgive him.

Bass. Shyloch, do you hear.

Shyl. I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats: what of that,
Tuball a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe
Will furnish me; but soft, how many months
Do you desire? Rest you fair good signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

An. Shylocke, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I Will break a custom: is he yet possessed
How much ye would?

Shy. I, I, three thousand ducats.

Ant. And for three months.

Shyl. I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond: and let me see, but hear you,
Me thoughts you said, you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

Ant. I do never use it.

Shy. When Jacob grazd his Uncle Labans Sheep,
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wise mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possesser; I, he was the third.

Ant. And what of him, did he take interrest?

Shyl. No, not take interest, not as you would say
Directly intrest, mark what Jacob did,
When Laban and himself were compremyzd
That all the canelings which were streakt and pied
Should fall as Jacobs hier, the Ewes being rank
In end of Autumn turned to the Rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these wolly breeders in the act,
The skilful shepherd pyld me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind
He stuck them up before the fulsome Ewes,
Who then conceauing, did in eaning time
Fall party-colourd lambs, and those were Jacobs.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed:
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

An. This was a venture sir that Jacob serud for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swayd and fashiond by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interrest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?

Shyl. I cannot tell, I make it breed at fast, but note me signior.


Anth. Mark you this Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose,
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O what a goodly outside falsehood has.

Shy. Three thousand ducats, it is a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.

Ant. Well Shylocke, shall we be beholding to you?

Shyl. Signior Anthonio, many a time and often
In the Ryalto you have rated me
About my moneys and my vsances:
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For suffrance is the badge of all our Trybe)
You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throate dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help:
Go to then, you come to me, and you say,
Shylocke, we would have moneys* you say so:
You that did void your ruin upon my beard,
And soote me as you spurn a stranger curre
Over your threshold, moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
Has a dog money? is it possible
A curre can lend three thousand ducats? or
Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key
With bated breath, and whispring humblenes
Say this: Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last,
You spurnd me such a day another time,
You called me dog: and for these courtesies
I Will lend you thus much moneys.

Ant. I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee to.
If thou will lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barraine mettaile of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou may with better face
Exact the penalty.

Shy. Why look you how you storm,
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have staind me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doyte
Of vsance for my moneys, and you will not hear me, this is kind I offer.

Bass. This were kindness.

Shyl. This kindness will I show, Go with me to a Notarie, seal me there
Your single bond, and in a merry sport if you repay me not on such a day in
such a place, such sum or sums as are expressed in the condition, let the
forfaite be nominated for an equal pound of your fair flesh, to be cut off
and taken in what part of your body pleases me.


Ant. Content infaith, isle seal to such a bond, and say there is much kindness
in the Jew.


Bass. You shall not seal to such a bond for me, ^e rather dwell in my,
necessity.


An. Why fear not man, I will not forfaite it, within these two months, that's
a month before this bond expires, I do expect return of thrice three times
the value of this bond.


Shy. O father Abram, what these Christians are, Whose own hard dealings
teaches them suspect the thoughts of others: Pray you tell me this, if he
should break his day what should I gain by the exaction of the forfeyture? A
pound of man's flesh taken from a man, is not so estimable, profitable neither
as flesh of Muttons, Beefes, or Goats, I say To buy his favor, I extend this
friendship, If he will take it, so, if not adieu, And for my love I pray you
wrong me not.


An. Yes Shylocke, I will seal unto this bond.


Shy. Then meet me forthwith at the Noteries,
Give him direction for this merry bond
And I will go and purse the ducats strait,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave: and presently
I Will be with you.

Exit. An. Hie thee gentle Jew. The Hebrew will turn
Christian, he grows kind.

Bassa. I like not fair terms, and a villains mind.

An. Come on, in this there can be no dismay,
My ships come home a month before the day.

Exeunt. Enter Morochus a tawnie Moore all in white, and three or four
followers accordingly, with Portia, Nerrissa, and their train. Morocho.
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed liuerie of the burnisht sun,
To whom I am a neighbor, and near bred.
Bring me the favrest creature Northward borne,
Where Phoebus sire scarce thawes the ysicles,
And let us make incyzion for your love,
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee Lady this aspect of mine
Has feared the valiant, (by my love I swear)
The best regarded Virgins of our Clyme
Have loved it to: I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts my gentle Queen.

Portia. In terms of choice I am not soly led
By nice direction of a maidens eyes:
Besides, the lottrie of my destenie
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing:
But if my Father had not scanted me,
And hedgd me by his wit to yield my self
His wife, who winnes me by that means I told you,
Your self (renowned Prince) than stood as fair
As any commer I have looked on yet
For my affection.

Mor. Even for that I thank you,
Therefore I pray you lead me to the Caskets
To try my fortune: By this Symitare
That slew the Sophy, and a Persian Prince
That wone three fields of Sultan Solomon,
I would ore-stare the sternest eyes that look:
Out-braue the heart most daring on the earth:
Pluck the young sucking Cubs from the she Bear,
Yea, mock the Lion when a rores for pray
To win the Lady. But alas, the while
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me
Miss that which one vnworthier may attain,
And die with greeuing.

Portia. You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to Lady afterward
In way of marriage, therefore be advised.

Mor. Nor will not, come bring me unto my chance.

Portia. First forward to the temple, after dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

Mor. Good fortune then,
To make me blessed or cursed'st among men.

Exeunt. Enter the Clown alone. Clown. Certainly, my conscience will serve
me to run from this Jew my Master: the fiend is at mine elbow, and tempts
me, saying to me, Iobbe, Launcelet Jobbe, good Launcelet, or good Iobbe, or
good Launcelet Iobbe, use your legs, take the start, run away, my
conscience says no; take heed honest Launcelet, take heed honest Iobbe, or
as afore-saide honest Launcelet Iobbe, do not run, scorn running with thy
heels; well, the most coragious fiend bids me pack, sia says the fiend, away
says the fiend, for the heavens rouse up a brave mind says the fiend, and
run; well, my conscience hanging about the neck of my heart, says very
wisely to me: my honest friend Launcelet being an honest man's son, or
rather an honest woman's son, for indeed my Father did something smacke,
something grow to; he had a kind of taste; well, my conscience says Launcelet
bouge not, bouge says the fiend, bouge not says my conscience, conscience say
I you counsel well, fiend say I you counsel well, to be ruld by my
conscience, I should stay with the Jew my Master, (who God bless the mark)
is a kind of devil; and to run away from the Jew I should be ruled by the
fiend, who saving your reverence is the devil himself: certainly the Jew is
the very devil incarnation, and in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind
of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew; the fiend
gives the more friendly counsel: I will run fiend, my heels are at your
commandment, I will run.


Enter old Gobbo with a basket. Gobbo. Master young man, you I pray you, which
is the way to Master Jews?


Launcelet. O heavens, this is my true begotten Father, who being more then
sand blind, high gravel blind, knows me not, I will try confusions with him.


Gobbo. Master young Gentleman, I pray you which is the way to Master Jews.


Launcelet. Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next
turning of all on your left; marry at the very next turning turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jews house.


Gobbo. Be Gods sonties twill be a hard way to hit, can you tell me whether
one Launcelet that dwells with him, dwell with him or no.


Launcelet. Talk you of young Master Launcelet, mark me now, now will I
raise the waters; talk you of young Master Launcelet.


Gobbo. No Master sir, but a poor man's Son, his Father though I say it is an
honest exceeding poor man, and God be thanked well to live.


Lance. Well, let his Father be what a will, we talk of young Master
Launcelet.


Gob. Your worships friend and Launcelet sir.


Lance. But I pray you ergo old man, ergo I beseech you, talk you of young
Master Launcelet.


Gob. Of Launcelet ant please your maistership.


Lance. Ergo Master Launcelet, talk not of master Launcelet Father, for the
young Gentleman according to fates and destenies, and such odd sayings, the
sisters three, and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you
would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.


Gobbo. Marry God forbid, the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.


Launcelet. Do I look like a cudgel or a houell post, a staff, or a prop:
do you know me Father.


Gobbo. Alack the day, I know you not young Gentleman, but I pray you tell
me, is my boy GOD rest his soul alive or dead.


Launcelet. Do you not know me Father.


Gobbo. Alack sir I am sand blind, I know you not.


Launcelet. Nay, in deed if you had your eyes you might fail of the knowing
me: it is a wise Father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will
tell you news of your son, give me your blessing, truth will come to
light, muder cannot be hid long, a man's Son may, but in the end truth
will out.


Gobbo. Pray you sir stand up, I am sure you are not Launcelet my boy.


Lance. Pray you let us have no more fooling, about it, but give me your
blessing: I am Launcelet your boy that was, your son that is, your child that
shall be.


Gob. I cannot think you are my son.


Launc. I know not what I shall think of that: but I am Launcelet the Jews
man, and I am sure Margerie your wife is my mother.


Gob. Her name is Margerie in deed, i will be sworn if thou be Launcelet, thou
art mine own flesh and blood: Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard have
thou got; thou have got more hair on thy chinne, then Dobbin my philhorse hase
on his tail.


Lance. It should seem then that Dobbins tail grows backward. I am sure he
had more hair of his tail then I have of my face when I lost saw him.


Gob. Lord how art thou changd: how do thou and thy Master agree, I have
brought him a present; how gree you now?


Lance. Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run
away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground; my Maister's a very
Jew, give him a present, give him a halter, I am famisht in his service. You
may tell every finger I have with my ribs: Father I am glad you are come, give
me your present to one Master Bassanio, who in deed gives rare new Lyuories,
if I serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare
fortune, here comes the man, to him Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the
Jew any longer.


Enter Bassanio with a follower or two. Bass. You may do so, but let it be so
hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock: see these
Letters delivered, put the Liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come
anon to my lodging.


Lance. To him Father.


Gob. God bless your worship.


Bass. Gramercie, would thou ought with me.


Gobbe. Here Is my son sir, a poor boy.


Lance. Not a poor boy sir, but the rich Jews man that would sir as my
Father shall specify.


Gob. He has a great infection sir, as one would say to serve.


Lau. Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire as
my Father shall specify.


Gob. His Master and he (saving your worships reverence) are scarce
catercosins,


Lau. To be brief, the very truth is, that the Jew having done me wrong,
does cause me as my Father being I hope an old man shall frutifie unto you.


Gob. I have here a dish of Doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and
my suit is.


Lau. In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall
know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet poor
man my Father.


Bass. One speak for both, what would you?


Laun. Serve you sir.


Gob. That is the very defect of the matter sir.


Bass. I know thee well, thou have obtaind thy suit,
Shylocke thy Master spoke with me this day,
And has preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jews service, to become
The follower of so poor a Gentleman.

Clown. The old proverb is very well parted between my Master Shylocke and
you sir, you have the grace of God sir, and he has enough.


Bass. Thou speakst it well; go Father with thy Son
Take leave of thy old Master, and enquire
My lodging out, give him a Lyuerie
More guarded then his fellows: see it done.

Clown. Father in, I cannot get a service, no, I have nere a tongue in my head,
well: if any man in Italy have a fayrer table which does offer to swear upon a
book, I shall have good fortune; go too, here is a simple line of life,
heeres a small tryfle of wives, alas, fifteen wives is nothing, a leven
widows and nine maids is a simple coming in for one man, and then to escape
drowning thrice, and to be in perrill of my life with the edge of a featherbed,
here are simple scapes: well, if Fortune be a woman she is a good wench for
this gere: Father come, i will take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.


Exit Clown. Bass. I pray thee good Leonardo think on this,
These things being bought and orderly bestowed
Return in have, for I do feast to night
My best esteemd acquaintance, hie thee go.

Leon. My best endeavors shall be done herein.
Exit Leonardo.
Enter Gratiano. Grati. Where Is your Master.

Leonar. Yonder sir he walks.

Grati. Signior Bassanio.

Bass. Gratiano.

Gra. I have suit to you.

Bass. You have obtaind it.

Gra. You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.

Bass. Why then you must but hear thee Gratiano,
Thou art to wild, to rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults
But where thou art not known; why there they show
Something too liberal, pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, least through thy wild behavior
I be misconstred in the place I go to,
And loose my hopes.

Gra. Signor Bassanio, hear me,
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and than,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say amen:
Use all the observance of ciuillity
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his Grandam, never trust me more.

Bass. Well, we shall see your bearing.

Gra. Nay but I bar to night, you shall not gage me
By what we do to night.

Bass. No that were pity,
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment: but far you well,
I have some business.

Gra. And I must to Lorenso and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper time.

Exeunt. Enter Iessica and the Clown. Jessica. I am sorry thou will leave my
Father so,
Our house is hell, and thou a merry devil
Did rob it of some taste of tediousnes,
But far thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And Launcelet, soon at supper shall thou see
Lorenso, who is thy new Masters guest,
Give him this Letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell: I would not have my Father
See me in talk with thee.

Clown. Adieu, tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful Pagan, most sweet
Jew, if a Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived;
but adieu, these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit: adieu.


Jessica. Farewell good Launcelet.
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my Fathers child,
But though I am a daughter to his blood
I am not to his manners: o Lorenso
If thou keep promise I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.

Exit. Enter Gratiano, Lorenso, Salaryno, and Salanio. Loren. Nay, we will
slinke away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return all in an hour.

Gratia. We have not made good preparation.

Salari. We have not spoke us yet of Torch-bearers,

Solanio. It Is vile unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

Loren. It Is now but four of clock, we have two hours To furnish us; friend
Launcelet what is the news.

Enter Launcelet. Launcelet. And it shall please you to break up this, it shall
seem to signify.


Loren. I know the hand, in faith it is a fair hand,
And whiter then the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.

Gratia. Love, news in faith.

Lance. By your leave sir.

Loren. Whither go thou.

Launc. Marry sir to bid my old Master the Jew to sup to night with my new
Master the Christian.


Loren. Hold here take this, tell gentle Iessica
I will not fail her, speak it privately,
Go Gentlemen, will you prepare you for this mask to night,
I am provided of a Torch-bearer.

Exit Clown. Sal. I marry, i will be gone about it strait.

Sol. And so will I.

Loren. Meet me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging
Some hour hence.

Sal. It Is good we do so.

Exit. Gratia. Was not that Letter from fair Iessica.

Loren. I must needs tell thee all, she has directed
How I shall take her from her Fathers house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What Pages suit she has in readiness,
If ere the Jew her Father come to heaven,
Yt will be for his gentle daughters sake,
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew:
Come go with me, pervse this as thou go,
Fair Jessica shall be my Torch-bearer.

Exit. Enter Jew and his man that was the Clown. Jew. Well, thou shall see,
thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylocke and Bassanio;
What Iessica, thou shall not gurmandize
As thou have done with me: what Iessica,
and sleep, and snore, and rend apparraile out.
Why Iessica I say.

Clown. Why Iessica.

Shy. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

Clow. Your worship was wont to tell me,
I could do nothing without bidding.

Enter Iessica. Iessica. Call you? what is your will?

Shy. I am bid forth to supper Iessica,
There are my keys: but wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatter me,
But yet I Will go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Iessica my girl,
look to my house, I am right loath to go,
There is some ill a bruing toward my rest,
For I did dream of money baggs to night.

Clown. I beseech you sir go, my young Master does expect your reproach.


Shy. So do I his.


Clown. And they have conspired together, I will not say you shall see a
Mask, but if you do, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a bleeding
on black monday last, at six a clock ith morning, falling out that year on
ashwensday was four year in thafternoone.


Shy. What are there maskes? hear you me Iessica, lock up my doors, and when
you hear the drum and the vile squealing of the wry-neckt Fiffe clamber not
you up to the casements then Nor thrust your head into the public street To
gaze on Christian fools with varnisht faces: But stop my houses ears, I mean
my casements, let not the sound of shallow fopprie enter my sober house. By
Jacobs staff I swear I have no mind of feasting forth to night: but I will
go: go you before me sir, say I will come.


Clown. I will go before sir. Mistres look out at window for all this, there
will come a Christian by will be worth a Jews eye.


Shyl. What says that fool of Hagars offspring? ha.


Iessica. His words were farewell mistress, nothing else.


Shy. The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, Snaile slow in profit, and
he sleeps by day more then the vvild-cat: drones hiue not with me, therefore I
part with him and part with him to one that I would have him help to wast his
borrowed purse. Well Iessica go in, perhaps I will return immediathe, do as I
bid you, shut doors after you, fast bind, fast find. a proverb never stale in
thriftie mind.


Exit. Ies. Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a Father, you a daughter lost.

Exit. Enter the maskers, Gratiano and Salerino. Great. This is the penthouse
under which Lorenzo desired us to make stand.


Sal. His hour is almost past.


Gra. And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour, for lovers ever run before
the clock.


Sal. O ten times faster Venus pidgions fly to seal loves bonds new made,
then they are wont to keep obliged faith vnforfaited.


Gra. That ever holds: who rises from a feast with that keen appetite that
he sits down? where is the horse that does vntread again his tedious
measures with the vnbated fire that he did pace them first: all things that are
are withmore spirit chased then enjoyed. How like a younger or a prodigal the
skarfed bark puts from her native bay hugd and embraced by the strumpet wind,
how like the prodigal does she return with ouer-wetherd ribbs and ragged
sails lean, rent, and beggerd by the strumpet wind?


Enter Lorenzo. Sal. Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.


Lor. Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode not I but my affairs have
made you wait: when you shall please to play the thieves for wives I Will watch
as long for you then: approach here dwells my father Jew. How whose within?


Iessica above. Iess. Who are you? tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I Will swear that I do know your tongue.

Lor. Lorenzo and thy love.

Iessica. Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed, for who love I so much? and now
who knows but you Lorenzo whether I am yours?


Lor. Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.


Ies. Here catch this casket, it is worth the pains, I am glad us night you
do not look on me, for I am much ashamde of my exchange: But love is blind,
and lovers cannot see The prerty follies that themselves commit, for if they
could. Cupid himself would blush to see me thus transformed to a boy.


Lor. Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.


Ios. What, must I hold a candle to my shames, they in themselves goodsooth are
too too light. Why, it is an office of discovery love, and I should be obscurd.


Lor. So are you sweet even in the lovely garnish of a boy, but come at once,
for the close night does play the runaway, and we are staid for at Bassanios
feast.


Ios. I will make fast the doors and guild my self with some mo ducats, and
be with you straight.


Gra. Now by my hoode a gentle, and no Jew.


Lor. Beshrow me but I love her heartily, A coin that bears the figure of an
Angel stamped in gold, but that's insculpt upon: But here an Angel in a golden
bed lies all within. Deliver me the key: here do I choose, and thrive I as I
may.


Por. There take it Prince, and if my form lie there then I am yours?


Mor. O hell! what have we hear, a carrion death, within whose empty eye
there is a written scroule, I Will read the writing.

All that glisters is not gold,
Often have you heard that told,
Many a man his life has sold
But my outside to behold,
Gilded timber do worms infold:
Had you been as wise as bold,
Young in limbs, in judgment old,
Your answer had not been inscrold,
Fareyouwell, your suit is cold.

Mor. Cold indeed and labor lost,
Then farewell heat, and welcome frost:
Portia adieu, I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave: thus loosers part.

Exit. Por. A gentle riddance, draw the curtains, go,
Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Exeum. Enter Salarino and Solanio. Sal. Why man I saw Bassanio under sail,
with him is Gratiano gone along; and in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.


Sola. The villain Jew with outcries raisd the Duke, who went with him to
search Bassanio; ship.


Sal. He came too late, the ship was undersail, But there the Duke was given
to understand that in a Gondylo were seen together Lorenzo and his amorous
Iessica. Besides, Anthonio certified the Duke they were not with Bassanio in
his ship.


Sol. I never heard a passion so confusd, So strange, outrageous, and so
variable as the dog Jew did utter in the streets, My daughter, o my ducats, o
my daughter, Fled with a Christian, o my Christian ducats, Justice, the law my
ducats, and my daughter, A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats of double
ducats, stolen from me by my daughter, and Jewels, two stones, two rich and
precious stones, Stolen by my daughter: justice; find the girl, she has the
stones upon her, and the ducats.


Sal. Why all the boys in Venice follow him, crying his stones, his daughter
and his ducats.


Sola. Let good Anthonio look he keep his day or he shall pay for this.


Sal. Marry well remembered, I reasond with a Frenchman yesterday, who told me,
in the narrow seas that part the French and English, there miscarried a vessel
of our country richly fraught: I thought upon Anthonio when he told me, and
wished in silence that it were not his.


Sol. You were best to tell Anthonio what you hear, Yet do not suddenly,
for it may grieve him.


Sal. A kinder gentleman treades not the earth, I saw Bassanio and Anthonio
part, Bassanio told him he would make some speed of his return: he answered,
do not so, slumber not business for my sake Bassanio, but stay the very riping
of the time, and for the Jews bond which he has of me let it not enter in
your mind of love: be merry, and employ your cheifest thoughts to courtship,
and such fair ostents of love as shall conveniently become you there, And even
there his eye being big with tears, turning his face, he put his hand behind
him, and with affection wondrous sencible He wrung Bassanios hand, and so they
parted.


Sol. I think he only loves the world for him, I pray thee let us go and
find him out and quicken his embraced heaviness with some delight or other.


Sal. Do we so.


Exeunt. Enter Nerrissa and a Seruiture. Ner. Quick, quick I pray thee, draw
the curtain strait, The Prince of Arragon has taken his oath, and comes to his
election presently.


Enter Arrogon, his train, and Portia. Por. Behold, there stand the caskets
noble Prince, if you choose that wherein I am containd straight shall our
nuptial rights be solemnized: but if you fail, without more speech my Lord
you must be gone from hence immediately.


Arra. I am enioynd by oath to observe three things, First, never to unfold to
any one which casket it was I chose; next, if I fail of the right casket, never
in my life to woo a maid in way of marriage: lastly, if I do fail in
fortune of my choice, immediately to leave you, and be gone.


Por. To these injunctions every one does swear that comes to hazard for my
worthless self.


Arr. And so have I addressed me, fortune now
To my hearts hope: gold, silver, and base lead.
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has.
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest, ha, let me see,
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire,
What many men desire, that many may be meant
by the fool multitude that choose by show,
not learning more then the fond eye does teach,
which pries not to thinteriour, but like the Martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and rode of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not iumpe with common spirits,
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why then to thee thou silver treasure house,
Tell me once more what title thou do bear;
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves,
And well said to; for who shall go about
To cosen Fortune, and be honorable
without the stamp of merit, let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity:
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor
were purchased by the merit of the wearer,
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? and how much honor
Picked from the chaft and ruin of the times,
To be new varnist; well but to my choice.
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves,
I will assume desert; give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

Portia. Too long a pause for that which you find there.

Arrag. What Is here, the pourtrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a shedule, I will read it:
How much unlike art thou to Portia?
How much unlike my hopes and my deseruings.
Who chooses me, shall have as much as he deserves?
Did I deserve no more then a fools head,
Is that my prize, are my deserts no better?

Portia. To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed natures.

Arrag. What is here?
The fire seven times tried this,
Seven times tried that iudement is,
That did never choose amiss,
Some there be that shadows kis.
Such have but a shadows blis:
There be fools alive Iwis
Siluerd over, and so was this.
Take what wife you will to bed,
I will ever be your head:
So be gone, you are sped.

Arrag. Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here,
With one fools head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet adieu, i will keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroath.

Portia. Thus has the candle singd the moath:
O these deliberate fools when they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to loose.

Nerriss. The ancient saying is no herisie,
Hanging and wiuing goes by destiny.

Portia. Come draw the curtain Nerrissa.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Where is my Lady.

Portia. Here, what would my Lord?

Mess. Madame, there is a-lighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify the approaching of his Lord,
From whom he brings sensible regreets;
To wit, (besides commends and curtious breath)
Gifts of rich valiew; yet I have not seen
So likely an Ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet
To show how costly Summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his Lord.

Portia. No more I pray thee, I am half a-feard
Thou will say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spendst such high day wit in praising him:
Come come Nerryssa, for I long to see
Quick Cupids Post that comes so mannerly.

Nerryss. Bessanio Lord, love if thy will it be.

Exeunt. Solanio and Salarino. Solanio. Now what news on the Ryalto?


Salari. Why yet it lives there unchecked, that Anthonio has a ship of rich
lading wrackt on the narrow Seas; the Goodwins I think they call the place, a
very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie
buried, as they say, if my gossip report be an honest woman of her word.


Solanio. I would she were as lying a gossip in that, as ever knapt Ginger, or
made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband: but it
is true, without any slips of prolixity, or crossing the plain high way of
talk, that the good Anthonio, the honest Anthonio; o that I had a title good
enough to keep his name company.


Salari. Come, the full stop.


Solanio. Ha, what say thou, why the end is, he has lost a ship.


Salari. I would it might prove the end of his losses.


Solanio. Let me say amen betimes, least the devil cross my prayer, for here
he comes in the likeness of a Jew. How now Shylocke, what news among the
Merchants?


Enter Shylocke. Shy. You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my
daughters flight.


Salari. That's certain, I for my part knew the Tailor that made the wings she
flew withal.


Solan. And Shylocke for his own part knew the bird was flidge, and then it is
the complexion of them all to leave the dam.


Shy. She is damnd for it.


Salari. That's certain, if the devil may be her Judge.


Shy. My own flesh and blood to rebel.


Sola. Out upon it old carrion, rebels it at these years.


Shy. I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.


Salari. There is more difference between thy flesh and hers, then between
Iet and Iuori, more between your bloods, then there is between red wine and
rennish: but tell us, do you hear whether Anthonio have had any loss at sea
or no?


Shy. There I have another bad match, a bankrout, a prodigal, who dare scarce
show his head on the Ryalto, a beggar that was vsd to come so smug upon the
Mart: let him look to his bond, he was wont to call me usurer, let him look
to his bond, he was wont to lend money for a Christian cursie, let him look
to his bond.


Salari. Why I am sure if he forfaite, thou will not take his flesh, what is
that good for?


Shyl. To bait fish with all, if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my
revenge; he has disgraced me, and hindered me half a million, laughed at my
losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my Nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my
friends, heated mine enemies, and what is his reason, I am a Jew: Has not a
Jew eyes, has not a Jew hands, organs, dementions, senses, affections,
passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the
same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same Winter
and Summer as a Christian is: if you prick us do we not bleed, if you tickle
us do we not laugh, if you poison us do we not die, and if you wrong us
shall we not revenge, if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in
that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humillity, revenge? If a
Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example, why
revenge? The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it shall go hard but I
will better the instruction.


Enter a man from Anthonio. Gentlemen, my master Anthonio is at his house, and
desires to speak with you both.

Saleri. We have been up and down to seek him.


Enter Tuball. Solanio. Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot be
matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew. Exeunt Gentlemen.


Enter Tuball. Shy. How now Tuball, what news from Genowa, have thou found my
daughter?


Tuball. I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.


Shylocke. Why there, there, there, there, a diamond gone cost me two thousand
ducats in Franckford, the curse never fell upon our Nation till now, I never
felt it till now, two thousand ducats in that, and other precious precious
jewels; I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear:
would she were hearst at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin: no news of
them, why so? and I know not what is spent in the search: why thou loss upon
loss, the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief, and no
satisfaction, no revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a my
shoulders, no sighs but a my breathing, no tears but a my shedding.


Tuball. Yes, other men have ill luck to, Anthonio as I heard in Genowa?


Shy. What, what, what, ill luck, ill luck.


Tuball. Has an Argosie cast away coming from Tripolis.


Shy. I thank God, I thank God, is it true, is it true.


Tuball. I spoke with some of the Sailors that escaped the wrack.


Shy. I thank thee good Tuball, good news, good news: ha ha, here in Genowa.


Tuball. Your daughter spent in Genowa, as I heard, one night fourscore ducats.


Shy. Thou stickst a dagger in me, I shall never see my gold again, four
score ducats at a sitting, four score ducats


Tuball. There came diverse of Anthonios creditors in my company to Ven^^^ that
swear he cannot choose but break.


Shy. I am very glad of it, i will plague him, i will torture him, I am glad of it.


Tuball. One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a
Monky.


Shy. Out upon her, thou torturest me Tuball, it was my Turkies, I had it of
Leah when I was a Batcheler: I would not have given it for a Wilderness of
Monkies.


Tuball. But Anthonio is certainly undone.


Shy. Nay, that is true, that is very true, go Tuball fee me an Officer,
bespeake him a fortnight before, I will have the heart of him if he forfeite,
for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will: go Tuball, and
meet me at our Smagogue, go good Tuball, at our Sinagogue Tuball.


Exeunt. Enter Bassanio, Portia, Gratiano, and all their traynes. Portia. I
pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I loose your company; therefore forbear a while,
There Is something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not loose you, and you know your self,
Hate counsels not in such a quallity;
But least you should not understand me well,
And yet a maiden has no tongue, but thought,
I would detain you here some month or two
before you venture for me. I could teach you
how to choose right, but then I am forsworn,
So will I never be, so may you miss me,
But if you do, you will make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn: Beshrow your eyes,
They have ore-lookt me and divided me,
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own I would say: but if mine then yours,
And so all yours; o these naughty times
puts bars between the owners and their rights,
And so though yours, not yours, (prove it so)
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but it is to peize the time,
To each it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

Bass. Let me choose,
For as I am, I hue upon the rack.

Por. Upon the rack Bassanio, then confess what treason there is mingled
with your love.

Bass. None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
which makes me fear th'inioying of my Love,
There may as well be amity and life
Tweene snow and fire, as treason and my love.

Por. I but I fear you speak upon the rack
where men enforced do speak any thing.

Bass. Promise me life, and i will confess the truth.

Portia. Well then, confess and live.

Bass. Confess and love
had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
does teach me aunsweres for deliverance:
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

Portia. Away then, I am locktin one of them,
If you do love me, you will find me out.
Nerryssa and the rest, stand all aloof,
Let music sound while he does make his choice,
Then if he loose he makes a Swan-like end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
may stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
and watery deathbed for him: he may win,
And what is music than? Than music is
even as the flourish, when true subjects bow
to a new crowned Monarch: Such it is,
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming bride-groomes ear,
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes
with no less presence, but with much more love
Then young Alcides, when he did redeem
The virgin tribute, paid by howling Troy
To the Sea Monster: I stand for sacrifice,
The rest alo^^^ are the Dardanian vviues:
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of th'exploit: Go Hercules,
Live thou, I live with much much more dismay,
I view the fight, then thou that make the fray.
A Song the whilst Bassanio comments on the caskets to himself. Tell me where
is fancy bred,
Or in the heart, or in the head,
How beget, how nourished? Reply, reply.
It is engendered in the eye,
With gazing fed, and Fancy dies:
In the cradle where it lies
I et us all ring Fancies knell.
I Will begin it.
Ding, dong, bell.

All. Ding, dong, bell.

Bass. So may the outward shows be least themselves,
The world is still deceau'd with ornament
In Law, what plea so tainted and corrupt,
But being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil. In religion
What damned error but some sober brow
will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grosnes with fair ornament:
There is no voice so simple, but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts;
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false
As stayers of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
who inward searched, have lyuers white as milk,
And these assume but valors excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see it is purchased by the weight,
which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
which makes such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairenes, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The scull that bred them in the Sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea: the beauteous scarf
vailing an Indian beauty; In a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore then thou ga^udy gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee thou pale and common drudge
tweene man and man: but thou, thou meager lead
which rather threatenst then do promise ought,
thy palenes moves me more then eloquence,
and here choose I, joy be the consequence.

Por. How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash embraced despair*
And shyddring fear, and greene-eyed jealousy.
O love be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excosse,
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less
for fear I surfeit.

Bas. What find I here?
Fair Portias counterfeit. What demi God
has come so near creation? move these eyes?
Or whither riding on the balls of mine
seem they in motion? Here are seuerd lips
parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
should sunder such sweet friends: here in her hairs
the Paynter plays the Spyder, and has wouen
a golden mesh tyntrap the hearts of men
faster then gnats in cobwebs, but her eyes
how could he see to do them? having made one,
me thinks it should have power to steal both his
and leave it self unfurnished: Yet look how far
the substance of my praise does wrong this shadow
in vnderprysing it, so far this shadow
does limpe behind the substance. Heeres the scroule,
the continent and summarie of my fortune.
You that choose not by the view
Chance as fair, and choose as true;
Since this fortune falls to you,
Be content, and seek no new.
If you be well pleased with this,
and hold your fortune for your bliss,
Turn you where your Lady is,
And claims her with a loving kis.
A gentle scroule: Fair Lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give, and to receive,
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he has done well in peoples eyes:
Hearing applause and universal shoute,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
whether those peales of praise be his or no,
So thrice fair Lady stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmd, signd, ratified by you.

Por. You see me Lord Bassamo where I stand,
such as I am; though for my self alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
to wish my self much better, yet for you,
I would be trebled twenty times my self,
a thousand times more fair, ten, thousand times
more rich, that only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends
exceed account: but the full sum of me
is sum of something: which to term in gross,
is an vnlessond girl, vnschoold, vnpractized,
happy in this, she is not yet so old
but she may learn: happier then this,
she is not bred so dull but she can learn;
happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
commits it self to yours to be directed,
as from her Lord, her governor, her King.
My self, and what is mine, to you and yours
is now converted. But now I was the Lord
of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen ore my self: and even now, but now,
this house, these servants, and this same my self
are yours, my Lords, I give them with this ring,
which when you part from, loose, or give away,
let it presage the ruin of your love,
and be my vantage to exclaim on you.

Bass. Maddam, you have beteft me of all words,
only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
and there is such confusion in my powers,
as after some oration fairly spoke
by a beloved Prince, there does appear
among the buzzing pleased multitude.
Where every something being blent together,
turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
expressed, and not expressed: but when this ring
parts from this finger, then parts life from hence,
o then be bold to say Bassanios dead.

Ner. My Lord and Lady, it is now our time
that have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
to cry good joy, good joy my Lord and Lady.

Gra. My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle Lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish:
for I am sure you can wish none from me:
and when your honors mean to solemnize
the bargain of your faith: I do beseech you
even at that time I may be married to.

Bass. With all my heart, so thou can get a wife.

Gra. I thank your Lordship, you have got m^
My eyes my Lord can look as swift as yours:
you saw the mistres, I beheld the maid:
You loved, I loved for intermission,
No more pertaines to me my lord then you;
your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
and so did mine to as the matter falls:
for wooing here until I swet again,
and swearing till my very rough was dry
with oaths of love, at last, if promise last
I got a promise of this fair one here
to have her love: provided that your fortune
atchiu'd her mistres.

Por. Is this true Nerrissa?

Ner. Maddam it is, so you stand pleased withal.

Bass. And do you Gratiano mean good faith?

Gra. Yes faith my Lord.

Bass. Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.

Gra. Well play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.

Ner. What and stake down?

Gra. No, we shall nere win at that sport and stake down.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
what, and my old Venecian friend Salerio?

Enter Lorenzo, Iessica, and Salerio a messenger from Venice. Bassa. Lorenzo
and Salerio, welcome hither,
if that the youth of my new intrest here
have power to bid you welcome: by your leave
I bid my very friends and countrymen
sweet Portia welcome.

Por. So do I my Lord, they are entirely welcome.

Lor. I thank your honor, for my part my Lord
my purpose was not to have seen you here,
but meeting with Salerio by the way
he did entreat me past all saying nay
to come with him along.

Sal. I did my Lord,
and I have reason for it, Signior Anthonio
commends him to you.

Bassa. Ere I open his Letter
I pray you tell me how my good friend does.

Sal. Not sick my Lord, unless it be in mind,
nor well, unless in mind: his letter there
will show you his estate.

open the letter. Gra. Nerrissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.
Your hand Salerio, what is the news from Venice?
how does that royal Merchant good Anthonio?
I know he will be glad of our success,
we are the Iasons, we have wone the fleece.

Sal. I would you had won the fleece that he has lost.

Por. There are some shroud contents in yond same paper
that steals the color from Bassanios cheek,
some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
could turn so much the constitution
of any constant man: what worse and worse?
With leave Bassanio I am half your self,
and I must freely have the half of any thing
that this same paper brings you.

Bass. O sweet Portia,
here are a few of the vnpleasant'st words
that ever blotted paper. Gentle Lady
when I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
ran in my veins, I was a gentleman,
and then I told you true: and yet dear Lady
rating my self at nothing, you shall see
how much I was a Braggart, when I told you
my state was nothing, I should then have told you
that I was worse then nothing; for indeed
I have engaged my self to a dear friend,
engaged my friend to his mere enemy
to feed my means. Here is a letter Lady,
the paper as the body of my friend,
and every word in it a gaping wound
issuing life blood. But is it true Salerio
has all his ventures faild, what not one hit,
from Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
from Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
and not one vessel escape the dreadful touch
of Merchant-marring rocks?

Sal. Not one my Lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
the present money to discharge the Jew,
he would not take it: never did I know
a creature that did bear the shape of man
so keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plyes the Duke at morning and at night,
and does impeach the freedom of the state
if they deny him justice. Twenty Merchants,
the Duke himself, and the Magnificoes
of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
but none can drive him from the envious plea
of forfaiture, of justice, and his bond.

Jessi. When I was with him, I have heard him swear
to Tuball and to Chus, his countrymen,
that he would rather have Anthonios flesh
then twenty times the value of the sum
that he did owe him: and I know my lord,
if law, authority, and power deny not,
it will go hard with poor Anthonio.

Por. Is it your decre friend that is thus in trouble?

Bass. The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
the best conditiond and unwearied spirit
in doing courtesies: and one in whom
the ancient Roman honor more appears
then any that draws breath in Italy.

Por. What sum owes he the Jew?

Bass. For me three thousand ducats.

Por. What no more, pay him six thousand, and deface the bond:
double six thousand and then treble that,
before a friend of this description
shall lose a hair through Bassanios fault.
First go with me to Church, and call me wife,
and then away to Venice to your friend:
for never shall you lie by Portias side
with an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
to pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along,
my maid Nerrissa, and my self mean time
will live as maids and widows; come away,
for you shall hence upon your wedding day:
bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer,
since you are dear bought, I will love you decre.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my Creditors grow cruel, my
estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfaite, and since in paying it, it
is impossible I should live, all debts are cleerd between you and I if I might
but see you at my death: notwithstanding, use your pleasure, if your love do
not persuade you to come, let not my letter.


Por. O love! dispatch all business and be gone.

Bass. Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make have; but till I come again,
no bed shall ere be guilty of my stay,
nor rest be interposer twixt us twain.

Exeunt. Enter the Jew, and Salerio, and Anthonio, and the Iaylor. Jew. Iaylor,
look to him, tell not me of mercy,
this is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Iaylor, look to him.

Ant. Hear me yet good Shylock.

Jew. I Will have my bond, speak not against my bond,
I have sworn an oath, that I will have my bond:
thou call'dst me dog before thou had a cause,
but since I am a dog, beware my phanges,
the Duke shall grant me justice, I do wonder
thou naughty Iaylor that thou art so fond
to come abroad with him at his request.

An. I pray thee hear me speak.

Jew. I Will have my bond. I will not hear thee speak,
I Will have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I Will not be made a soft and dull eyde fool,
to shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
to christian intercessers: follow not,
I Will have no speaking, I will have my bond.

Exit Jew. Sol. It is the most impenitrable curre
that ever kept with men.

An. Let him alone,
I Will follow him no more with bootlesse prayers.
he seeks my life, his reason well I know;
I often deliuerd from his forfeytures
many that have at times made moan to me,
therefore he hates me.

Sal. I am sure the Duke will never grant
this forfaiture to hold.

An. The Duke cannot deny the course of law:
for the commodity that strangers have
with us in Venice, if it be denied,
will much impeach the justice of the state,
since that the trade and profit of the city
consists of all Nations. Therefore go,
these griefs and losses have so bated me
that I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
to morrow, to my bloody Creditor.
Well Iaylor on, pray God Bassanio come
to see me pay his debt, and then I care not.

Exeunt. Enter Portia, Nerrissa, Lorenzo, Iessica, and a man of Portias. Lor.
Maddam, although I speak it in your presence,
you have a noble and a true conceit
of god-like amity, which appears most strongly
in bearing thus the absence of your Lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
how true a gentleman you send relief,
how decre a lover of my Lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
then customarie bounty can enforce you.

Por. I never did repent for doing good,
nor shall not now: for in companions
that do converse and wast the time together,
whose souls do bear an egall yoke of love,
there must be needs a like proportion
of lyniaments, of manners, and of spirit;
which makes me think that this Anthonio
being the bosom lover of my Lord,
must needs be like my Lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
in purchasing the semblance of my soul;
From out the state of hellish cruelty,
This comes too near the praising of my self,
Therefore no more of it: here other things
Lorenso I commit into your hands,
The husbandry and manage of my house,
Until my Lords return: for mine own part
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerrissa here,
Until her husband and my Lords return,
There is a Monastry two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
not to deny this imposition,
the which my love and some necessity
now lays upon you.

Lorens. Madame, with all my heart,
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

Por. My people do already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
in place of Lord Bassanio and my self.
So far you well till we shall meet again.

Lor. Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you.

Iessi. I wish your Ladyship all hearts content.

Por. I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
to wish it back on you: far you well Jessica.
Exeunt. Now Balthaser, as I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
and use thou all th'indeuour of a man,
In speed to Mantua see thou render this
into my cousin hands Doctor Belario,
And look what notes and garments he does give thee,
bring them I pray thee with imagined speed
unto the Tranect, to the common Ferrie
which trades to Venice; vvast no time in words
but get thee gone, I shall be there before thee.

Baltha. Madam, I go with all convenient speed.

Portia Come on Nerrissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of; we will see our husbands
before they think of us?

Nerrissa. Shall they see us?

Portia. They shall Nerrissa: but in such a habit,
that they shall think we are accomplished
with that we lack; I Will hold thee any wager
when we are both accoutered like young men,
i will prove the prettier fellow of the two,
and wear my dagger with the brauer grace,
and speak between the change of man and boy,
vvi'h a reed voice, and turn two minsing steps
into a manly stride; and speak of frayes
like a fine bragging youth: and tell quaint lies
how honorable Ladies sought my love,
which I denying, they fell sick and dyed.
I could not do withal: then i will repent,
and wish for all that, that I had not killd them;
And twenty of these punie lies i will tell,
that men shall swear I have discontinued school
above a twelue-moneth: I have within my mind
a thousand raw tricks of these bragging lacks,
which I will practice.

Nerriss. Why, shall we turn to men?

Portia. Fie, what a question's that,
if thou were nere a lewd interpreter:
But come, i will tell thee all my my whole device
when I am in my coach, which stays for us
at the Park gate; and therefore have away,
for we must measure twenty miles to day

Exeunt. Enter Clown and Jessica. Clown. Yes truly, for look you, the sins
of the Father are to be laid upon the children, therefore I promise you, I
fear you, I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of
the matter: therefore be a good chere, for truly I think you are damnd, there
is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of
bastard hope neither.


Iessica. And what hope is that I pray thee?


Clown. Marry you may partly hope that your Father got you not, that you are
not the Jews daughter.


Jessica. That were a kind of bastard hope in deed, so the sins of my mother
should be visited upon me.


Clown. Truly then I fear you are damnd both by father and mother: thus when
I shun Scilla your father, I fall into Caribdis your mother; well, you are gone
both ways.


Iessica. I shall be saved by my husband, he has made me a Christian?


Clown. Truly the more to blame he, we were Christians enough before, in as many
as could well live one by another: this making of Christians will raise the
price of Hogs, if we grow all to be pork eaters, we shall not shortly have a
rasher on the coals for money.


Enter Lorenzo. Iessi. I Will tell my husband Launcelet what you say, here he come?


Loren. I shall grow iealious of you shortly Launcelet, if you thus get my wife
into corners?


Jessica. Nay, you need not fear us Lorenzo, Launcelet and I are out, he
tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jews
daughter: and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in
converting Jews to Christians, you raise the price of porke.


Loren. I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the
getting up of the Negroes belly: the Moore is with child by you Launcelet?


Clown. It is much that the Moore should be more then reason: but if she be
less then an honest woman, she is indeed more then I took her for.


Loren. How every fool can play upon the word, I think the best grace of wit
will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only
but Parrats: go in sir, bid them prepare for dinner?


Clown. That is done sir, they have all stomachs?


Loren. Goodly Lord what a wit snapper are you, than bid them prepare dinner?

to offices of tender courtesy:
We all expect a gentle answer Jew?

Jew. I have possessed your grace of what I purpose,
and by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
to have the due and forfet of my bond,
if you deny it, let the danger light
upon your charter and your Cities freedom?
You Will ask me why I rather choose to have
a weight of carrion flesh, then to receive
three thousand ducats: I Will not answer that?
But say it is my humor, is it aunswerd?
What if my house be troubled with a Rat,
and I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
to have it baind? what, are you aunswerd yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pigge?
Some that are mad if they behold a Cat?
And others when the bagpipe sings ith nose,
cannot contain their urine for affection.
Masters of passion swayes it to the mood
of what it likes or loathes, now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
why he cannot abide a gaping pigge?
why he a harmless necessary Cat?
why he a woollen bagpipe: but of force
must yield to such in euitable shame,
as to offend himself being offended:
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
more then a lodgd hate, and a certain loathing
I bear Anthonio, that I follow thus
a loosing suit against him? are you answered?

Bass. This is no answer thou unfeeling man,
to excuse the current of thy cruelty?

Jew. I am not bound to please thee with my answers?

Bass. Do all men kill the things they do not love?

Jew. Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

Bass. Every offense is not a hate at first?

Jew. What would thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

Anth. I pray you think you question with the Jew,
you may as well go stand upon the Beach
and bid the maine flood bate his usual height,
well use question with the Woolfe,
the Ewe bleake for the Lamb:
You may as well forbid the mountain of Pines
to wag their high tops, and to make no noise
when they are fretten with the gusts of heaven:
You may as well do any thing most hard
as seek to soften that then which what is harder:
his Jewish heart? therefore I do beseech you
make no more offers, use no farther means,
but will all brief and plain conueniencie
let me have judgment, and the Jew his will?

Bass. For thy three thousand ducats here is six?

Jew. If every ducat in six thousand ducats
were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond?

Duk. How shall thou hope for mercy rendering none?

Jewe. What judgment shall I dread doing no wrong?
you have among you many a purchased slave,
which like your Asses, and your Dogs and Mules
you use in abject and in slavish parts,
because you bought them, shall I say to you,
let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
why sweat they under burdens, let their beds
be made as soft as yours, and let their pallats
be seasond with such viands, you will answer
the slaves are ours, so do I answer you:
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
is dearly bought, as mine and I will have it:
if you deny me, fie upon your Law,
there is no force in the decrees of Venice:
I stand for judgment, answer, shall I have it?

Duke. Upon my power I may dismiss this Court,
unless Bellario a learned Doctor,
whom I have sent for to determine this
Come here to day?

Salerio. My Lord, here stays without
a messenger with letters from the Doctor,
new come from Padua?

Duke. Bring us the letters? call the Messenger?

Bass. Good cheer Anthonio? what man, courage yet:
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all,
ere thou shall loose for me one drop of blood?

Antho. I am a tainted vveather of the flock,
meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
drops earliest to the ground, and so let me;
You cannot better be imployd Bassanio,
then to live still and write mine Epitaph?

Enter Nerrissa. Duke. Came you from Padua from Bellario?

Ner. From both? my L. Bellario greetes your grace?

Bass. Why do thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

Jew. To cut the forfaiture from that bankrout there?

Gratia. Not on thy soul: but on thy soul harsh Jew
thou makst thy knife keen: but no mettell can,
no, not the hangmans axe bear half the keenenesse
of thy sharp envy: can no prayers pearce thee?

Jew. No, none that thou have wit enough to make*

Gratia. O be thou damnd, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accusd;
Thou almost make me waver in my faith,
to hold opinion with Pythagoras,
that souls of Animalls infuse themselves
into the trunks of men: Thy currish spirit
gouernd a Woolfe, who hanged for human slaughter
even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
and whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam;
infusd it self in thee: for thy desires
are vvoluish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.

Jew. Till thou can rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offendst thy lungs to speak so loud:
Repair thy wit good youth, or it will fall
to curelesse ruin. I stand here for law.

Duke. This letter from Bellario does commend
a young and learned Doctor to our Court:
Where is he?

Ner. He attends here hard by
to know your answer whether you will admit him.

Duke. With all my heart: some three or four of you
go give him courteous conduct to this place,
mean time the Court shall hear Bellarios letter.
Your Grace shall understand, that at the receipt of your letter I am very
sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in loving visitation was
with me a young Doctor of Rome, his name is Balthazer: I acquainted him with
the cause in controversy between the Jew and Anthonio the Merchant, we turned
ore many books together, he is furnished with my opinion, which bettered
with his own learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend, comes
with him at my importunity, to fill up your graces request in my stead. I
beseech you let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a
reverend estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old a head: I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his
commendation.


Enter Portia for Balthazer. Duke. You hear the learnd Bellario what he writes,
and here I take it is the doctor come.
Give me your hand, come you from old Bellario?

Portia. I did my Lord.

Duke. You are welcome, take your place:
are you acquainted with the difference
that holds this present question in the Court.

Por. I am informed thoroughly of the cause,
which is the Merchant here? and which the Jew?

Duke. Anthonio and old Shylocke, both stand forth.

Por. Is your name Shylocke?

Jew. Shylocke is my name.

Por. Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
yet in such rule, that the Venetian law
cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
You stand within his danger, do you not.

An. I, so he says.

Por. Do you confess the bond?

An. I do.

Por. Then must the Jew be merciful.

Shy. On what compulsion must I, tell me that.

Por. The quality of mercy is not straind,
it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
upon the place beneath: it is twice blessed,
it blesses him that gives, and him that takes,
it is mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes
the throned Monarch better then his crown.
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
the attribut to awe and majesty,
wherein does sit the dread and fear of Kings:
but mercy is above this sceptred sway,
it is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
it is an attribut to God himself;
and earthly power does then show likest gods
when mercy seasons justice: therefore Jew,
though justice be thy plea, consider this,
that in the course of justice, none of us
should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
and that same prayer, does teach us all to render
the deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
to mittigate the justice of thy plea,
which if thou follow, this strict Court of Venice
must needs give sentence against the Merchant there.

Shy. My deeds upon my head, I crave the law,
the penalty and forfaite of my bond.

Por. Is he not able to discharge the money?

Bass. Yes, here I tender it for him in the Court,
yea, twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times ore
on forfait of my hands, my head, my heart,
if this will not suffice, it must appear
that malice bears down truth. And I beseech you
wrest once the law to your authority,
to do a great right, do a little wrong,
and curb this cruel devil of his will.

Por. It must not be, there is no power in Venice
can altar a decree established:
twill be recorded for a precedent,
and many an error by the same example
will rush into the state, it cannot be.

Shy. A Daniell come to judgment: yea a Daniell.
O wise young Judge how I do honor thee.

Por. I pray you let me look upon the bond.

Shy. Here it is most reverend doctor, here it is.

Por. Shylocke there is thrice thy money offered thee.

Shy. An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven,
shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
Not not for Venice.

Por. Why this bond is forfait,
and lawfully by this the Jew may claim
a pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
nearest the Merchants heart: be merciful,
take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.

Shy. When it is paid, according to the tenure.
It does appear you are a worthy judge,
you know the law, your exposition
has been most sound: I charge you by the law,
whereof you are a well deserving pillar,
proceed to judgment: by my soul I swear,
there is no power in the tongue of man
to alter me, I stay here on my Bond,

An. Most hartelie I do beseech the Court
to give the judgment.

Por. Why than thus it is,
you must prepare your bosom* for his knife.

Shy. O noble Judge, o excellent young man.

Por. For the intent and purpose of the law
has full relation to the penalty,
which here appears due upon the bond.

Jew. It Is very true: o wise and upright Judge,
how much more elder art thou then thy looks.

Por. Therefore lay bare your bosom.

Jew. I, his breast,
so says the bond, does it not noble Judge?
Nearest his heart, those are the very words.

Por. It is so, are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

Jew. I have them ready.

Por. Have by some Surgion Shylocke on your charge,
to stop his wounds, least he do bleed to death.

Jew. Is it so nominated in the bond?

Por. It is not so expressed, but what of that?
Twere good you do so much for charity.

Jew. I cannot find it, it is not in the bond.

Por. You Merchant, have you any thing to say?

Ant. But little; I am armd and well prepared,
give me your hand Bassanio, far you well,
grieve not that I am fallen to this for you:
for herein Fortune shows her self more kind
then is her custom: it is still her use
to let the wretched man out-liue his wealth,
to view with hollow eye and wrinckled brow
an age of poverty: from which lingering penance
of such misery does she cut me of.
Commend me to your honorable wife,
tell her the process of Anthonios end,
say how I loved you, speak me fair in death:
and when the tale is told, bid her be judge
whether Bassanio had not once a love:
Repent but you that you shall loose your friend
and he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I Will pay it instantly with all my heart.

Bass. Anthonio, I am married to a wife
which is as dear to me as life it self,
but life it self, my wife, and all the world,
are not with m^^ ^steemd above thy life.
I would loose al^ I sacrifize them all
here to this devil, to deliver you.

Por. Your wife would give you little thanks for that
if she were by to hear you make the offer.

Gra. I have a wife who I protest I love,
I would she were in heaven, so she could
entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

Ner. It Is well you offer it behind her back,
the wish would make else an unquiet house.

Jew. These be the christian husbands, I have a daughter
would any of the stock of Barrabas
had been her husband, rather then a Christian.
We trifle time, I pray thee pursue sentence.

Por. A pound of that same Merchants flesh is thine,
the Court awards it, and the law does give it.

Jew. Most rightful Judge.

Por. And you must cut this flesh from off his breast,
the law alowes it, and the court awards it.

Jew. Most learned Judge, a sentence, come prepare.

Por. Tarry a little, there is some thing else,
this bond does give thee here no jot of blood,
the words expressly are a pound of flesh:
take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
but in the cutting it, if thou do shed
one drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
are by the laws of Venice confiscate
unto the state of Venice.

Gra. O upright Judge,
Mark Jew, o learned Judge.

Shy. Is that the law?

Por. Thy self shall see the Act:
for as thou vrgest justice, be assurd
thou shall have justice more then thou desirst.

Gra. O learned judge, mark Jew, a learned judge.

Jew. I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice
and let the Christian go.

Bass. Here is the money.

Por. Soft, the Jew shall have all justice, soft no have,
he shall have nothing but the penalty.

Gra. O Jew, an upright Judge, a learned Judge.

Por. Therefore prepare thee to cut of the flesh,
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
but just a pound of flesh: if thou take more
or less then a just pound, be it but so much
as makes it light of heavy in the substance,
or the division of the twentieth part
of one poor scruple, nay if the scale do turn
but in the estimation of a hair,
thou dyest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

Gra. A second Daniell, a Daniell Jew,
now infidel I have you on the hip.

Por. Why does the Jew pause, take thy forfaiture.

Shy. Give me my principal, and let me go.

Bass. I have it ready for thee, here it is.

Por. He has refusd it in the open Court,
he shall have merely justice and his bond.

Gra. A Daniell still say I, a second Daniell,
I thank thee Jew for teaching me that word.

Shy. Shall I not have barely my principal?

Por. Thou shall have nothing but the forfaiture
to be so taken at thy perrill Jew.

Shy. Why then the devil give him good of it:
I Will stay no longer question.

Por. Tarry Jew,
the law has yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
if it be proved against an alien,
that by direct, or indirect attempts
he seek the life of any Citizen,
the party against the which he does contriue,
shall seize one half his goods, the other half
comes to the privy cofler of the State,
and the offenders life lies in the mercy
of the Duke only, against all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou standst:
for it appears by manifest proceeding,
that indirectly, and directly to
thou have contrived against the very life
of the defendant: and thou have incurd
the danger formorly by me rehearst.
Down therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

Gra. Beg that thou may have leave to hang thy self,
and yet thy wealth being forfait to the state,
thou have not left the value of a cord,
therefore thou must be hanged at the states charge.

Duke. That thou shall see the difference of our spirit
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it:
for half thy wealth, it is Anthonios,
the other half comes to the general state,
which humblenes may drive unto a fine.

Por. I for the state, not for Anthonio.

Shy. Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that,
you take my house, when you do take the prop
that does sustain my house: you take my life
when you do take the means whereby I live.

Por. What mercy can you render him Anthonio?

Gra. A halter gratis, nothing else for Godsake.

Anth. So please my Lord the Duke, and all the Court
to quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content: so he will let me have
the other half in use, to render it
upon his death unto the Gentleman
that lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favor
he presently become a Christian:
the other, that he do record a gift
here in the Court of all he dies possessed
unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

Duke. He shall do this, or else I do recant
the pardon that I late pronounced here.

Por. Art thou contented Jew? what do thou say?

Shy. I am content.

Por. Clarke, draw a deed of gift.

Shy. I pray you give me leave to go from hence,
I am not well, send the deed after me,
and I will sign it.

Duke. Get thee gone, but do it.

Shy. In christning shall thou have two Godfathers,
had I been judge, thou should have had ten more,
to bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.

Exit. Duke. Sir I entreat you home with me to dinner.

Por. I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
and it is meet I presently set forth.

Duke. I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
Anthonio, gratify this gentleman,
for in my mind you are much bound to him.

Exit Duke and his train. Bass. Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
have by your wisdom been this day aquitted
of grievous penalties, in Jew whereof,
three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
we freely cope your curtious pains withal.

An. And stand indebted over and above
in love and service to you euer-more.

Por. He is well paid that is well satisfied,
and I delivering you, am satisfied,
and therein do account my self well paid,
my mind was never yet more mercinarie.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

Bass. Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further,
take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
not as fee: grant me two things I pray you,
not to deny me, and to pardon me.

Por. You press me far, and therefore I will yield,
give me your gloves, I Will wear them for your sake,
and for your love i will take this ring from you,
do not draw back your hand, i will take no more,
and you in love shall not deny me this?

Bass. This ring good sir, alas it is a trifle,
I will not shame my self to give you this?

Por. I will have nothing else but only this,
and now me thinks I have a mind to it?

Bass. There Is more depends on this then on the value,
the dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
and find it out by proclamation,
only for this I pray you pardon me?

Por. I see sir you are liberal in offers,
you taught me first to beg, and now me thinks
you teach me how a beggar should be aunswerd.

Bass. Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
and when she put it on, she made me vow
that I should neither sell, nor give, nor loose it.

Por. That scuse serves many men to save their gifts,
and if your wife be not a mad woman,
and know how well I have deserved this ring,
she would not hold out enemy for ever
for giving it to me: well, peace be with you.

Exeunt. Anth. My L. Bassanio, let him have the ring,
let his deseruings and my love withal
be valued against your wives commandment.

Bass. Go Gratiano, run and ouer-take him,
give him the ring, and bring him if thou can
unto Anthonios house, away, make have.
Exit Gratiano. Come, you and I will thither presently,
and in the morning early will we both
fly toward Belmont, come Anthonio.

Exeunt. Enter Nerrissa. Por. Enquire the Jews house out, give him this deed,
and let him sign it, we will away to night,
and be a day before our husbands home:
this deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo?
Enter Gratiano.
Grati. Fair sir, you are well ore-tane:
My L. Bassanio upon more advice,
has sent you here this ring, and does entreat
your company at dinner.

Por. That cannot be;
his ring I do accept most thankfully,
and so I pray you tell him: furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylockes house.

Gra. That will I do.

Ner. Sir, I would speak with you:
I Will see if I can get my husbands ring
which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

Por. Thou may I warrant, we shall have old swearing
that they did give the rings away to men;
but well outface them, and out-sweare them to:
away, make have, thou know where I will tarry.

Ner. Come good sir, will you show me to this house.

Enter Lorenzo and Iessica. Lor. The moon shines bright. In such a night as
this,
when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
and they did make no noise, in such a night
Troylus me thinks mounted the Trojan walls,
and sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
where Cressed lay that night.

Jessi. In such a night
did Thisbie fearfully ore-trip the dew,
and saw the Lions shadow ere him self,
and ran dismayed away.

Loren. In such a night
stood Dido with a willow in her hand
upon the wild sea banks, and waft her Love
to come again to Carthage.

Iessi. In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
that did renew old Eson.

Loren. In such a night
did Iessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
and with an unthrift love did run from Venice,
as far as Belmont.

Iessi. In such a night
did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
and nere a true one.

Loren. In such a night
did pretty Iessica (like a little shrow)
slander her Love, and he forgave it her.

Iessi. I would out-night you did no body come:
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

Enter a Messenger. Loren. Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

Messen. A friend?

Loren. A friend, what friend, your name I pray you friend?

Mess. Stephano is my name, and I bring word
my Mistres will before the break of day
be here at Belmont, she does stray about
by holy crosses where she kneeles and prays
for happy wedlock hours.

Loren. Who comes with her?

Mess. None but a holy Hermit and her maid:
I pray you is my Master yet returned?

Loren. He is not, nor we have not heard from him,
But go we in I pray thee Iessica,
and ceremoniously let us prepare
some welcome for the Mistres of the house.

Enter Clown. Clown. Sola, sola: woe ha, ho sola, sola.

Loren. Who calls?

Clo. Sola, did you see M. Lorenzo, and M. Lorenzo sola, sola.

Loren. Leave hollowing man, here.

Clown. Sola, where, where?

Loren. Here?

Clow. Tell him there is a Post come from my Master, with his horn full of
good news, my Master will be here ere morning sweet soul.


Loren. Let Us in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter: why should we go in.
My friend Stephen, signify pray you
within the house, your mistres is at hand,
and bring your music forth into the air.
How sweet the moone-light sleeps upon this bank,
here will we sit, and let the sounds of music
creep in our ears soft stilnes, and the night
become the tutches of sweet harmony:
sit Iessica, look how the floor of heaven
is thick inlayed with pattens of bright gold,
there is not the smallest orb which thou beholdst
but in his motion like an Angel sings,
still quiring to the young eyde Cherubins;
such harmony is in immortal souls,
but whilst this muddy vesture of decay
does grossly close it in, we cannot hear it:
Come hoe, and wake Diana with a himne,
with sweetest tutches pearce your mistres ear,
and draw her home with music.

play Music. Iessi. I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

Loren. The reason is* your spirits are attentive:
for do but note a wild and wanton heard
or race of youthful and unhandled colts
fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neghing loud,
which is the hot condition of their blood,
if they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
or any air of music touch their ears,
you shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze,
by the sweet power of music: therefore the Poet
did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods.
Since naught so stockish hard and full of rage,
but music for the time does change his nature,
the man that has no music in himself,
nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils,
the motions of his spirit are dull as night,
and his affections dark as Terebus:
let no such man be trusted: mark the music.

Enter Portia and Nerrissa. Por. That light we see is burning in my hall:
how far that little candell throws his beams,
so shines a good deed in a naughty world.

Ner. When the moon shone we did not see the candle?

Por. So does the greater glory dim the less,
a substitute shines brightly as a King
until a King be by, and then his state
empties it self, as does an inland brook
into the maine of waters: music hark.

Ner. It is your music Madame of the house?

Por. Nothing is good I see without respect,
me thinks it sounds much sweeter then by day?

Ner. Silence bestows that virtue on it Madam?

Por. The Crow does sing as sweetly as the Lark
when neither is attended: and I think
the Nightingale if she should sing by day
when every Goose is cackling, would be thought
no better a Musition then the Run?
How many things by season, seasond are
to their right praise, and true perfection:
Peace, how the moon sleeps with Endimion,
and would not be awaked.

Loren. That is the voice,
or I am much deceau'd of Portia.

Por. He knows me as the blind man knows the Cuckoe
by the bad voice?

Loren. Dear Lady welcome home?

Por. We have bin praying for our husbands welfare,
which speed we hope the better for our words:
are they returned?

Loren. Madam, they are not yet:
but there is come a Messenger before
to signify their coming?

Por. Go in Nerrissa.
Give order to my servants, that they take
no note at all of our being absent hence,
nor you Lorenzo, Jessica nor you.

Loren. Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet,
we are no tell-tales Madame, fear you not.

Por. This night me thinks is but the day light sick,
it looks a little paler, it is a day,
such as the day is when the sun is hid.

Enter Bassanio, Anthonio, Gratiano, and their followers. Bass. We should hold
day with the Antipodes,
if you would walk in absence of the sun.

Por. Let me give light, but let me not be light,
for a light wife does make a heavy husband,
and never be Bassanio so for me,
but God sort all: you are welcome home my Lord.

Bass. I thank you Madam, give welcome to my friend,
this is the man, this is Anthonio,
to whom I am so infinitely bound.

Por. You should in all sense be much bound to him,
for as I hear he was much bound for you.

Anth. No more then I am well acquitted of.

Por. Sir, you are very welcome to our house:
it must appear in other ways then words,
therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

Gra. By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong,
infaith I gave it to the Judges Clarke,
would he were gelt that had it for my part,
since you do take it Love so much at heart.

Por. A quarrel hoe already, what is the matter?

Grati. About a hoope of gold, a paltry ring
that she did give me, whose posie was
for all the world like Cutlers poetry
upon a knife, Love me, and leave me not.

Ner. What talk you of the posie or the value:
You swore to me when I did give you,
that you would wear it till your hour of death,
and that it should lie with you in your grave,
though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
you should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a Judges Clarke: no Gods my Judge
the Clarke will nere wear hair ons face that had it.

Gra. He will, and if he live to be a man.

Nerrissa. I, if a woman live to be a man.

Gra. Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
a kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
no higher then thy self, the Judges Clarke,
a prating boy that begd it as a fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

Por. You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
to part so slightly with your wives first gift,
a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
and so riueted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my Love a ring, and made him swear
never to part with it, and here he stands:
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it,
nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
that the world masters. Now in faith Gratiano
you give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
and twere to me I should be mad at it.

Bass. Why I were best to cut my left hand off,
and swear I lost the ring defending it.

Gra. My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
unto the Judge that begd it, and indeed
deserved it to? and then the boy his Clarke
that took some pains in writing, he begd mine,
and neither man nor master would take ought
but the two rings.

Por. What ring gave you my Lord?
Not that I hope which you received of me.

Bass. If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it: but you see my finger
has not the ring upon it, it is gone.

Por. Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven I will nere come in your bed
until I see the ring?

Ner. Nor I in yours
till I again see mine?

Bass. Sweet Portia,
if you did know to whom I gave the ring,
if you did know for whom I gave the ring,
and would conceive for what I gave the ring,
and how unwillingly I left the ring,
when naught would be accepted but the ring,
you would abate the strength of your displeasure?

Por. If you had known the virtue of the ring,
or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
or your own honor to contain the ring,
you would not then have parted with the ring:
what man is there so much unreasonable
if you had pleased to have defended it
with any terms of zeal: wanted the modesty
to urge the thing held as a ceremony:
Nerrissa teaches me what to believe,
i will die for it, but some woman had the ring?

Bass. No by my honor Madam, by my soul
no woman had it, but a civil Doctor,
which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
and begd the ring, the which I did deny him,
and sufferd him to go displeasd away,
even he that had held up the very life
of my dear friend. What should I say sweet Lady,
I was enforced to send it after him,
I was beset with shame and courtesy,
my honor would not let ingratitude
so much besmere it: pardon me good Lady,
for by these blessed candels of the night,
had you been there, I think you would have begd
the ring of me to give the worthy Doctor?

Por. Let not that Doctor ere come near my house
since he has got the jewel that I loved,
and that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
I Will not deny him any thing I have,
no, not my body, nor my husbands bed:
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argos,
if you do not, if I be left alone,
now by mine honor which is yet mine own.
i will have that Doctor for mine bedfellow.

Nerrissa. And I his Clark: therefore be well aduisd
how you do leave me to mine own protection.

Gra. Well do you so: let not me take him then,
for if I do, i will mar the young Clarks pen.

Anth. I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.

Por. Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding.

Bass. Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
and in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes
wherein I see my self.

Por. Mark you but that?
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself:
In each eye one, swear by your double self,
and there is an oath of credit.

Bass. Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

Anth. I once did lend my body for his wealth,
which but for him that had your husbands ring
had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
my soul upon the forfet, that your Lord
will never more break faith advisedly.

Por. Then you shall be his surety: give him this,
and bid him keep it better then the other.

Antho. Here Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

Bass. By heaven it is the same I gave the Doctor.

Por. I had it of him: pardon me Bassanio,
for by this ring the Doctor lay with me.

Nerrissa. And pardon me my gentle Gratiano,
for that same scrubbed boy the Doctors Clarke
in liew of this, last night did he with me.

Grati. Why this is like the mending of high ways
in Summer where the ways are fair enough?
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it.

Por. Speak not so grossly, you are all amazed;
Here is a letter, read it at your leisure,
It comes from Padua from Bellario,
there you shall find that Portia was the Doctor,
Nerrissa there her Clarke. Lorenzo here
shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
and even but now returned: I have not yet
enterd my house. Anthonio you are welcome,
and I have better news in store for you
than you exspect: unseal this letter soon,
there you shall find three of your Argosies
are richly come to harbor suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

Antho. I am dumb?

Bass. Were you the Doctor, and I knew you not?

Gra. Were you the Clark that is to make me cuckold.

Ner. I but the Clarke that never means to do it,
unless he live until he be a man.

Bass. (Sweet Doctor) you shall be my bedfellow,
when I am absent then lie with my wife.

An. (Sweet Lady) you have given me life and living;
for here I read for certain that my ships
are safely come to Rode.

Por. How now Lorenzo?
my Clarke has some good comforts to for you.

Ner I, and i will give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Iessica
from the rich Jew, a special deed of gift
after his death, of all he dies possessed of.

Loren. Fair Ladies, you drop Manna in the way
of starued people.

Por. It is almost morning,
and yet I am sure you are not satisfied
of these events at full. Let us go in,
and charge us there upon intergotories,
and we will answer all things faithfully.

Gra. Let it be so, the first intergory
that my Nerrissa shall be sworn on, is,
whether till the next night she had rather stay,
or go to bed now being two hours to day:
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
till I were couching with the Doctors Clarke.
Well, while I live, i will fear no other thing
so sore, as keeping safe Nerrissas ring.

Exeunt. FINIS.

