THE POOR MAN'S TEARS, Opened in a sermon, preched by Henry Smith.

Treating of Alms deeds, and releeuing the poor.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright 1592.

THE POOREmans tears.
MAT. 10. He that shall give to one of the least of these a cup of cold water
in my name: he shall not loose his reward.
THE argument I have to entreat off, is only of giving Alms to the poor;
and when, and in what sort we ought to relieve the pore Herein for your better
instruction, I will show what Alms is: how, and to whom Alms must be given,
and wherefore we are to give Alms. I know in these days, and in this iron
age, it is as hard a thing to persuade men to part with money, as to pull out
their eyes and cast them away, or to cut of their hands and give them away, or
to cut off their legs and throw them away: Nevertheless, I cannot but
wonder that men are so slow in giving of alms, and so hard hearted toward
the relief of the poor, when the promises of GOD warrant them not to loose
their reward. S. John says, 1. John 3.
he that has the substance of this world, and sees his brother want, how
can the love of God be in him? This is a question which can hardly be
answered of a great number: no it will not be considered of a number, nor
regarded of a number. And yet the Evangelist hereby lays open unto all
persons, that he which has wealth, seeing his brother in want, and will not
releue him, he loses the love of God; which love is so great as is the love of
a natural mother unto her own child: nay more then that, it is a love so
firmly settled, that it is impossible to be removed.

There are many rich persons, Luke 16.
that think skorne to relieve the pore, of whose hard dealing we have a
president in the sixteenth of Luke. The rich man in his life time would not
releue Lazarus, but despised him; yea he forgot God, and thought there was no
God (but his gold) that cold in justice punish him for despising the poor.
Lazarus died for want, and so did Dives for all his wealth; who soon after,
(being in hell) beheld Lazarus in heaven, triumphing in Abraham's bosom, while
he was tormented in hell fire. This fire burns, skaldeth, skortcheth, and
tormenteth; of which, when the rich man felt the smart, (though all too late)
he sorrowed and repented, and would feign have sent word thereof unto his
friends: but he could have no messenger for all his lordly livings nor no
releasement of his torments, for all his bags of gold. Now to whom would
he have sent word? Forsooth to a number of his friends, that indeed think there
is no God nor devil: no heaven nor hell, nor no torments in hell fire after
this life. But I would advise those of that opinion to do as Thomas Didimus
did by Christ's wounds, that ere he would believe, put in his hands and felt.
And therefore to all such I say, as will not believe it, let them go thither
and feel; then doubtless they will find it so, and say it is so. This example
of Dives may admonish such hard hearted persons to be mollified with the tears
of the poor: that they may, when Dives has dined, let Lazarus have the crumbs.

We read in Mathewe, Math. 25.
that when Christ comes to judgment, he will say to them on the left hand,
go from me ye cursed into helfire which was prepared from the beginning: by
which appears, that hell fire is not only hot, but it is everlasting hot,
and never has end: Let therefore hellfire, and the eternal torments thereof,
admonish you to be merciful to the poor. To this also may be added, what
he will say to the righteous, go you into everlasting joys which never
shall have end: When I came among you as a stranger you received me: when I
was naked you clothed me, and when I was hungry, you fed and refreshed me,
which proves that the kingdom of heaven belongs unto those that harbors
strangers, cloatheth the naked, feeds the hungry, comforts the sick, and
does perform such charitable acts of compassion: yet not as the papist does
to account it meritorious, but as a faithful christian to do it in faith and
true zeal of a christian life, for every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. It is not enough for us only to
bear fair leaves, but we must also bring forth good fruit: otherwise let us be
sure, our Savior Christ will forsake us.

The Prophet Esaias says; Esaias 58
if thou break thy bread unto the pore, and power forth thy heart unto them,
thy light shall rise in darkness, thy dimnes shall be as the moone-tide; and God
shall still guide thee: whereby apeareth that those deeds of charity are
commonly performed by the righteous, that still seek to enjoy the pleasures of
heaven, which (...) so far beyond the common immagination of men, that no
heart can think, no ear can hear, no tongue can speak, nor pen can write,
the unspeakable pleasures thereof.

Then if the joys of heaven be so great, (as doubtless they be) and that
through good life and good deeds, we are to inherit the kingdom of heaven,
we ought the more carefully to see to the continual relief of the poor, and
do as much as in us lies to provide for them, every one according to his
ability. Let me therefore admonish you in Gods name, to mollify your hearts
with the pitiful tears of the poor, that so you may give continual alms
to their relief, that when Dives has dined, Lazarus may have the crumbs.

Christ says, it is a deed more blessed to give them, then to take from them;
for the excellency of christians consists in leading a godly life and giving
of alm^^s: And the excellency of all things is showed in their giving. The
sun gives his light, the Moon her light, the Sarres their light, the
Clouds their water, the Trees their fruit, the earth her herbs, the herbs
their flowers, the flovvers their seeds, and the seeds their increase: yea,
beasts and birds fowls and fishes, give naturally in their kind, and are
more careful and loving one to an other then we, which made Job say, go to the
beasts of the field and they will teach thee. For man is most unnatural to
man, and so far digressing from nature in his kind, that let some ungodly
rich cormorants see a poor person beg: this is their present sentence of him:
whip the roags, to Briderwell with these roagues, it is pity these roagues be
suffered to live: then if they fall sick, let them fammish, starve, and die,
all is one to him; for of him they shall receive no comfort.

Augustus Caesar thought that day to be lost, wherein he did not benefit any
poor person, and with money relieve him from penury. And I know, some godly
men that take delight in releeuing the pore with their continual alms, not
supersticiously to be seen of men, but secretly to be seen of God. The Lord
increase the number of them, and make their example redownde to the relief of
thousands.

Alms is a charitable relief given by the godly to the sick, to the lame,
the blind, the impotent, the needy the hungry and poorest persons: even such
as ar daily vexed with continual want: to whom even of duty, and not of
compulsion, we ought to impart: some part of that which God has mercifully
bestowed upon us: For as we daily seek for benefits at gods hand, which he
does continually give us: so ought we (therewith to relieve the poor) since
God has so commanded us. The performance whereof, we ought not to drive off
from time to time, but to do it when they desire to have it done: for the true
obedience of god does forbid us to prolong or drive off the doing of good
things: as appears in Noah, who when he was commanded, did enter the Arc:
Abraham, when he was commanded, did forthwith offer up his son Isaake, and did
circu^sise his house upon the same day he was appointed. A learned writer
called Naziensin says of himself, that when in his youth he had once lost
the tenor of good life graie hears was got about his head, ere he recovered it
again: whereby I gather, that when we are young, if we harden our hearts
against the pore if we do not willingly impart our bread to them, but drive
their hungry stomachs stubbornly from our doors: that doubtless gray hears
will come upon our heads before we can find the right way to pity and
compassion.

O let us take heed that our hearts be not hardened against the poor, nor that
we give our alms to get glory of the world: but so let us give our alms,
that the one hand may not know what the other does; yea we ought to give it
with such equality that our poor neighbors may be relieved; to whom indeed
we ought to become contributors, as Job and Toby did. All people have not one
belly, for as one chimnie may be hot, so another may be cold: One pot moist
with lickor, when another may be dry; one purse empty, when another is full.
And one poor man's belly full when an others is empty. That is a good
commonwealth, that looks to every member in the commonwealth: And those
men worthy of riches, that looks daily to the feeding of their poor
neighbors. Let therefore the tears of the poor admonish you to charity, that
when Dives has dined, Lazarus may have the crumbs.

Now let us proceed and consider what we must give, and to whom we must give,
in the text we are willed to give though it be but a cup of cold water, or a
piece of bread: this contains matter both for the taker and the giver: Bread
will serve beggars, and they must be no choosers: yet bread will not serve some
beggars that boldly on Gads hill, Shooters hill, and such places take men's
horses by the heads, and bids them deliver their purses, for these fellows are
of the opinion of the Anabaptists, that every man's goods must be common to
them, or else they will force them to part it: but these are sawsie beggars,
and ought to have alms at Tiburne: as for other sort of beggars, and other
poor persons, they must be content to take up their cross, endeavor
themselves patiently to suffer their ordinary greeuances: and remember that
man's nature may be satisfied with a little.

As touching how much we shall give, we are taught that if we have much, we
should give accordingly: If we have but little, give what we can spare: S.
Luke councelleth us if we have two Coats, we must give one to him that has
not: and of meat likewise: but as touching this question, little need to be
spoken, when our own covetous hearts are ready enough to frame excuses.

Some will make a question of their alms and say they know not what the
party is that demands relief or beggeth alms of them: O says some I
suspect he is an idle person, dishonest, or perhaps an unthrift and therefore
refuses to give any relief at all. To this I answer they are needless
doubts, for we ought to relieve them if we know them not for such persons:
And let their bad deeds fall on their own necks, for if they perish for want,
we are in danger of Gods wrath for them: but to give unto such as we know of
lewd behavior, thereby to continue them in their wickedness, were very
offensive: we are not still tied to one place for giving our charity, but it
stretches far, for we are commanded not only to relieve our own countrymen,
but also strangers, and such as dwell in foreign nations.

Again, here the giver may learn to give freely, for the thing he gives is
but bread or water: Bread is the fruit of the earth, and for the earth gives
it us, we may the better give it again. But bread in this place signifies all
thing necessary: for the fare and cheer in old time was contained under the
title of bread, and all manner of drink under the title of water: but in this
as in all other things the simplicity of the old world is quite gone out,
and new and corrupt things are lately crept in. In the old time Jacob desired
he might have bread in his journey, but now the case is altered, for we must
have sundry dishes of contrary devises, framed for the taste of the mouth and
pleasantness of the stomach, which is used with great superfluity, and far
more cost then needs: better now to fill the belly then the eye, although to
content the common multitude: the eye is the only thing which must be pleased.
Yet when you are in the midst of all your iollitie and costly fare, let the
tears of the poor admonish you to relieve them, that when Dives has dined,
Lazarus may have the crummes.

The tears of men, women and children are grievous and pitiful: and tears
give cause of great compassion, especially the tears of such as therewith are
constrained to beg for their relief: But if the tears of the rich for the
loss of their goods, or the tears of parents for the death of their children,
or the tears of kind natured persons for the loss of friends or other wrongs
sustained, ought generally to be regarded and pitied; Then much more should
the tears of those breed great compassion in the hearts of christians, whom
beggary, want, and extremes of miserable hunger constrains to sheade tears
in most grievous and lamentabe sort. O what shall a man say unto those pitiful
faces, which are made moist through the extremes of hunger, wherein are most
bitter and sharp effects: (A thing above al extremes) to a hungry body.

Every bitter thing is sweet, and every foul thing seem clean, hunger made
the apostles glad to eat the ears of corn. David glad to eat the show bread.
Lazarus desirous to eat crummes, and Elias content with meal: In the
destruction of Jerusalem, it made the mother eat her own child, and in the
waylinges of Jeremy people eat their own ordure: It made people cry to
Pharao for bread: it made an asses head, and the dung of Pigions to be eaten
in Samaria, and others to swound and lie dead in the streets. The affliction of
hunger caused little tears, and brought all these things to pass. David
says that God numbered all his tears in a bottle David's tears were worthy to
be preserved: But if ever tears were worthy to be numbered; the tears that
are shed for famine howsoever men neglect to regard the^, they are
undoubtedly gathered together into Gods bottle, and thence they rain as waters
out of vialles in way of reuengement of those that take no compassion of such a
woeful spectacle.

Tears are the last thing that man woman or child can move by, and where
tears move not, nothing will move. I therefore exhort you by the lamentable
tears, which the poor do daily shed through hunger and extreme misery to
be good unto them, to be charitable and merciful unto them; and to relieve
those who^ you see with misery distressed.

The scripture says, give to every one that asks, God gave herbs and
other food unto every living thing, every commonwealth that lets any
member in it to perish for hunger is unnatural and an uncharitable
commonwealth. But men are now adays so full of doubts thorough a covetous
desire to themselves that they cannot abide to part with any thing to the
pore, notwithstanding that God has promised he will not forget the work and
love which you have showed in his name to the poor and distressed.

Some will say for their excuse, that they are ouercharged by giving to a number
of persons: and therefore, they cannot give to so many beggars: for by so
doing, he might sone become a beggar himself. David answers this objection
very well, and says thus; I never saw the just man forsaken, nor his seed beg
his bread: whereby he meant, that in all the time that he had lived, or that
any man living the years of David, shall skarslie see, that upon an upright
heart in giving a man, should be brought to beggerie.

The answer to this ordinary objection or excuse of worldlings; I say in the
defense and behalf of the pore. There are a number that will deny a poor
body of a penny, and plead poverty to them, though they seem to stand in
never so great extremes, when in a far worier sort they will not stick
imediatlie to spend ten or twenty shillinges. The rich worldling makes no
conscience to have ten or twenty dishes of meat at his table, when in troth,
the one half might sufficiently satisfy nature: the rest run to the relief
of the pore, and yet in the end he might depart better refreshed with one dish,
the^ commonly he is with twenty. Some will not stick to have twenty coats,
twenty houses, twenty farms, yea twenty Lordshippes, and yet go by a
poor person, whom they see in great distress and never relieve them with
one penny, but say God help you, I have not for you. There is Lawyers will
not stick to undo twenty pore men, and Merchants that make it no conscience
to eat out twenty other that have the hundreths out at vsery, their chests
cramd full of crowns, and their cofers full of golden Gods, or glistring
Angels, that will go by twenty poor, miserable, hungry, impotent, and
distressed persons, and yet not bestow one penny on them: And though they do
most shamefullie ask it: yet can they most shamelesly deny it, and refuse to
perform it.

The people of this world can very easily find a staff to beat a dog, they are
never without excuses, but ready to find delays, and very pregnant to
devise new shifts to keep in their alms. Now will I show you reasons why
we should give. God says, who so gives to the poor, lends unto the Lord,
and shall be sure to find it again, and receive for the same an hundredth
fold. And again, blessed is he that considererh of the pore and needy: the
Lord shall deliver him in the day of trouble. Hereby appears, that we shall
receive our alms again, except we doubt whether Gods word be true or no.
For confirmation whereof, the Prophet David, says: the testimonies of God are
true and righteous. And God speaks by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias saying:
The word is gone out of my mouth, and it shall not return, the promise which
God made to Sara, was found true: his promise made to the children of Egypt
was found true: his promise to Joshua, in the ouertrhowing of his enemies, was
found true. God promised David his kingdom, to Solomon he promised wisdom,
to Pharao destruction by water, to Saul, the loss of his kingdom, and to
Solomon, the dividing of his kingdom: all which, and far more proved true.
Then let us not doubt in Gods promises, for from time to time they have been
found true and just. Let us consider that we must die and leave our goods, we
know not to whom: then while we are here, let vsdestribute thereof unto the
pore, that we may receive our reward in the kingdom of heaven. God says by
S. Luke: O fool, this night will I fetch away thy soul, and then, that which
thou have got, who shall possess it? Here is a question worth the noting,
and meet for rich men to consider: especially such as hoord up wealth, and
have no regard to the relief of the poor. Do they think, that the wealth
which they have gathered together, will come to good after their decease: No,
it will melt and consume away like butter in the Sun: The reason is, because
they would not do as God has commanded the^, in the distributing part of that
to the poor which was lent them by the Lord.

The children of God in the sixth of the Apocalips cry out: how long O Lord,
thou that art holy and true: do thou not judge and revenge our blood upon
those that dwell on the earth; whereby appears that God exercises good men,
and those whom he loves in the troubles of this world, which we account long;
yet is their time but short, although their trouble makes it seem long but
these I say ought to be content, and all those that do trust in God must be
content, to releue one another for atime, since after a short time, we shall
doutles find the fruits of our alms again: short is man's life while we are in
this world: David compares it to a vapor, to a bubble, to wind, to grass,
to a shadow, to a smoke, and every fading thing that consumes in a moment.
Esaias compares it to the remoouing of a Tabernackle, and Job to an Eagles wing,
or a Weauers shittle: so that our life is but short, and after a few days,
though you think them many: whatsoever you mercifully bestow upon the poor
here on earth: You shall certainly find the same again both in heaven and on
the earth.

Solomon in the 12. of the Proverbs says, Prou. 12.
he that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, Eccle. 34.
shall cry himself and not be heard. 1. Cor. 4.
The bread of the poor is in the ways of the rich: Eccle. 7.
he that keeps it from them, is a man of blood. S. Paul says, no man
gives but he that has received. And Jesus Syracke says, stretch forth thy
hand unto the poor, that thy mercy and blessing may be made perfect Basil an
ancient father of the church, does charge the rich with wast, for which they
shall surely answer. Art thou not (says he) a robber in keeping an other
man's substance, and to reckon it as thine own. It is the bread of the hungry
which thou do detain; the coat dew to the naked, thou lockest in thy
wordrop: the shoes that appertains to the barefoot, lies drying in thy house;
and the gold which should relieve the pore, lies canckering in thy cofers:
which saying, as it teaches the liberality due unto the poor: so it blames
the careless rich, that account all to be their own, and will part with
nothing, keeping to themselves more then is sufficient. But to such saint James
says, that at the latter day, the mite in the crumbs, the moathes in the
garments, and the rust in the gold, shall fret them like canckers. Ambrose
says, it is no less sin to take from him that rightly possesses, the^
being able not to give to him that wants.

The right rich man that duly deserves that name, is not known by his
possession, by his costly fare, and costly building, by his sumptuous palace,
by his plate, Jewels, and substance, but by considering the poor and needy:
Whereof Austine says thus: the rich are proved by the poverty of others: so
that still the scriptures and fathers prescribe not an indifferency, but a
necessity: not at pleasure, but upon duty, that the pore and needy shall be
considered and relieved.

Where is the large liberallity be come, that in time past was rooted in our
forefathers, they were content to be liberal, though they applied it to evil
purposes, the successors of those which in time past gave liberally to
maintain Abots, Friars, Monks, Nuns, Masses, Durges, Trentals, and all
idolatry: seeing the abuses thereof, may now bestow it to a better use:
namely, to foster and feed the pore members of Christ.

The world is as great as it has been, the people now are more rich then
they have been, and more covetous then they have been: yea, they have more
knowledge then ever they had: yet want the desire they have had to become
liberal and seem therein most wilful ignorant.

The extorcioner can spare naught unto the poor, for joining house to house,
and land to land, though he have the poor man's curse for it: the Prophet Esaias
says, the extortioner does no good to the poor, but daily seeks to root
them forth of doors: the pride of apparel makes us forgette the patched of
the pore. Our costly fare, their extreme hounger, and our soft lodging, their
miserable lying.

Oh how liberal were people in times past to mainetaine superstition: and
now how hard hearted are they grown to keep the poor from famine, will
ye make a skorne of the poor and needy: The poor now perisheeh by the
Rich men, and noe manne considers it: This is not the right duty of
faithful Christians: this ought not to be the fruits of our profession, nor
this is not the mercy which we learn by the word.

Therefore toward the relief of the pore I say, give, and give gladly: for
the bread that is given with a stony heart, is called stony bread, though
necessary to be taken by the poor, to slake hounger: yea, it is but sower
bread: such a giver in mine opinion, is next kinseman unto Satan: for he gave
Christ stoans in stead of bread: but this man gives christians stony bread.
The Wise Man says, lay up thy alms in the hands of the poor, and know that
in the end, what thou keep thou shall lose, but that thou give to the
poor, shall be as a purse about thy neck. For as this life waxes old, and
our days pass away, so shall this vain pelf pass away from us, neither
shall riches help in the day of vengeance, but the corruption abides, which
fretteth like a canker. Then what shall it profit to get all the world, and
when the world forsakes us, that shall be most against us, that best we loved
while we were in the world. Let every man therefore persuade himself, that
his soul is better then those subtle riches: the possession whereof is variable
and uncertain: for they pass from us much more swiftlye then they came to us.
And albeit we have the use of them, even till the last day, yet at length we
must leave them to others. Then ere you die, lay them forth for the profit of
your poor brethren: learn to forsake the couerous world, before it forsake
you, and learn counsel of our Savior Christ, who advises you to make
friends of the wicked Mammon.

We see daily, Luke 16.
that every one is good to the poor, (as we commonly say) but they will give
the^ naught but words: then I say, great boast and small roast makes unsavory
mouths: yet if words will do any good, the poor shall not want them. For it
does cost nothing to say alas good soul, God help thee, God comfort thee, I
would I were able to help thee: and such commonly will say so, that have
store of wealth lying by them. Such still wish well unto themselves, in wishing
themselves able: but of such wishing, and for such wishers, I say as a beggar
said to a Bishop, who made like answer, that if such wishes were worth but
one halfpenie to the poor: I doubt, they would not be so liberal. I wish you
good brethren leave wishing, and fall to some doing: you lock up and will not
loose, you gather together, even the devil and all, and why? Because you would
feign hatch the Cokatrise egg: you nurse up a canker for your selves, yea
keep the pack that shall trouble your voyadge unto God, as Christ says: O
how hard shall it be for a rich man to be saved, it shall be easier for a
Camel to go through a needles eye. This he says not, because no rich man
shall be preserved, but because the merciless rich man shall be damned. We
are admonished to liberality by sundry natural examples, the clouds if they
be full, do yield forth their rain, much rain is a burden to clouds, and
much riches are burdens to men. It is said of Abraham in the 13. of Gene is,
that he was burdened with gold: yet Abraham was a good man, but it burdened his
head to be busy with the cares of gold. Again, to eat much, to drink
much, and rest much, is a burden to the soul, though it be pleasant to the
body. And in the 12. of Luke it apeareth, that abundance of riches, makes
one to eat much, drink much, and rest much: then were it not for the
covetous minds of those that have much, they might impart to the poor one
part of that which they duily spend in superflity. If this be not amended, I
let you to understand that the poor must cry, and their voice shall be
heard, their distress considered, and our vengance shall be wrought I tell you
troth, even in Jesus Christ that the poor has cried unto the Lord, and he
has heard them. With speed therefore open your ears: if not to man, yet to
Christ, who continually commands us to give and bestow upon the poor and
needy. Give and it shall be given you says he by S. Luke, and sets before
our eyes the example of the poor widows mites, as also the example of a
covetous rich man, who demanding how he might obtain eternal life, was
answered thus by him, go sell all thou have, and give to the poor, not that it
is necessary for every man so to do, or that a man cannot be saved without
he do so: but thereby teaching him perticulerly to loathe the world, and
generally seek means for the daily cherishing and the refreshing of the
poor. Do not continually feed your equals for that is offensive: but when
your may spare to spend and banquet your selves, then call the poor and
impotent and refresh your poor distressed neighbors and brethren. And when
Dives has dined, let Lazarus have the crummes. And still remember the saying of
S. Matthew: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

To conclude (beloved in the Lord) let me entreat you rich men to consider it
is your duty, to remember the poor and their continual want: you that eat
till you blow, and feed till your eyes swell with fatness, that taste first
your course meats and then fall to finer fare: that have your several drinks
for your stomach, and your sorts of wine for your appetite impart some of
your superfluity unto the poor, who being comforted by you, will doubtless
pray for you that God world bless you and yours, and increase your store: a
thousand fold which if they should forget, yet the promises of God remain
inviolable toward you for the same.

If the proud would leave their superfluity in apparel, their excess in
imbrodery, their vanity in cuttes, gardes and pownees, their excess in
spangling their fantastical feathers and needless bravery, the greater part
would suffice toward the relief of the poor, and yet have sufficient to
suffice nature.

Let the glutton seek only to suffice nature and leave his daily surfeiting
in belly cheer, then might the poor be fed with that which he oftentimes
either lothsomely vomites forth, or works as an instrument to shorten his
own life. Let the whormonger leave off his dalliance, and his inordinate
expenses for maintaining of his wickedness; and it shall be good for his
body, and better for his soul, yea his purse shall be the heavier, and he
thereby better able to relieve the poor.

Let every artificer and tradesman live orderly, avoiding superfluous
expenses, not spending his money vainly at dice, tables, cards, bowling,
betting, and such like, but live as becomes civil christians in the fear of
God: they may have sufficient for the maintenance of themselves and their
famelie, and yet the poor may be by them sufficiently relieved.

Let us consider that we who have our beginning from God, ought generally to
bend all our actions toward the pleasing of God, and doing as he commands
us, we please him: for if we help the poor we help him, and doing all
charitable actions to the poor, he accompteth it as done to himself.

Let us generally learn, not to contemn or despise the poor, but according to
our abillities help them and consider of their extremes: and at any hand not
to disdain and vpbraid them with the titles of base rogues or such like, but
in all godly christian means to cherish and comfort them with such charitable
relief, as we may in reason affoorde unto them, yea and to consider of their
cases, as if it were our own.

Let us take example of good Cornelius the Captain, of whom mention is made
in the Acts of the Apostles, to whom the Angel of God appearing in a vision,
said thus; Cornelius, thy prayer and thine alms is come up before God* (...)
here the reward, and also of whom thou shall be rewarded.

Let us consider of their misery that with hungry chappes, and lanke bellies,
would willingly feed on that, which you wastfully consume, the poor I say
would find good comfort of that which commonly you fling to your dogs, and
on your dung-hils: and let us have regard to their coldness, their nakedness,
their misery and grievous necessity: think of this and comfort them: And
let us be mindful that poverty and want compels many an honest person to
take in hand the performance of much vilde and slavish business: and that
therefore they deserve to be succored with mercy and pity rather then to be
despised for their poor estate: O think of the hard hearted persons were in
their miserable estate, how glad would you be to be refreshed that now will
skarsly yield one penie to their relief.

Lastly, let us call to mind the example of the widow of Sarepta, who though
her provision and store were but little when the preacher of the Lord came to
her to ask her bread, answered I have nothing but a little flower in a
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: which notwithstanding she willingly
bestowed upon him: for which, a thing worthy memory followed: for her barrel
was again filled with flower, and her pot with oil: this was the Lords doing
for fostering the poor prophet of the Lord, sure the plenty that comes by
the poor is much, for the field of the poor is fruitful, it surrendreth
again the fruit to them that give ought, yea if it be but a cup of cold water,
Mark. 10.
as says our Savior Christ. To whom be all honor, power and dominion, now
and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A HARMONY, FROM HEAVEN. Sommoning all men unto the hearing of the truth.

By Henry Smith.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1592.

A harmony from heaven sommoning all men to the hearing of the truth.
The text. All Nations.
THe Apostle Paul writing to Timotheus tells him, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
that GOD would have all men come to the knowledge of the truth, and be
saved: in which words the Apostle gives him to understand, that there is none
other way, either for Priest or people to come unto God, but by that ordinary
means, which is the hearing of his word the which the Apostle calls his
truth: because it is not only true of it self, but also does witness of his
truth, who is truth it self: by the very same name does our Savior Christ
call gods word, when making his prayer to his heavenly father (for the elect)
he says: John. 17. 17.
father, sanctify them in thy truth; and immediately adds, thy word is the
truth. The next thing that the apostle aduertiseth Timothy of, that this truth
being rightly known, brings salvation to them that so know it, and this the
Apostle confirms by an argument taken from his own faith, Romans 1. 16.
when he says; I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power
of God, able to save every believer. And last of all, the Apostle has set
down the generality of this truth, both in saying to Timothy, that god
would have al men to be acquainted with it, and to the saints at Rome, that it
is able to save every beleuer. Hereof it comes, that he writing to the
Collossia^s, exhorts the^ not so much to the hearing of this truth taught
the^; as to an inward intertainment of the same, when he says: let the word
of Christ dwell in you plentifully in all wisdom, Colos. 3. 16.
teaching and admonishing your own selves, teaching themselves, because many of
the Colossians seemed to be ignorant of that which they should know, and
admonishing themselves, because a number of them did know much, but practiced
little. So that, such is the entertainment that gods word ought to find amongst
us, as David promised thereunto, when he said: O Lord, teach me the way of thy
statutes, and I shall keep it even unto the end. And we are taught to
entertain gods word, by the example of John, who receiving the little book at
the hand of the Angel, was commanded to eat that book, partly to teach us,
Psalm. 119. 33.
that gods word must abide within us, Apoc. 10. 10*
and partly to signify, Mat. 4.
that our bodelie bread serves not our souls necessity. Esaias said, that he
had carefully carried gods message: for I was found (says he) of those that
sought me not, and have been made manifest to them that asked not after me,
Esaias 65. 1.
howbeit he was not so careful in speaking, but the people were as careless
in hearing: for the which cause, he utters this complaint: Lord who has
believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? When Jeremy
had faithful* lie delivered the message of the Lord his GOD, in rebuking those
Jews which burned incense to the Idols of Egypt: Esaias 53. 1.
he says, that all the men that knew that their wives had burned incense to
strange Gods, and a great many women which stood by, Ier. 44, 14. 15
gave him this answer: the word which thou speak unto us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hear it of thee, but what we think good, that will we do.
Such was the wickedness of the people so many years past, as appears in
many places of gods word: among the which, that of the Babylonians was not
the lea^^ which moved Jeremy to send Sheraiah unto them with the book, Iere.
51. 63.
and with a strait charge, that when he had read it unto them, he should bind
a stone unto it, and cast it into the river Euphrates, to teach the Babylonians
and all men, that as the hard stone caused that good book to sincke in the
water, so the hardness of our stony hearts, is not only the depriving of us,
of many good blessings, but also a violent sincking of our souls in sin.

The just consideration whereof, moved the Apostle Paul, Romans 2. 4. 5.
to expostulate the matter with every hard hearted sinner in this sort: do
thou not know that the bountefulnesse of God, leads thee to repentance, but
thou after thine hard heart that can not repent, do heap up to thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment
of God, and yet to see what small preparation there is unto repentance, every
godly man wishes like zealous Jeremy: Oh that mine head were a fountain: and
that mine eyes were rivers of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
slain of my people: so grievous is the way of the ungodly unto the child of
God, that he cannot account it any better thing, then a race wherein they run
striving, who shall come first to the devil, when they lead a life as void of
repentance, as if sin were seen and allowed, and hell fire but an old wives
fable. What made Jeremy so weary of his people, but that he savv them weary
of well doing, for sighing and sorrowing thus he says. Oh that I had a cottage
in the wilderness of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people and go from
them, for they are all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels.

So long as Steven the Martyr talked to the Jews of their petigree, they
harkened unto him diligently, but when he rebuked their sins, saying that
they were a stiffenecked people, and of a hard heart, resisting the holy ghost,
in persecuting the prophets, and putting to death the Lord of life. Then they
stopped their ears, and gnashing their teeth, ran upon him and stoned him to
death. Acts 7. etc.
So fares it at this day amongst men, that many are as well contented to hear
pleasant things, as the Jews were to harken to Steven, repeating their
parentage* But if a man shall hit all sorts of ill manners, as well as speak to
al sorts of men: they hold it as a principle, that he forgets his Text,
who remembers their sins, notwithstanding they know, that it is the
Ministers duty to tell the house of Jacob their sins, Esaias 58.
and to let Israel hear of their transgressions, and the peoples part, not
only to be content, but also desirous to know their duties, and to show
their desire in the forwardenesse of their coming before him that ought to
teach: Otherwise we might imagine, that God spoke but in sport, Malac. 2. 7.
when he said by his Prophets, the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge
and the people shall seek it at his mouth: For so thought the evil disposed
people in Ezechiels time, who used to hear him preach with the like affections
that many bring now a days. Concerning whose fruitless hearing, God
infourmeth Ezechiell, by saying unto him: Son of man, the children of my
people talk of thee by the walks and in the doors of houses, and speak one to
another, every one to his brother, saying: come I pray you and hear what is
the word that comes from the lord. They come unto thee, as the people used to
come, and my people sit before thee, and hear the words; but they will not do
them; for with their mouths they make jests, and their heart goes after their
covetousness, and lo thou art unto them; as a jesting song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can sing well; for they hear thy words, but they do them
not.

These people and the people, which were in the time of Hosea the Prophet, may
meetly be matched with the men of our age, who were as ready to rail on the
priest, as he was pressed to reprove their sin. Hoseah. 4.
For says Hosea, these people are as those that rebuke the priest. It is most
true that the want of salvation proceeds either of the lack of teaching, or
of the want of faith to believe rightly that which is taught.

The first of these is approved by the words which the holy Ghost spoke by the
mouth of this prophet last named (thus) my people are destroyed with lack of
knowledge. Hoseah. 4. 6
etc. The other by the testimony of our savior Christ himself, who sending
his Eleven to preach and baptize; Mark 16. 16
says he that believes, and is baptized shall be saved; he that believes not
shall be damned; why went the rich man to hell? but either for one of these
causes before named; or for the^ both (that is to say) because he never
frequented the word of God; whereby faith is begotten in the hearts of the
hearers; or if he heard the same word, yet it was heard so carelessly that it
took no root at all: and indeed that answer which Abraham made to his
request, seems to aver the truth of that which I say; for when request was
made by that helhound, that a messenger might go from the dead to his five
brethren, which were yet at his fathers house. etc. Abraham replied (thus) they
have Moses, and the Prophets. Let them hear them; for as Abraham says, if
that which Moses has set down in Gods justice, cannot better our brazen
faces: and hearts of Adament, nor they invaluable, and most assured promises
made by Christ to his elect, and recorded by his prophets, cannot drive us
from sin, and draw us to himself. Then there is no more hope of us, in
hearing the word of God, then was of Simon and Judas. Acts 8. 13.
Though they heard the word, Acts 1. 18.
and received the Sacraments, for our life is no other way reformed by a
careless kind of hearing, 1. Kings. 12.
then Jeroboam redressed the religion in Israel, when he set up two golden
Calves, the one in Dann, and the other in Bethel, Judith. 3. 8.
that the Israelites might worship them them, or Nabuchadneezer in his
kingdom, when he destroyed Idols, that he might be worshipped as God. It is a
matter so true that no man can so much as imagine, much less speak the
contrary, Esaias 5. 4.
without great offense that God has done so much for his vine, as by any
means might be, in so much that David the king of Israel never had greater
cause then the prince and people of England have, to say of the goodness of
God, Psalm. 147. 20
he has not dealt so lovingly with any nation as with us, in giving to us so
long use of his laws, and yet, he that compares the pastors painful
preaching with the peoples little profiting, in most places of this land, shall
find just occasion to think that the son of God has pronounced that same
curse upon this English vine: which he uttered against that fruitless
figtree mentioned by Mark in these words, Mark. 11. 14.
Never fruit grow on thee henceforth: God grant that there be not some men:
who measure the meat by the man, like those proud Citizens, Luke 19. 14.
which said we will not have this man to reign over us, and loathe the
message because they like not the messenger, like those skornfull Jews, that
told Jeremy to his face: the word which thou speak to us in the name of
the Lord, we will not hear it of thee, Iere. 44. 14. 15.
but whatsoever we think good, that will we do, but that they may know those
men which labor among them; and have the oversight of them in the land, 1.
These. 5. 12
and not barely know them; but also love them for their good works sake. Thus
having finished the former circumstances as compendiously as I promised: I
proceed to the next words, the which contain in them, the second part of a
christian ministers duty, which is to minister the sacraments rightly,
whereof one is set down in his due order by the institutor Christ himself,
when he says, baptising them in the name of the father, and the son, and the
holy ghost. Now because the word Baptism has diverse significations in the
scripture: I will here set down, as many of them as my memory can record.
First the word Baptism according to the true meaning of the Greek text:
Baptisma does not signify only addicting, but such a dipping in the water as
does cleanse the party dipped, and for that the Primitive Church did use to
put the party baptized quite under the water. Therefore Paul writing both to
the Romans and Collossians, Romans 6. 4.
uses these words: Colos. 2. 12.
we are buried then with him in baptism into his death: that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the father: So we also should
walk in newness of life: in the which words the Apostle shows what
resemblance their baptism has with Christ his death and resurrection.
Secondly, baptism is used for a bare washing, in which sense our Savior
spoke, when he said to the Pharisees, Mark 7. 8.
you lay apart the commandments of God and observe the traditions of men, as
the washing of pottes and cups and many such things ye do, and in the
same sense we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 9. 10.
when the author says that the old Tabernacle, consisted of many washinges
and ceremonial rightes, until the day of reformation came. Thirdly, by
baptism we may understand affliction, as our Savior Christ did, in saying to
James and John the sons of Sebedeus, Mark 9. 38.
can you be baptized with that baptism wherewith I must be baptized, and to
his Disciples, I must be baptized with a baptism: but how am I payned until
I be ended. Luke 12, 50
Fourthly baptism is a liberal distribution of the graces of GOD as appears
in these words. John baptized with water, Acts 1. 5.
but you shall be baptized with the holy Ghost within these few days.

Fifthly, the word baptism is taken for doctrine only, as in that place
wherein the holy Ghost having occasion to speak of Apollo a Jew of
Alexandria, says that he was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 42
and did know but the baptism of John only. And last of al Baptism is taken
for a reverent order of ministering that Sacrament in the Church, and the whole
sanctification of the parties baptized as in the words of this present part of
Scripture, baptising them. etc.

But to speak of the Sacrament it self. It has been usual with almighty
God from time to time to confirm his couenauntes with seals set to the same:
for example we see, that there is a Rainbowe in the clouds; the reason
whereof is, that GOD having in his justice destroyed the old world for sin:
(only Noah and his famelie being excepted) the same GOD in his mercy made a
covenant with Noah, that he would never destroy it so again for confirmation
thereof: he set the Raynbow in the Clouds as a seal to that covenant betwixt
himself and Noah; Genes. 9. 13. 14.
So was circumcision given to Abraham, as a seal of confirmation in that
promise, that in his seed, Genesis 17. 10. 11.
all the nations of the earth should be blessed: So that as many as were
circumcised, were within the compass of that covenant, in stead whereof, we
have baptism, the which whosoever shall refuse: we account him, as cut off
from Gods Church. Mark 10.
Christ Jesus gave inuisicle grace, by visible laying his hands upon children
and other sick people: John 20. 22.
So he gave the gift of his holy spirit unto his Disciples: when having
breathed upon them, he said: receive you the holy ghost. The Sscramentes were
ordained in the church of God for 3. uses: first that we should acknowledge al
those to be our fellows servants, whom we see to have put on the same liuerie
with our selves, and in this sense said the Apostle Paul: all those that are
baptized into Christ, Galat. 27. 3.
have put on Christ. Secondly, the Sacraments do put a manifest difference
betwixt the true church and the false, Acts 2. 39.
as Peter has taught us, in saying repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, for to use the promise made unto your children,
and all that are yet far off, even so many as God shall call: and our Savior
says, to such belongs the kingdomof God: that is, to such as lead an
innocent life. Mark 10. 14.


The third use of the Sacraments, is to seal up in the hearts of the elect all
those promises which GOD has made unto them in Jesus Christ his Son, and their
Savior: in the which sense Paul spoke, when he said, that Abraham received
the sign of circumcision, Rom, 4. 11.
as a seal of that righteousness which he had by faith, and in the very same
sense our Savior says, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved.
Mark 16. 16.
But it is to be considered, that the Institutor sets down the form of
administering the sacraments, when he says, baptizing them in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost. He commands to baptize in the
name of the father and of the son, because the holy Ghost proceeds from the
father and the son, and in the name of the holy Ghost: for except a man be
borne of water and the spirit, John 3. 5.
he cannot see the kingdom of God. When our savior offered to wash Peter's feet,
he imagined it to be a nedles work, John 13. etc.
for thou shall never wash my feet said he: but when Christ answered, that
such as are not washed by him, have no part with him: that is, neither part of
his spirit, nor of his kingdom. Peter bethinking himself better, would not
have his feet only, but also his hands and head washed: howbeit it is not
necessary to wash any more then is unclean: as Peter's feet defiled with
dirt and mire, so our souls spotted with sins, must be cleansed by Christ his
blood only. And after this manner it is necessary, that every one of us
should be washed: whereof the outward putting of water upon the party baptized,
is a lively figure. John Baptist was sanctified in his mothers womb, as the
Angel had foreshewed. Luke 1. 15.
But when our Savior Christ came to him to be baptized, Math. 3. 13
John put him back, and said: I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? Psalm 51. 5
That kingly prophet David, was a man after gods own heart, yet he says of
himself: I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Job was called by God himself a just and upright man, Job 1. 8. etc.
fearing God, and eschewing evil: whose peer was not found upon the face of
the earth: notwithstanding all this, he says of himself: who can bring a
clean thing out of filthiness? Job. 14 4.
the which question is all one with Paul's affirmation, who says: such as the
root is, such are the branches, Romans 11. 16.
as if he had said with Adam, the father of us all was undefiled then are we
his sons clean also. But if he were once dead in sin, being our root, then
how could we his imps have life of our selves. All this was spoken of
original sin; as for actual sins, namely, those sins which we continually
commit, they are as palpable as the darkness of Aegipt, the which as Moses
says, was so gross, that it might be felt: Exo. 10. 21 22.
in so much, that David says, when God looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, Psalm. 14. 2. 3.
(that is) when he considered man's conversation: they were all so far gone
out of the way, that there was none that did good, in so much that the prophet
repeateth it with an Emphasis, and says, no not one. And the man of God Moses,
says: when God beheld the boldness of the old world in sinning, Genesis 6. 5. 6.
it repented him that he had made man: that is, he was sorry, that man whom he
had made to live well, should live so ill. The continual sin of Sodom
brought fire and brimstone from heaven to consume them in the same. Genesis 19. 24.
David feeling the burden of his sins, began to sincke under them: Psalm 38.
4.
for (says he) my sins are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden, too
heavy for me to bear. Paul having by the virtue of the law, Romans 7. 7.
learned his sins, (for he had not known sin, except the law had said, thou
shall not sin) fell to lamenting of them thus. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death: where it is to be noted, that he
calls his body a body of death, in respect of sin, which gives power to
death over our bodies. 1. Cor. 15. 56.
And to conclude, of such force is sin in us, that if the goodness of God had
not so praeordained, that the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
believing wife, and the unbelieving wife, by the believing husband, 1. Cor. 7.
14.
our children should be very unclean.

Again, being washed or baptized in the name of the father, son, and holy
Ghost: we are advertised, that we must give godly, christian, and holy names
unto our children in in token of their sacred profession, for holy is he that
has called us, and that we may be the more forward so to do. It will be worth
our labor to consider of a few examples, tending to the same purpose, Luke 1.
62. 63.
as of Zachary the father of John the Baptist, who being dum when that his son
was born, his friends made signs unto him, how he would have him called, and
askeing for writing tables, writ, saying his name is John: the which word
John is as much as (to say) Grace: and thus was Zachary commanded by the
Angel to name him. Luke 1. 13.
The scripture accords plentiful examples of those that have given names to
their children, affoordeth to such occasions as have been offered in the time
of their travel: As when Raell went with her husband Jacob toward Bethell to
build an altar unto God: She travailed in childbirth, and in traveling
dyed: but before she departed, Genesis 35. 18.
she called his name Benony: that is, the son of her sorrow; but his father
Jacob called him Benony; that is the son of his right hand. So Leah having
born to Jacob four sons she said, now will I praise God, etc. And that she
might the better bear in mind her promise, she named her last son Judah. Genesis
29. 35.
When the man of Benjamin came from the Israelites with his clothes rent, and
dust upon his head in token of heaviness, and certified father Ely, 1. Sam. 4.
12.
that God's Ark was taken by the Philistines, and that his two sons were
slain: the old father fell backward out of his seat, and broke his neck, and
his daughter in law. Phynies wife being flighted with fear: fell in travel
and dyed in child bed: but before her death, she called her son Icabod (that
is) the glory of God, meaning thereby that she accounted the glory of God to
be taken from Israel, when God's Ark which was a figure of his Church, wherein
we glorify his name) was taken away by the enemy. And secondly to admonish
all parents so to nuiture up their children, that they may seek to maintain
the glory of God better then Ely did, for the wickedness of whose children:
As also for the fathers default in not correcting them, God had threatened
before that if he once began with him; 1. Sam. 3. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
he would make an end with him: so that as the Prophet says: children being
the fruit of the womb, as they are come from God, are a good blessing and an
heritage that comes of the Lord, Psalm. 12. 7.
because he it is, from whom every good and perfect gift does proceed: yet
in respect of men, so may the matter be handled that they shall find no such
cross or curse as graceless: or unruled children: such as Esau, Genesis 26. 35
and his two wives who were a grief of mind, and a heart breaking to Isaak
their father, and Rebekah their mother.

It is true that the very godliest men and women, have rather desisired sons
then daughters at the hands of God, but they did it for good and godly
purposes: As when Abraham desired a son to the end that Eliezer the steward
of his house being a stranger, Genes. 15, 2.
Namely a man of Damascus should not be the heir of his goods. So did Anna
pray to God for a son when she said, O Lord of hosts, if thou will look on
the trouble of thine handmaid and remember, me, etc. And give unto thine
handmayd a manchilde: 1. Sam. 1, 11. etc.
then will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life etc. And as the
very name of a son is in price and preferred at this day, so has it been
heretofore, as when Phineas wife being near her death in travel: 1. Sam. 4.
20
the midwife with the rest thinking to comfort her, said; fear not for thou
have borne a son, when the angel said to Abraham this time twelve months;
Sarah thy wife shall bear a son. Sarah laughed as partly doubting, Genesis 18,
10. 12.
and partly ioying that so sage a woman as she should conceive a son by so
aged a man as Abraham was. That same Angel that certified Zachario; Luke. 1.
13. 14.
that Elizabeth his wife should bear John the Baptist said, not only that it
should be a son: but such a son as should bring joy to him and many more.
Luke 1. 26 verse 30
And that Angel Gabriell, that was sent of God Mary, the mother of our savior,
according to his humanity, says, that in stead of fear she had found favor
with God: and his reason is this: for thou shall bear a son, and shall call
his name Jesus: As if he had said, it is a great blessing of God to bear a
child: and a greater to bear a man child: but to be so far in Gods favor
as to bear such a son, as shall be the savior of the world, it is the
greatest grace which has been heard of: in the which, God make his Church
joyful; and for the which in special, and for all the rest of his blessings
in general, God make us thankful, Amen.

John 10. 9. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and
shall go in, and go out, and shall find pasture. FINIS.
A MEMENTO, FOR MAGISTRATES.

By Henry Smith.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1592.

A Memento for Magistrates.
THe Apostle Paul writing to Timotheus amongst many other things, 1. Tim. 5.
17.
assures him, that those Elders which rule well, are worthy of double honor.
And the Author of the 45. Psame, Psalm. 45. 7.
speaking of the government of Solomon says. The Scepter of thy kingdoome is
a right Scepter, for thou love righteousness and hate iniquity; in which
words the Author aduoucheth, that he cannot rule rightly, that loves not to
judge justly, and that he usurps authority that deals partiallie: for
we must remember, that he measurerh Salomons worthiness to reign by his well
swaying of the scepter, the which Salomo^ could not have handled so
commendablie as he did, if he had not been carried away with an earnest desire
to deal indifferently amongst men in causes of controversy, but most plainly
appears his great desire of godly government in that hearty prayer which he
uttered unto almighty God, (when he said) give unto thy servant O Lord an
understanding and a wise heart, 3. king. 3.
to judge thy people, that I may discern betwixt good and evil. In this
prayer it is plain, that although he was a King, yet he calls himself the
servant of God, for promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor yet from the south, but from God, who plucketh down one, and sets
up another. And Solomon, having prayed for wisdom and understanding, Psalm.
75. 7. 8.
he shows whereunto he would apply those good gifts of God, even unto the
glory of him that gave them, to judge thy people, that I may discern betwixt
good and evil (says he) for by him Kings reign, Prou. 8. 15.
and by him Princes decree Justice. Exodus 18.
When Iethro the father in law of Moses, came out of the land of Madian to see
Moses being at the mount of God, which was mount Sinai, and beheld how the
people flocked unto Moses their magistrate for judgment and justice, by due
consideration thereof: Iethro found these three in conueniences: First, that
Moses wearied himself with sitting in judgment from the morning until night.
Secondly, that he was too tedious unto the people which attended upon him in
all that time. And thirdly, that notwithstanding his carfulness in judgment,
and their earnest expectation of justice, he was not able to dispatche so
many matters as was brought before him: but with a light hearing, and a
little regarding of many men's causes. Wherefore, Iethro being a man very
desirous that justice might proceed, that no man's matter should slightly be
slipped over, counsaileth Moses to make more Magistrates in Israel, and to the
end that this might be performed the better, Iethro does point at the
disposition of those men which should bear rule, for (says he) thou shall
choose out amongst all the people, men of courage, dealing truly, fearing
God, and hating covetousness, and them shall thou make governors over the
people.

By this you may perceive, how Iethro in counsailing, and Moses in practicing,
did both aim at justice and true judgment. For it is not a mean matter, or
light labor, for men of years to sit from morning to night in judgment: no,
their years, antiquity, and consequently their bodies imbesilitie cannot
easily endure it, besides the care of common causes heard at home, and that
which is the biggest burden of all, the continual good of the Commonweal,
which they meditate carefully, when we sleep securely is not to be
forgotten, but herin are many Magistrates greatly to be blamed, in that they
cause the people to attend upon the^ from morning until night, with expenses
great and continual, whilst they find no end of poor men's matters, because
they wish no end of spending money.

Are their minds set upon righteousness which deal thus? No, no: they are the
same that the Prophet spoke of, Psalm. 31. 12.
when he said, the ungodly seeks occasion against the righteous, and
knasheth upon him with his teeth, for the crafty counselor takes occasion to
hinder his Cliants just cause, that he might still feed upon the poor man's
purse: the Lawyer, who cares not to deal unfaithfully is like the crystal
glass, which flatteringly shows unto every man a fair face, how iuill
favored so ever he be. So can he persuade the simple swain, that his cause will
bear a strong action, be it never so weak. Oh remember what God said unto
Israel, you shall not do what seems good in your own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.
but what I command you: Then know, that you do not that which he has
commanded because you deal not with mercy and truth, for if ever the time
required, Psalm. 25.
and occasion was offered to move that question to Magistrates, which David
did in his days: namely, Psalm. 82. 2.
how long they will proceed to give unjust judgment, and to accept the person
of the ungodly. Now is the time and occasion present, for I do not doubt,
but it is too true, that the Prophet has spoken; who says, that the ungodly
are more set by the^ the righteous; Abac. 1.
and this is the cause that wrong judgment does proceed. How can justice sit,
when there is no seat appointed for her, you may be sure she will not have to
do with the stool of wickedness, Psalm. 94.
where mischief stands in stead of justice. It was a worthy commendation
that David uttered in the praise of Jerusalem* Psalm. 122. 3.
when he said; there is the seat for judgment, the which appointing of that
seat for judgment, was an argument that they loved justice: and first the
place wherein it was set, assures us hereof, for it was set in the gate,
vvher through men might have passage to and from the judgment seat. Secondly,
the manner of framing that seat in the gate: namely, that the Judges of force
must sit with their faces toward the rising of the sun, in token that their
judgment should be as pure from corruption, as the sun was clear in his
chiefest brightness. Oh happy house of David, whose seat was set so
conveniently, whose causes were heard so carefully, and matters judged so
justly. The Israelites thought themselves well apaid, when they had the
government of Debora that virtuous Woman, Judge. 5. 8.
for all was laid a bed, until she came up a mother in Israel; and as
she was a good gouernesse in her time, so she loved those that were like unto
her self: for says she, my heart is set upon the governors of Israel.
David was a good King while he lived, Psalm. 89.
as it did appear by the testimony of God himself, who said of him, I have
found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. Secondly, by
his appealing to God for judgment in this case, Psalm. 26. 1.
when he says, be thou my judge O Lord, for I have walked innocently, etc.

And last of all, by that good counsel which he gave upon his deathbedde unto
Solomon his Son, who was to succeed him in that kingdom, 3. king. 2. 3.
for (says he) thou shall prosper and come to great honor, if thou keep the
commandments which GOD commanded Moses, when Phillip the King of Macedonia,
did cast of the earnest suit of a poor widow, with this slender answer; go
thy way, for I have no leisure to hear thee now. She replied thus, and why
have thou leisure to be a King: as if she should have said, God has given
thee time to reign, and power to govern, that thou might apply them both
unto that end wherefore they are given thee: Prou. 20.
for mercy and truth preserves a King, and with loving kindness his seat is
vpholden. When Solomon prayed to God for an understanding heart that he might do
justice among gods people: it is said, that his prayer pleased God passing
well, because Solomon* asked wisedoome rather then wealth, 3. King. 3.
and knowledge rather then honor: for thereby he gave evidence that his heart
was set upon righteousness: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. It is a most excellent prayer which the Prophet makes, when he
says; give thy judgment unto the King, Psalm. 72. 1.
O Lord, and thy righteousness unto the kings son, etc. then shall he judge
the people according unto right, and defend the poor, wherein the Prophet
prayed for himself, while he governed the kingdom of Israel, and for his
successors in the same, having relation unto that promise spoken of in the 132.
Psalm: Verse 9.
the Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and he will not shrincke from
it, saying: of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon thy seat: if thy
children keep may testimonies which I shall learn them. And the Prophet
proceeds to say, then shall he judge the people according unto right, and
defend the pore, by the word (then) he insinuates, that when God gives grace
to the Magistrate; then he cannot choose but do right, and defend those which
do sustain wrong. But when the Prophet says, (and defend the pore) Some man
would think that he had said enough before, and therefore might have cut of
this speech, but it is to be remembered, that as sick men needs not the
Physician, or the way fairing man his weapon at one time only, but as often
as the patient is sick, so often he must have the Physicians counsel, and
as often as the traueiler is assaulted, so often he uses his weapon. In like
sort the poor man oppressed often, does as often need the defense of the
Magistrate: And therefore, has the Magistrate the sword is always carried
before him, and this sword is always carried before rather the behind the
Magistrate, that he might rather remember justice, then cast the care thereof
behind his back, the last, but not the least thing to be marked of the
Magistrate is; that justice is set forth with a pair of ballaunces in the one
hand, which admonishes him to way those matters justly which are brought
before him: And within the other hand a two edged sword, Psalm. 94. 15
to the intent that justice might return to judgment, (that is) that things
iustlye judged, might be rightly rewarded on both sides: 3. king. 3.
whereof King Solomon has given a good president. First, in finding out the
true mother of the smothered child, which is a point of judgment. Secondly,
in restoring the living child to his own mother, which was a point of
justice. And these parts of a Christian Magistrate duty are so necessarily
lincked together, that so often as one of them is wanting, the law receives
a maime at the hand of the Magistrate. John 19.
As when Pilate judged Christ guiltless, Act. 24
but yet put him to death: and when Paul's cause was heard and approved, yet
he was left in prison: Therefore, it is good counsel, and worthy to be
hearkened unto, which David gave unto all Kings and Magistrates, that they be
learned and wise: for if the Magistrate be not wise, Psalm 2. 10.
(words) may carry the matter away. As when Daniel when he was accused of
dispising the decree of Nabucadnezer the King of Babylon, Bell and Dragon.
Jeremy to be an enemy to the commonwealth of Israel, Iere. 18.
Elias to be a troubler of the state, 3. king. 18.
Paul to be a factious and seditious fellow, Acts 24.
Naboath to have blasphemed God and king Ahab: 3. king. 21.
and as at the importunate cry of the Jews, Christ was put to death, Luke 23.
and Barrabas the murderer set at liberty. The special wisdom of God,
Exodus 4.
matched Moses the Magistrate, with Aron the minister, thereby gyuing us to
understand, that when the word and the sword go together, there can be none
other but good government. As for example, so long as the good priest Iehoiba,
4. king. 12.
and the godly king Ioas lived together, God was worshipped, and his people
guided according unto his word: for the man of God counseled virtuously, and
the King practiced carefully: whereunto that saying of Solon does very well
agree, who being asked when the common wealth did best flourish: he answered,
when the people obey the magistrate, and the magistrate obeys the law: for
laws are better unmade then unkept; no doubt there want not such, as wilsay
with those head strong people in David's days: Psalm. 2. 3.
let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their coardes from us, and
our laws have been a long time like to spiders webs, so that the great buzzing
bees break through, and the little feeble flies hang fast in them.

But admit that you replye and say, they are made stronger, then in the
days of our forefathers, yet are they like unto walled Cities in the time of
war, at the which time, be your walks never so strong, they are beaten
down: if they want men and munition, so if your laws wisely made, do want
Patrones to defend them, they will soon be little worth, therefore it was not
the worst warning that Iethro gave to Moses, Exodus 18.
that he should make such magistrates as were men of courage: For as Crisippus
said sometimes, so it is true at all times, that if a magistrate rules amiss,
he shall procure the displeasure of God, (if well) he shall be hated of men,
and hereof it comes, that Valerius Maximus writes to Antigonus the Emperor,
who when he should put on his imperial crown and roabes, stepping upon the
cloth of estate, uttered these words with a very loud voice.

Oh cloth of more honorable then happy estate, wherewith, if a man were so
thorouglie acquainted, that he could number the cares that concern thee,
^hee would not stoop for thee, though he might have thee for the taking up,
for great and weight is that charge which is laid upon a Christian
magistrate in commonwealths affairs, and of no less continuance then care:
wherefore, Haimo would have every magistrate to remember these 3. things: 1.
that himself is but a man. 2. that he governs men like to him self, and 3.
that he shall not always be a magistrate, as the Prophet has taught, when he
spoke thus in the person of GOD: I said you are Gods, but you shall die like
men, and fall like one of the Princes: and yet shall they not be so excused,
but must also give accomptes of their government, as did that Steward:
mentioned by S. Luke. It is good therefore, not only for those men that have
the election of Magistrates, to make such choice of officers as Iethro inioyneth
Moses: Psalm. 82. 6.
and as God himself commanded Israel, when he said, you shall make him king,
whom the Lord our God shall choose: but also very meet for those magistrates
being so elected, to have a care, that as they are in place above other men: so
in good life they go before the people: for this was it, that the Israelites
desired God to grant unto Joshua being newly made their governor. Namely a
faithful heart to go in and out before them: For said they, even as we obeyed
Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: Joshua. 1.
Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. And it was a
necessary prayer: for how foul a fault were it, that the man which is
appointed to punish adultery, should be more worthy of correction for the
same kind of sin, then the party punishied. Like unto the whore-hunting Judges
of Samaria: Ierm. 5.
mentioned by the Prophet Jeremy, in his fifth chapter: or that he which is
appointed to judge according to law, should do any thing contrary to the
law: As angry Ananias, commanded that Paul should be smitten contrary to law:
Acts 25* 2.
in this point does the Lord school the king of Judah, by his Prophet Jeremy,
who says, hear the word of the Lord thou King of Judah, that sit in thy
kingly seat of David: Iere. 22. 24.
thou, and thy servant, and thy people that go in and out at this gate: thus
the Lord commands, keep equity and righteousness: deliver the oppressed
from the power of the violent, do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, and shed no innocent blood in this place, and if
you keep these things faithfully: then shall there come in at the door of
this house, kings to sit upon David's seat, etc. But if you will not be
obedient unto these commandments. I swear by mine own self, says the Lord
(this house shall be waste) for example, the same prophet speaking there of the
wicked government of Seluin the son of good king Josias, that governed Judah,
(says) did not thy father eat and drink, and prosper well so long as he
dealt with righteousness, from whence came this, but because he had me
before his eyes (says the Lord.)

Now when Jeremy says that Josias had God before his eyes; his meaning is all
one with David's intent, when he says, God stands in the parliament of
princes, he is judge among Gods, to give all Magistrates a Memento, that God is
present in all their assemblies and judges them that judge under him whereof
they had need to be put in mind: for oftentimes Mycheas proves too true a
prophet in saying, that the great man will speak what his heart desires, and
the hearers must allow it well: of the which sort of men the very best is,
but as a thisle which a man can hardly touch vnpricked, and the most just
like a bramble, whereunto the sillye sheep seeking to be shrouded from the
sharp showers, is often forced to leave her fleece behind: whose unworthy
coming to their places. Ioatham has well described in the person of
Abimilech, when he said, the trees of the wood went to anoint a king over
them: and said unto the Olive tree: Reign thou over us: but the Olive tree
answered, shall I leave my satnesse, Judges 9.
which both Gods and men praise in me: and go to be promoted over the trees.
Then they came to the fig tree, and said, come thou and reign over us; the
fig tree answered: shall I leave my sweetness and good fruit, and go to be
promoted over the trees, They said unto the vine: Reign thou over us, but the
vine answered, should I leave my wine wherewith I cheer God and men, to be
promoted over the trees: then they said unto the bramble, will thou reign over
us. Then said the bramble, if it be true indeed that you will submit your
selves to my authority, and put your trust under my shadow, or else fire
proceed from the bramble and consume you. By this parable we are taught
generally that every man is to be content with that estate wherein God has
placed him, and that for the most part the very best worthy, do refuse
proffered promotion, and on their part well deserved, whereas on the contrary,
the most unfitly furnished with justice and true judgment, and the least
deserving in a commonwealth: are of al other most ambitious. Such an one was
Absalon, who stole away the hearts of Israel with this flattering speech. 2
king ^.
Oh that I were made Judge in the land, that every man which has any plea or
matter in the law might come to me that I might do him justice, but this is
the just reward, of such as before convenient time, and apt occasion to be
offered, do ambitiously seek the seat of judgment, even untimely and unnatural
death, 2. king. 18.
for Absolon was hanged by the hair of his head, Judges 9.
and a woman with a piece of a millstone dashed out Abymelechs brains, though
Absalon be absent and Abimilech brained long since, yet it is to be suspected
that many me^ get preferment, by their practices, coming in such sheep skins
as are fair words and flattering speeches, but God grant that they prove not
like unto those judges whom Zophonie feared not to liken unto Lions: Cap. 3.
2. 3.
who finding their pray in the evening, chop up all, not leaving so much as
the bones until the morning, Solomon said well, Prou. 20. ^.
that many would be accounted good doers, but where shall we find a faithful
man: some men have said well with Absolon, before they came to preferment, but
they can now be contented to see many men, to sue seven years for their
right, and yet suffer them to sustain wrong because necessity has no law
forsooth. Go to, go to, some body will answer for that one day. A man would
think, that necessity should have the most law, because he has least money
and fewest friends. Magistrates might learn such a lesson of God himself, as it
being rightly practiced, they could not choose but do justice, and this is it,
when almigtie God intended to destroy Sodom and Gomora, before he would do so
though their sins were monstrous great, he considered thus of the matter, the
cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great, and their sin is exceeding grievous.
Genesis 18.
I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether according to
that cry which is come unto me or not, that I may know. Lo let all magistrates
learn by the example of God himslfe, to go down and see (that is) to apply
their ears to hear dilligentlie, and their minds to meditate justly of each
man's matter, if you ask me why, I answer as God himself does, that they may
know vidz. that they may discern betwixt truth and falsehood, right and wrong:
this is that question which David demanded of Saules counselors, that egged
him on to hurt him that never harmed them: are your minds set upon
righteousness, O ye congregation, and do you judge the thing that is right. O
ye sons of men, says he, the same prophet in all his troubles desiring God
to stand on his side against his oppressors, thought it as convenient to crave
of God, the consideration of his cause as to ask his aid against his
adversaries, Psalm. 11. 1.
and therefore prays thus. Ponder my words, O Lord consider my meditation,
etc. So Magistrates have not only authority to make and establise good
laws: but also to determine betwixt men according to the same, unto whose
sensor the subject must submit himself as the Apostle proves to the
Romans, when he says: Romans 13.
let every soul submit it self unto the authority of the higher powers, for
all power is of God, wherefore, whosoever resists that power, resists the
ordinance of God, and purchases unto himself damnation. For Magistrates are
not to be feared of them that do well, but of them that do nill: will thou
not fear, do well then, so shall thou have praise, for he is the minister of
God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil, then fear, for he bears not
the sword for naught, but is the minister of GOD to take vengeance upon them
that do evil, where it is to be remembered, that the civil magistrate, who
bears the sword, is called the minister of God, as well as that spiritual
magistrate that preaches the word: and that no doubt, to the intent he might
take care as well to maintain true religion, as to minister deserved
discipline for it stands with all divine and human reason, that if all
masters and fathers ought to have a more the^ ordinary care to instruct and
help forward their families in Christian religion, so much as in them lies;
much more ought the magistrate to meditate by all means possible to perform
his duty therein; who is a father over all families: I cannot set this forth
in any playner speech then David has done in this short saying; kiss the
son, least he be angry; and so you perish in the right way; Psalm. 2. 12.
by which speech the prophet teaches that God cannot be honored by any other
means then by that which Christ his son has taught; who says himself in
the fifth of John; he that honors the son, John 5. 23.
honoreth the father: he that dishonors the son, dishonors the father,
so that he means in this place; that if you worship not the son as he
has commanded; then you dishonor him; if you dishonor him; then you anger
him; if you anger him, he casts you off: if he casts you off, then you are
from the right way, and if you are from the right way, then you perish. For
the avoiding whereof, all godly Magistrates have had a special care to
meditate in the law of the Lord: such were Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa,
Iosophat, Isachias, etc. Of whose good example, God grant all godly magistrates
to make good use. Amen.

Psalm. 98. 10. With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people
with equity. FINIS.
THE WEDDING GARMENT.

Romans 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. By Henry Smith.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1592.

To the Reader.
To control those false copyes of this sermon, which were printed without my
knowledge, (patched) as it seems out of some borrowed notes, Genesis 43. 11.
and to stop the printing of it again without my corrections, as it was
intended, because they had got it lice^ced before, although vt ^erly unwilling
for some respects to have it published, which made me withstand their
importunity so long, yet seeing more inconvenience then I thought of, I
suffered that which I could not hinder. And now hoping that it is Gods will to
profit some by it, as Jacob parted from Benjamin, so that which must be, let
be, and the Lord give thee a blessing with it.

THE WEDDING GARMENT.
Romans 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have chosen a Text which is the sum of the Bible. For all scripture runs
upon Christ like the title of a book, Revel. 8.
because Christ is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of man's
salvation, therefore he is figured in the law foretold in the Prophets, and
fulfilled in the Gospel. Some places point to his divinity, some to his
humanity, some to his kingdom, some to his priesthood, some to his
prophecy, some to his conception, some to his birth, some to his life, some to
his miracles, some to his passion, some to his resurrection, some to his
Ascension, some to his glorification, all point unto the Savior like John
Baptist, John 1. 29,
when he said, This is the lamb of God which takes away ths sins of the
world. Therefore learn Christ, and learn all.

Now to teach us how we should hear, and how we should love, and how we
should fear, and how we should believe, and how we should follow Christ,
that we may know when we have learned him. The Apostle says, Put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ: as though this word did contain all our duties unto Christ,
To put him on, which seems to be the level of this phrase (if you mark how
it comes in) for before Paul says Cast away the works of darkness, and put
on the armor of light. Verse 12.
Then he names the works of darkness, Verse. 13.
which we should cast off: viz. gluttony, drunkenness, Verse 14.
strife, envy, chambering, wantonness, after he names the armor of light,
which we should put on, and calls it by the name of the giver, The Lord
Jesus Christ. In steed of gluttony, Psalm. 109. 88
and drunkenness, and strife, and envy, and chambering, and wantonness, and
other patches of the devil, wherewith man clothed himself as with a Garment.
The Apostle gives him another garment, which he calls Jesus Christ: he
does not oppose virtue to vice, as one would think when he had said, Cast off
gluttony, he should have said, Put on sobriety: when he had said, Cast
of wantonness, he should have said, Put on continency. When he had said,
Cast of envy he should have said, Put on love: but in stead of all virtues,
he commends the example of Christ for every virtue, and opposes it to
every vice, as if he should say, He which thinks only to follow Christ,
needs not be led by the hand from virtue to virtue, but his example will
teach him what he shall follow, and what he shall flee, better then all
precepts in the world.

Therefore this is the best thought in every action for a man to think, What
Christ would do, which was made not only redemption and salvation to save us,
but wisdom and example to guide us. Therefore he says: 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Learn of me, and follow me, as though we should think before we speak,
Mat. 11. 29.
whether he would speak so, Mark 10. 21
and consider before we do, whether he would do so, and do all by his example,
as the scholar writes by his copy, or else we do not learn of him, but of
our selves, and then we go awry, like a child which scribleth with out a
rule. If thou resoluest to speak, and do no otherwise then Christ would
speak and do himself, thou shall be sure to do all things well, because
thou follovvest a straight pattern. Therefore study what this means. John 3.
4.
To put on Christ. It is a strange speech, and a strange Garment, they which
cannot tell like Nichodemus what Christ means, when he says, that we must
be born again, cannot tell what Paul means when he says, Put on Christ:
as if one man should put on another. I think many here may go to the
Apostle, as the Apostle went unto Christ, Luke 1. 9.
and ask. Gal 3. 27.
What is the parable? This phrase is read in none but Paul, which has written
most of justification by Christ: and therefore he uses all phrases to
express how we should apply Christ unto us, and in no terms he has
showed it more lively then in this phrase, Put on Christ. For it signifies
that Christ does cover us like a Garment, Romans 4. 7.
and defend us like an Armoure. He hides our unrighteousness with his
righteousness, he covers our disobedience with his obedience, he shadoweth
our death with his death, that the wrath of God cannot find us, judgment
cannot spy us, the curse cannot see us, for the garment which covers and
hides us. Genesis 27.
But as Jacob got the blessing in the name and apparel of Esau his elder
brother. So in the name and apparel of Christ our elder brother, we receive
the blessing, and are received into favor like Christ himself. For God says
not: This is my beloved son which pleases me, Math. 3. 17.
But in whom I am well pleased: meaning, that not only Christ pleases GOD,
but we please God in Christ: 1. Cor. 11. 3.
For Christ is our head. Ephesians. 5. 23.
Therefore, as one looking in the face of a man, does like him straight if he
like his face: so God beholding us in the face of Christ, does love us
straight, because the face does please him: But Christ is not our head,
unless we be his members, Christ is not our Garment unless we put him on: as
Christ did put on our garment, when he clothed himself with our flesh, and
took our infirmities, and bore our curse: so we must put on his garment, that
is, his righteousness, his merits and his death, which is as strange a
vesture to us, as our flesh was to him, Revel. 3. 4.
and much ado we have to put it on, Mat. 22. 11.
and when it is on, Mat. 7. 23.
there is great cunning to wear it cleanelie and comely from soyling and
renting, that such a precious Garment be not taken from us again. Therefore,
many seem to wear this Garment which shall be thrust from the banquet,
because they wear it not: as those which will say when the Lord shall come to
judgment, Luke 13. 26.
We have seen thee in our streets, we have heard thee in our Synagogs, we
have prophesied, we have cast out devils, we have wrought miracles by thy
name: as though if any had put him on, or borne his marks, they were the men
which were marked like his servant, therefore who but they shall enter into
Heaven? Yet Christ says, I know you not, there is their reward, I know you
not: as if he should answer, you wear not my Liuerie, Luke 13. 27.
you bear not my Cognizance for all your shows, therefore, depart from me:
So he put them off, because they had not put him on: For though they had seen
his person, and heard of his virtues, yet they had not faith to apply his
mercies, his merits, his death, and his righteousness unto them, without
which no man can put on Christ nor wear him. Faith is the hand which puts
him on. Faith takes first his righteousness, and covers her unrighteousness,
then she takes his obedience, and covers her disobedience, then she takes
his patience, and covers her impatiency, then she takes his temperance, and
covers her intemperancie, then she takes his continency, and covers her
incontinencie, then she takes his constancy, and covers her inconstancy:
then she takes his says, and covers her diffidence: then she takes his
humility, and covers her pride: then she takes his love, and covers her
rancour. And so takes one roabe after another, and tricketh her self until
she have put on Jesus Christ: that is, until she appear in the sight of
God, like Jesus Christ, clothed with his merits and graces: that God has no
power to be angry with her, because she comes so like his Son. This is to
put on Jesus Christ, as you shall see more lively, when you have taken a
view of the garment, for we are to speak of christ the Garment, and of our
putting it on. There be many fashions of apparel, but they are too light, or
too heavy, or to sad, or too course, or to stale, and all wear out. At last
the Apostle found a fashion, that surpasses them all: it is never out of
fashion, meet for all seasons, fit for all persons, and such a profitable
weed, that the more it is worn, the fresher it is. what fashion have you
seen comparable to this? 2. Sam. 10. 4.
It is not like the clothes of David's Ambassadors, which covered their upper
parts, 1. Sa. 17. 29.
but not their lower parts: 2. king. 14. 2.
not like Saules armor, which tried David when he should fight with it. Nor
like the counterfeit of Ieroboams wife, John 9. 45.
which disguised her self to go unknown: nor like to the old rags of the
Gibeonites, which deceived Joshua, nor like the paultrie suite of Michah, which
he gave once a year to his Leuite, nor like the gluttons flaunt, Iud. 17. 10.
which ietted in purple every day; nor like the light clothes which Christ
said are in kings Courts, Math. 11. 8.
and make them lighter that wear them. Luke 16. 19.
But it is like the Garment of the high Priest, Exodus 28. 21.
which had all the names of the Tribes of Israel, written upon his breast: so
all the names of the faithful are written in the breast of Christ, and
registered in the book of his merits: Mal. 3. 16.
it is like Elias Mantell which divided the waters: 2. king. 2. 8.
So he deuideth our sins and punishments, that they which are clothed with
Christ, Deuteronomy. 26. 5.
are armed both against sin and death. It is like the Garments of the
Israelites in the wilderness, which did not wear: forty years together,
they wandered in the desert, and yet says Moses, their shoes were not worn,
but their apparel was as when they came out of Egypt: So the righteousness of
Christ does last for ever, Math. 17. 2.
and his mercies are never worn out. Hest. 6. 11.
As Mardocheus shined in the kings robes before the people: So and more
glorious are the faithful in the robes of Christ before God. When Christ was
transfigured upon the Mount. Mat. says, that his face shined like the sun,
and his clothes were as white as the light: Psalm. 136. 1
So when we are transfigured into the image of Christ we shall shine before
other men like lights: and therefore Christ's Disciles are ca^lled Lights,
Math. 5. 14.
because they were clothed with light, and shined to the world.

Solomon was not so glorious in all his royalty, Mat. 6. 29.
nor the Lillies which are brauer then Solomon, as he which is clothed with
Christ, because the apparel upon him is better then all the world about him.
Therefore if David said, 1. Sam. 1. 14.
Weep ye daughters of Israel for Saul which clothed ye in purple: I may
say, rejoice ye daughters of Israel, for Christ which has clothed you with
righteousness, as it were with a vesture, before you come to the banquet.

This is the wedding Garment without which no man can feast with the Lord.
Math. 12. 12
This Garment is called an Armor, because it defends us from all the
assaults of the devil the flesh, Ephesians. 9. 1.
the world, the heat of persecution, and the cold of defection. This Garment is
called Light, Romans 1.
because it is the beauty and glory of them which wear it. Matthew. 6.
This Garment is called a kingdom, because none but kings do wear it, that
is, they are inthroned in the kingdom of christ, and made kings over the world,
the flesh and Satan: which wear this Garment, Iud 16. 6.
like the hair of Sampson which while he wore he was like a king, and all his
ennemies had no power to hurt him.

This Garment Paul has sent unto you, to go before the king of heaven and
earth, a holy Garment, a royal garment, Romans 5. 1.
an immaculate garment, an everlasting garment: Romans 14. 17
a garment whereof every hem is peace of conscience, Math. 9. 20.
every pleat is joy in the holy ghost, every stitch is the remission of some
sin, and saves him which wears it. If he which touched the hem of Christ's
garment was healed, he which wears the garment, nay he which wears Christ
himself, shall not he be healed of all his sores, though he were wounded from
head to foot? You need not cloth him now which says. Math. 25. 43
When I was naked ye did not cloth me, Math. 21. 8
nor cast your Garments in his way, Genesis 9. 23.
as they did, when he came to Jerusalem, Luke 10. 34.
but take his Garments, and suffer your selves to be clothed, This Samaritan;
does not signify Christ, but yet may be resembled to Christ.
as Noah did, to cover your nakedness. As the good Samaritane put him upon
his own beast, which was spoiled with thieves, and bound up his sores when he
was wounded. So Christ Jesus mounteth the faithful upon his righteousness,
and heals their sins, as though he should cover them with his Garments, Genesis
3. 1.
whom the world, the flesh, and the devil have robbed of their Garments, that
is, the righteousness which they had in Paradise before the serpent came: so
if we put on Christ, we are clothed with his obedience, whereby our
wickedness is covered: we are clothed with his merits whereby our sins are
forgiven: we are clothed with his death: whereby our punishment is released, we
are clothed with his spirit, whereby our hearts are mollified and sanctifikd,
and renewed till we resemble Christ himself. This is the Apostles meaning, to
put on Christ, as it is unfolded in Col. 3. 12. Col 3. 12.
Where he bringes forth all the robes of Christ, and sorts them, and says,
put on mercy, put on meeknes, put on humility, verse 20.
put on patience, put on love, all which before he called (the new man) so
that to put on Christ, is to put on the new man with all his virtues, until we
be renewed to the Image of Christ, which is like a new man amongst men. They
which labor to be righteous, and yet believe that Christ's righteousness shall
save them, have put on Christ as Paul would have them. We are not taught to
put on Angels, nor saints, nor the Virgin Mary, nor Paul himself, to cover our
sins with their righteousness, as the Papists do, but we are commanded to put on
Christ, and cover our sins with his righteousness. The body has many
Garments, but the soul has one garment. Every clout will cover our sores,
but the finest silk will not cover our sins. Therefore when we seem brave
to others, we seem foul to God, because his eye is upon our sins, which
lie naked, when all the rest is covered, until we put on Christ, and then we
hear that voice, Thy sins are covered. And then we have that blessing:
Math. 9. 2.
Blessed is the man, whose sin is covered. So we are clothed and blessed
together. Psalm. 32. 1.
Yet this garment is out of request, too rough for some, too grave for others,
too base for others. And therefore in stead of putting on Christ, they put him
off, in stead of welcomming him, Luke. 1. 37.
they discharge him, like the Gad^rens, Math. 8. 34.
that they may keep their Swine, Matthew. 27. 135.
that is, their beastly pleasures which he would cast into the Sea. These are
like the foolish soldiers which should have made christ their garment, and
they cast lots upon his garments, and divided them, and so spoiled them. So do
the papists deal with this garment, they say it is not fit for them, and
therefore they break it and mangle it, and piece it with rags of their own
inventions: they say it is too light, and notable to bear off the storms of
death, and heat of hell, and therefore chose rather to make themselves
garments of their merits, and their Masses, and their penance, and their
pardons, and their pilgrimages: Genesis 3. 7. and 31.
like Adam and Eve, which made themselves coats of figleaues, which God
destroyed again, to show that when men have patched al their leaves of masses,
of pardons, of pilgrimages, and satisfactions together, yet they will not cover
their nakedness, nor keep of the heat of gods wrath, but are like the curtall
skirts of David's Ambassadors, 2. Sam. 10 4
which hid not their shame. Therefore when we may go in our masters attire,
shall we scrubbe like beggars patched in our rags? Mine own garments defile
me, Job. 9. 31.
says Job: Our own Garments, our own righteousness defiles us, for what
garment, what righteousness have we of our own, but that which like a
menstruous cloth, Esaias 64. 6.
which had more need to be washed it self, then to wipe that which is foul.
Therefore Christ must make us Garments or else when our backs flaunt it like
courtiers, our souls shall strippe like beggars. Genesis 9. 20.
And the Devils will spore themselves like Cham, to see our nakedness.

First the Father made us Garments in Paradise, Genesis 3. 21.
now the son makes us Garments in the wilderness, naie, the Son is made
our Garment, as Paul says, Christ us made unto us righteousness: 1. Cor. 1.
30.
that is, Christ's righteousness, must be our Garment, or else we shall be
ashamed when our righteousness does not reach to cover our nakedness, but
still some part will peep bare until he cast his righteousness upon it,
and then all is covered. 1. Sam. 17. 40.
As David needed no other armor against the Giant, then a Sling: so we need no
other garment against sin then Christ. There wants nothing but this, to put
it on.

Now let us see how to put this Garment on. Many fumble about it, like
children which had need of one to put on their clothes. Some put on Christ as a
cloak, which hangs upon their shoulders, and covers them when they go
abroad to be seen of men: they can cast on the cloak of holiness, and seem
for a while as holy as the best, but so soon as they come home, the cloak goes
of, and the man is as he was, whose vizard was better then his face. Thus
Hypocrites put on christ, as many retain unto noble men, not to do them any
service, but to have their countenance. Many put on christ like a hat, which
goes off to every one which meets them: so every temptation which meets
them, makes them forget what they heard, what they promised, what they
resolved, and change their way, as though they had not repented at all. So the
common people like your selves put on Christ, they are zealous, so long as they
are in the Church, and bear their breasts, and cast up their eyes, like the
Publican, when they hear a sentence which mooues them, Luke 18. 11.
as though they would do no more against that saying while they live. But the
next business puts all out of mind, till they come to the church again.
Some put on christ as a glove, which covers but the hand, so they put on the
face of Christ, or the tongue of Christ, but their hands work, and their feet
walk, as they did before: So many professors of Religion put on Christ,
which call but for discipline and reformation, that they might get a name of
zeal and sincerity, to cover some fault, which they would not be suspected
of. Thus every man would cover himself with Christ, but they have not the
skill, or they have not the will to put him on. What will you do then? Though
the garment be never so good, yet it is not good to them that do not wear it.
For what profit have we of the garments which we do not wear? they neither
keep us from heat nor cold. Therefore Paul does not bring you a garment to
lay by you for the mothes, but he biddes you put it on. Here is the cunning
now in putting it on. If Paul had taught us this, then you would hearken unto
him. Well, you shall hear what Paul says to the putting of it on. First
(says Paul) you must cast away the works of darkness, Verse. 12.
and then put on the armor of light. First you must put off, and then put on:
As the Eagles feathers will not lie with any other feathers, but consume them,
which lie with them: So the Wedding Garment will not wear with filthy
garments, but scorns like the Arc, that Dagon should stand by it. If any man
may not wear women's apparel for lightness, 1 Samuel 5. 8
may he wear the devils apparel, and cloth himself with pride, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
with covetousness, with envy, with hypocrisy, with uncleanness, and when
he is like the devil sit at Gods table? Math. 2. 21.
No man (says christ, patcheth a new piece to an old Garment, and will thou
patch an old piece to a new Garment: God forbad the people to wear linsey
wolsey, Leui. 19. 19.
because it was a sign of inconstancy, but this is inconstancy it self. He
does not put on christ, but puts off christ, Job. 19. 23.
and puts on Beliall, Reu. 3. 15.
which fashions himself to God, and the world too. As Christ's coat was
without seame, so they must be without stain that wear it. For when a man
puts on fair clothes, he makes himself fair too, and auoideth every
foul thing, least it should foul his clothes: So must he which puts on
Christ: for the finest garment is soonest stained. Therefore when thou have put
on this Garment, thou must wash thy self, and pick thy way, and choose thy
works, and handle nothing that is foul for marring thy clothes, that is, thou
must not think as thou did, nor speak as thou did, nor live as thou
did, but remember that thou have changed thy Master, and serve him with
whom thou art bound. Jude 9.
For if God and the devil could not agree upon Moses body, for one to have one
part, and the other another part, but God would have all: Much less will God
agree that the devil should have part of the soul, which would not yield
him part of the body. Thus have you heard what you must put off: now hear how
Christ must be put on. Reave. 10. 9.
As the Angel taught John to read the book when he bad him eat it: so we must
put on Christ, as if we did eat him, not as the papists do in their Mass, but
as the meat is turned into the substance of the body, and goes through
every part of man: So Christ and his word should go from part to part, from
ear to heart, from heart to mouth, from mouth to hand, till we be of one nature
with the^, that they be the very substance of our thoughts and speeches, and
actions, as the meat is of our body. This is, to eat Christ and his word, or
else we do not eat them, but chew them, and when our taste is satisfied, spue
them out again. Ephesians. 3. 30.
Thus we must put on Christ, for the word signifies so to put him on, as if
thou would put him in, that he may be one with thee, and thou with him, as
it were in a body together. As he has put on all our infirmities, so we must
put on all his graces, not half on, but al on, and claspe him to us, and girde
him about us; and wear him even as we wear our skin, which is always about
us. Then there shall be no need of wyers, nor curls, nor perriwigges, the
husbands shall not be forced to rack their rents, nor inhaunce their fines,
nor sell their lands, to deck their wives. 2. King. 2.
But as the poor mantle of Eliah seemed better to Elisha then all the robes of
Solomon, so the wedding garment shall seem better then all the flantes of
vanity, and put every fashion out of fashion, which is not modest and comely
like it self. If you will know farther how to put on Christ, you shall see
how your text vvil catechize you in his three names. Lord, Jesus, Christ. The
Apostle seems to spell out the way unto us, how we should wear this
garment. First, we must put him on as Lord, then we must put him on as
Jesus: Lastly, we must put him on as christ. Thou must put him on as Lord, that
is, thy ruler to command thee, and thy Tutor to govern thee, thy master to
direct thee, thou must be no man's servant but his, take no man's part against
him, Act. 4. 19.
but say with the Apostle, Whether is it meet to obey God or you? Thou must
put him on as Jesus, Joshua has the like name but not from God, nor to that end.
that is, thy savior, in whom thou trustest, thy protector on whom thou
depe^dest, thy redeemer in who^ thou beleeuest. Thou must not look for thy
salvation from Angel, nor Saint, nor any thing beside him. For the name of
Jesus signifies a Savior, Luke 1. 69.
and is given to none but him, and he is not only called the Savior, Iud. 3.
9.
but the salvation, in the song of Simeon, to show that he is the only
Savior, for there be many Saviors, but there can be but one salvation: as
there may be many tortures, and yet but one death. Therefore when he is called
the salvation, it implies that there is no Savior beside him. Thou must put
him on as Christ, Luke 3. 33.
that is, Act. 3. 22.
a king to rule, a Prophet to teach, Heb. 8. 3.
a Priest to pray and sacrifice and pacify the wrath of GOD for thee. Mat. 1.
16.
For this name Christ does signify that he was anointed a king, Heb. 1. 8.
a Priest and a Prophet: for man, a king to rule him, a Priest to offer
sacrifice for him, a Prophet to teach him, so that he puts on Christ as
Lord, which worshippeth none but him, so that he puts on Christ as Lord,
which worshippeth none but him. Gal. 3. 17.
He puts on Christ as Jesus, which believes in none but him, and he
puts on Christ as Christ, which worshippeth none but him, believes in none
but him, and hears none but him. You put on Christ first, when you are
baptized. then you were sealed and consecrated to his service, so soon as you
came into the world, you vowed to renounce the world and follow God: how
many have put on christ thus, and since have put him off again, which have
broken the first promise that ever they made, and were never faithful to God
since. You put on Christ again, Romans 6. 3.
when you are called and sanctifieed, that is, when you cast off the old man,
which is corrupt with the lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 4. 22.
the pride of life, and the cares of this world, and put on the new man, which
is regenerat in righteousness and holiness to the image of Christ, or
likeness of Adam in his innocence, for to put on the new man, is to become a
new man, as if thou were borne again, and conceived of the holy Ghost. Of
this Job speaks when he says, Romans 12. 2.
I put on Justice and it covered me* Job. 29. 14.
you put on Christ again, 1. Cor. 10. 16
when you receive this holy Sacrament, and are partakers of his body and
blood, that is, the merits of his obedience and passion by faith, which
hears him, as if she did see him, and sees him, as if she did feel him, and
feels him, as if she did taste him, and tastes him, as if she did digest him,
then christ is become yours and dwells in you, and feeds you with his grace
to eternal life, as the bread and wine sustaineth the life present.

Lastly, Phil. 3. 21.
when you have put on Christ in these three sorts, 1. Cor. 15, 49.
which is your Garment for this world, after you shall put on Christ in
heaven, and be clothed with his glory, and that shall be your last vesture,
which shall never wear out.

Thus have you heard what is meant by putting on Christ, first to cloathe our
selves with righteousness and holiness like Christ, and then because our own
righteousness is too short to cover our arms, and legs, and thighs of
sin, but still some bare place will peer out and shame us in the sight of
God: therefore we must borrow Christ's Garments, Genesis 27. 15.
as Jacob did his brothers and cover our selves with his righteousness, that
is, believe that his righteousness shall supply our unrighteousness, and his
sufferinges shall stand for our sufferings, because he came to fulfill the
law, and bear the curse, and satisfy his father for us, that all which
believe in him might not die, but have life everlasting. Ioh. 3. 16.


Now I have showed you this goodly Garment, you must go to another to help
you to put it on, and none can put this Garment upon you, but he which is the
Garment, the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore to him, let us pray.

FINIS.

