A PLEASANT Conceited Comedy CALLED, Loves labors lost.

As it was presented before her Highness this last Christmas.

Newly corrected and augmented By W. Shakespere.

Imprinted at London by W.W. for Cutbert Burby. 1598.

Enter Ferdinand K. of Nauar, Berovvne, Longauill, and Dumaine. Ferdinand. LET
Fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen Tombs,
And then grace us, in the disgrace of death:
When spite of cormorant devouring Time,
Then devour of this present breath may buy:
That honor which shall bate his sythes keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore brave Conquerours, for so you are,
That war against your own affections,
And the hudge army of the worlds desires.
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force,
Nauar shall be the wonder of the world.
Our Court shall be a lytlle Achademe,
Still and contemplatyue in living art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longauill,
Have sworn for three years term, to live with me:
My fellow Scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this sedule here.
Your oaths are past, and now subscribe your names:
That his own hand may strike his honor down,
That violates the smallest branch herein,
If you are armd to do, as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it to.

Longauill. I am resolved, it is but a thee years fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine,
Fat paunches have lean pates: and daynty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bancrout quite the wits.

Dumaine. My loving Lord, Dumaine is mortefied,
The grosser manner of these worlds delyghts:
He throws upon the gross worlds baler slaves
To love, to wealth, to pome* I pine and die,
With all these living in Philosophy*

Berowne. I can but say their protestation over,
So much dear Liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strickt obseruances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
And one day in a week to touch no food:
And but one meal on every day beside:
The which I hope is not enrolled there.
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wincke of all the day.
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day:
Which I hope well is not enrolled there,
O these are barraine taskes, too hard to keep,
Not to see Ladies, study, fast, not sleep.

Ferd. Your oath is past, to pass away from these.


Berow. Let me say no my liege, and if you please,
I only swore to study with your grace,
And stay here in your Court for three years space.

Longa. You swore to that Berowne, and to the rest.


Bero. By yea and nay sir, than I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?

Ferd. Why that to know which else we should not know.


Ber. Things hid and ^ard (you mean) from cammon sense.


Ferd. I, that is studies god-like recompense.


Bero. Com'on then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus, to study where I well may dine,
When I to fast expressly am forbid.
Or study where to meet some Mistress fine.
When Mistresses from common sense are hid.
Or having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If studies gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it does not know,
Swear me to this, and I will nere say no.

Ferd. These be the stopps that hinder study quit,
And train our intelects to vain delight.

Bero. Why? all delights are vain, but that most vain
Which with pain purchased, does inherit pain,
As paynefully to poare upon a Book,
To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Does falsely blind the eyesight of his look:
Light seeking light, does light of light beguyle:
So ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by loosing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye in deed,
By fixing it upon a fayrer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heavens glorious Sun,
That will not be deep searched with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others Books.
These earthly Godfathers of heavens lights,
That give a name to every fixed Star,
Have no more profit of their shyning nights,
Then those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know, is to know naught but fame:
And every Godfather can give a name.

Ferd. How well he is read to reason against reading.


Dum. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.


Lon. He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.


Ber. The Spring is near when green geese are a breeding.


Duma. How follows that?


Ber. Fit in his place and time.


Duma. In reason nothing.


Bero. Something then in rhyme.


Ferd. Berowne is like an envious sneaping Frost,
That bites the first borne infants of the Spring.

Bero. Well, say I am, why should proud Summer boast,
Before the Birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abhortiue birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a Rose,
Then wish a Snow in Mayes new fangled shows:
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you to study now it is too late,
Clymbe ore the house to unlock the little gate.

Ferd. Well, sit you out: go home Berowne: adue.


Bero. No my good Lord, I have sworn to stay with you.
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Then for that Angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident I Will keep what I have sworn,
And bide the penance of each three years day.
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I Will write my name.

Fer. How well this yielding rescewes thee from shame.


Ber. Item, That no woman shall come within a mile of my Court. Has this bin
proclaimed?


Long. Four days ago.


Ber. Lets see the penalty* On pain of loosing her tung.
Who devised this penalty?

Long. Marry that did I.


Bero. Sweet Lord and why?


Long. To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
A dangerous law against gentletie.
Item* If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the term of three
years* he shall endure such publibue shame as the rest of the Court can
possible devise.

Ber. This Article my liege your self must break,
For well you know here comes in Embassaie,
The French kings daughter with your self to speak:
A Maid of grace and complet majesty,
About surrender up of Aquitaine,
To her decrepit, sick, and bedred Father.
Therefore this Article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired Princess hither.

Ferd. What say you Lords? why, this was quite forgot.


Ber. So Study evermore is ouershot,
While it does study to have what it would,
It does forget to do the thing it should:
And when it has the thing it hunteth most*
It Is won as towns with fire, so won so lost.

Fer. We must of force dispense with this Decree,
She must lie here on mere necessity.

Ber. Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years space:
For every man with his affectes is borne,
Not by might mastred, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me,
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the Laws at large I write my name,
And he that breaks them in the least degree,
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to other as to me*
But I believe although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
But is there no quick recreation granted?

Ferd. I that there is, our Court you know is haunted
With a refined trauailer of Spain,
A man in all the worlds new fashion planted,
That has a mint of phrases in his brain:
On who the music of his own vain tongue
Does ravish like inchaunting harmony:
A man of complements whom right and wrong
Have chose as vmpier of their mutenie.
This child of Fancy that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high borne words the worth of many a Knight:
From tawnie Spain lost in the worlds debate.
How you delight my Lords I know not I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my Minstrelsie.

Bero. Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire new words, Fashions own knight.

Lon. Costard the swain and he, shall be our sport,
And so to study th^ee years is but short.

Enter a Constable with Costard with a letter. Constab. Which is the Dukes own
person?


Ber. This fellow, What would?


Constable. I my self reprehend his own person, for I am his graces Farborough:
But I would see his own person in flesh and blood.


Ber. This is he.


Constable. Signeour Arm Arm commendes you:
There Is villainy abrod, this letter will tell you more*

Clown. Sir the Contempls thereof are as touching me.


Fer. A letter from the magnifisent Armado.


Bero. How low so ever the matter, I hope in God for high word^^*


Lon. A high hope for a low heaven God grant us patience


Ber. To hear, or forbear hearing*


Lon. To hear meekely sir, and to laugh moderatly, or to forbear both.


Bero. Well sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to clime in the
merrines.


Clow. The matter is to me sir, as concerning Iaquenetta:
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.

Bero. In what manner?


Clow. In manner and form following sir all those three. I was seen with her
in the Manner house, sitting with he^ upon the Form, and taken following her
into the Park^r which put together, is in manner and form following. Now sir
for the manner, It is the manner of a man to spe^ke to a woman, for the form
in some form.


Ber. For the following sir.


Clow. As it shall follow in my correction, and God defend the right.


Ferd. Will you hear this Letter with attention?


Bero. As we would hear an Oracle.


Clow. Such is the sinplicitie of man to harken after the flesh*


Ferd GReat Deputy the welkis Vizgerent, and sole dominatur of Nauar, my
souls earthes God, and bodies fostring patron:


Cost. Not a word^ of Costard yet.


Ferd. So it is


Cost. It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is in telling true: but so.


Ferd. Peace.


Clow. Be to me, and every man that dares not fight.


Ferd. No words.


Clow. Of other men's secrets I beseech you.


Ferd. So it is besedged with sable colored melancholy, I did commend the
black oppressing humor to the most wholesome physic of thy health-geuing
air: And as I am a Gentleman, betook my self to walk: the time When? about
the sixth hour, When Beasts most grase, Birds best peck* and Men sit down to
that nourishment which is called Supper: So much for the time When. Now for the
ground Which? which I mean I walked upon, it is ycliped Thy Park. Then for the
place Where? where I mean, I did encounter that obscene and most propostrous
event that draws from my snowhite pen the ebon colored Incke, which here
thou viewest, beholdest, suruayest, or see. But to the place Where? It
stands North North-east and by East from the West corner of thy curious
knotted garden; There did I see that low spirited Swain, that base Minow of
thy mirth, ( Clown. Me?) that unlettered small knowing soul, ( Clow. Me?)
that shallow vassal ( Clown. Still me.) which as I remember, hight Costard, (
Clow. O me) sorted and consorted contrary to thy established proclaimed Edict
and continen^ Cannon: Which with, o with, but with this I passion to say
wherewith:


Clo. With a Wench.


Ferd. With a child of our Grandmother Eve, a female; or for thy more sweet
understanding a Woman: him, I (as my ever esteemed duty pricks me on) have
sent to thee, to receive the m^^^e of punishment by thy sweet Graces Gfficer
Anthony Dull, a man of good reput, carriage b^aring, and estimation.


Antho. Me ant shall please you? I am Anthony Dull.


Ferd. For Iaquenetta (so is the weaker vessel called) which I apprehended
with the aforesaid Svvaine, I keep her as a vessel of thy Laws fury, and
shall at the least of thy svveete notice, bring her to trial. Thine in all
complements of devoted and hartburning heat of duty.

Don Adriano de Armado.


Boy. Which the base vulgar do call three.


Arma. True.


Boy. Why sir is this such a piece of study? Now here is three studied ere
yele thrice wincke: and how easy it is to put years to the word three, and
study three years in two words, the dancing Horse will tell you.


Arm. A most fine Figure.


Boy. To prove you a Cipher.


Arm. I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is base for a Soldier
to love; so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing my Sword against the
humor of affection, would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it, I would
take Desire prisoner, and ransom him to any French Courtier for a new deuisde
cu^sie. I think scorn to sigh, me thinks I should outsweare Cupid. Comfort
me Boy, What great men have bin in love?


Boy. Hercules Master.


Arm. Most sweet Hercules: more authority dear Boy, name more; and sweet my
child let them be men of good repute and carriage.


Boy. Sampson Master, he was a man of good carriage, great carriage: for he
carried the Towne-gates on his back like a Porter: and he was in love.


Arm. O well knit Sampson, strong ioynted Sampson; I do excel thee in my rapier,
as much as thou did me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Sampsons
love my dear Moth?


Boy. A Woman, Master.


Arm. Of what complexion?


Boy. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.


Arm. Tell me precisely of what complexion?


Boy. Of the seawater Green sir.


Arm. Is that one of the four complexions?


Boy. As I have read sir, and the best of them too.


Arm. Green in deed is the color of Lovers: but to have a love of that
color, me thinks Sampson had small reason for it. He surely affected her for
her wit.


Boy. It was so sir* for she had a green wit.


Arm. My love is most immaculate white and red.


Boy. Most maculate thoughts Master, are maskt under such colors.


Ar. Define, define, well educated infant.


Boy. My fathers wit, and my mothers tongue assist me.


Ar. Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty and pathetical.


Boy. If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will nere be known:
For blush-in cheeks by faults are bred,
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
Eor still her cheeke^ possess the same,
Which native she does owe
A dangerous rhyme master against the reason of white and red.

Ar. Is there not a Ballet Boy, of the King and the Beggar?


Boy. The world was very guilty of such a Ballet some three ages since, but I
think now it is not to be found: or if it were, it would neither serve for the
writing, nor the tune.


Ar. I will have that subject newly writ ore, that I may example my digression
by some mighty presedent. Boy, I do love, that Country girl that I took in
the Park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.


Boy. To be whipped: and yet a better love then my master.


Ar. Sing Boy, My spirit grows heavy in love.


Boy. And that's great marvel, loving a light Wench.


Ar. I say sing.


Boy. Forbear till this company be past.


Enter Clown, Constable, and Wench. Constab. Sir, the Dukes pleasure is that
you keep Costard safe, and you must suffer him to take no delight, nor no
penance, but a'must fast three days a week: for this Damsel I must keep her
at the Park, she is alowde for the Day womand. Fare you well.


Ar. I do betray my self with blushing: Maid.


Maid. M^n.


Ar. I will visit thee at the Lodge.


Maid. That's hereby.


Ar. I know where it is situate.


Ma. Lord how wise you are.


Ar. I will tell thee wonders.


Ma. With that face.


Ar. I love thee.


Ma. So I heard you say.


Ar. And so farewell.


Ma. Fair weather after you.


Clo. Come Iaquenetta, away.

Exeunt.
Ar. Villain, thou shall fast for thy offenses ere thou be pardoned.


Clo. Well sir I hope when I do it, I shall do it on a full stomach.


Ar. Thou shall be heauely punished.


Clo. I am more bound to you then your fellows, for they are but lightly
rewarded.


Ar. Take away this villain, shut him up.


Boy. Come you transgressing slave, away.


Clo. Let me not be pent up sir, I will fast being loose.


Boy. No sir, that were fast and loose: thou shall to prison.


Clo. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I have seen,
some shall see.


Boy. What shall some see?


Clo. Nay nothing M. Moth, but what they look upon. It is not for prisoners
to be too silent in their words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thank God
I have as little patience as an other man, and therefore I can be quiet.

Exit.
Arm. I do affect the very ground (which is base) where her shoo (which is
baser) guided by her foot (which is basest) does tread. I shall be forsworn
(which is a great argument of falsehood) if I love. And how can that be true
love, which is falsely attempted? Love is a familiar; Love is a Devil. There
is no evil angel but Love, yet was Sampson so tempted, and he had an excellent
strength: Yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit. Cupids But
shaft is too hard for Hercules Clubb, and therefore too much odds for a
Spaniards Rapier: The first and second cause will not serve my turn: the
Passado he respects not, the Duella he regards not; his disgrace is to be
called Boy, but his glory is to subdue men. Adue Valor, rust Rapier, be
still Drum, for your manager is in love; yea he loves. Assist me some
extemporall God of Rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn Sonnet* Devise Wit, write
Pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.

Exit.
Enter the Princess of France, with three attending Ladies and three Lords.
Boyet. Now Maddame summon up your dearest spirrits,
Consider who the King your father sendes:
To whom he sendes, and what is his Embassy.
Your self, held precious in the worlds esteem,
To parlee with the sole inheritoure
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchles Nauar, the plea of no less weight,
Then Aquitaine a Dowry for a Queen.
Be now as prodigal of all Dear grace,
As Nature was in making Graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside,
And prodigally gave them all to you.

Queen. Good L. Boyet, my beauty though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
Not vttred by base sale of chapmens tongues:
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth,
Then you much willing to be counted wise,
In spending your Wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker, good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all telling fame
Does noise abroad Nauar has made a Vow,
Till painful study shall outweare three years,
No Woman may approach his silent Court:
Therefore to's seems it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure, and in that behalf
Bold of your worthiness, we single you,
As our best moving fair soliciter:
Tell him, the Daughter of the King of France
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
Importuous personal conference with his grace.
Haste, signify so much while we attend,
Like humble visage Suitors his high will.

Boy. Proud of employment, willingly I go.

Exit Boy.
Prince. All pride is willing pride, and yours is s^t
Who are the Votaries my loving Lords, that are vowfellowes with this virtuous
Duke?

Lor. Longauill is one.


Princ. Know you the man?


1. Lady. I know him Maddame at a marriage feast,
Between L. Perigort and the bewtious heir
Of Jacques Fauconbridge solemnized.
In Normandy saw I this Longauill,
A man of sovereign peerelsle he is esteemd:
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:
Nothing becoms him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtues gloss,
If virtues gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp Wit matched with too blunt a Will:
Whose edge has power to cut whose will still wills,
It should none spare, that come within his power.

Prin. Some merry mocking Lord belike, is it so?


Lad. They say so most, that most his humors know.


Prin. Such short lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?

2. Lad. The young Dumaine, a well accomplished youth,
Of all that Virtue love, for Virtue loved,
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill:
For he has wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit*
I saw him at the Duke Alanso^s once,
And much too little of that good I saw,
Is my report to his great worthin^s.

3. Lad. An other of these Su^dentes at that time,
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hours talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one does catch,
The other turns to a mirth-moouing jest.
Which his fair tongue (conceits expositer)
Delivers in such apt and gracious words,
That aged ears play treuant at his tales.
And younger hearinges are quite ravished.
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.

Prin. God bless my Ladies, are they all in love?
That every one her own has garnished,
With such bedecking ornaments of praise.

Lord. Here comes Boyet.

Enter Boyet.
Prin. Now, What admittance Lord?


Boyet. Nauar had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his compettitours in oath,
Were all addressed to meet you gentle Lady
Before I came: Marry thus much I have learnt,
He rather means to lodge you in the feelde,
Like one that comes here to besiedge his Court,
Then seek a dispensation for his oath:
To let you enter his vnpeeled house.

Enter Nauar, Longauill, Dumaine, and Berowne. Bo. Here comes Nauar.


Nauar. Fair Princess, Welcome to the court of Nauar.


Prin. Fair I give you back again, and welcome I have not yet: the roof of
this Court is too high to be yours, and welcome to the wide fields too base to
be mine.


Nau. You shall be welcome Madame to my Court.


Prin. I will be welcome then, Conduct me thither.


Nau. Hear me dear Lady, I have sworn an oath,


Prin. Our Lady help my Lord, he will be forsworn.


Nau. Not for the world fair Madame, by my will.


Prin. Why, will shall break it will, and nothing else.


Nau. Your Ladishyp is ignorant what it is.


Prin, Were my Lord so, his ignorance were wise*
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace has sworn out Houskeeping:
It Is deadly sin to keep that oath my Lord,
And sin to break it: but pardon me, I am too sodain^ bold,
To teach a teacher ill beseems me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suite.

Nau. Madame I will, if suddenly I may.


Prin. You will the sooner that I were away,
For you will prove periurde if you make me stay.

Berowne. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?


Kather. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?


Ber. I know you did.


Kath. How needles was it then to ask the question?


Ber. You must not be so quick.


Kath. It Is long of you that spur me with such questions.


Ber. Your wit's too hot, it speedes too fast, twill tire.


Kath. Not till it leave the rider in the mire.


Ber. What time a day?


Kath. The hour that fools should ask.


Ber. Now fair befall your mask.


Kath. Fair fall the face it couers.


Ber. And send you many lovers.


Kath. Amen, so you be none.


Ber. Nay then will I be gone.


Ferd. Madame, your father here does intimate,
The payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
Being but the one half of, of an entire sum,
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he, or we, as neither have
Receiud that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the moneys worth.
If then the King your father will restore,
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair faiendship with his Majesty,
But that it seems he little purposes:
For here he does p^maund to have repaide,
A hundred thousand Crowns, and not demands
One payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine.
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Then Aquitaine, so guelded as it is.
Dear Princess were not his requests so far
From reasons yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding against some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.

Prin. You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt,
Of that which has so faithfully been paid.

Ferd. I do protest I never heard of it:
And if you prove it, Il^ repay it back,
Or yield up Aquitaine.

Princ. We arrest your word.
Boyet you can produce acquittances,
For such a sum from spciall officers,
Of Charles his father.

Ferd. Satisfy me so.


Boyet. So please your Grace, the packet is not come,
Where that and other specialties are bound:
To morrow you shall have a sight of them.

Ferd. It shall suff^se me; at which enteruiew,
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
M^ane time receive such welcome at my hand,
As honor (without breach of honor) may,
Make tender of to thy tru^ worthiness.
You may not come (fair Princess) within my gat^s,
But here without you shall be so receiude,
As you shall deem your self lodgd in my har^*
Though so denide fair^ harbor in my house,
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farew^^^
To morrow shall we visit you again.

Pri. Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace.


Na. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.

Exit.
Ber. Lady I will commend you to my none heart.


Ros. Pray you, do my commendations, I would be glad to see it.


Ber. I would you heard it groan.


Ros. Is the fool sick.


Ber. Sick at the heart.


Ros. Alack, let it blood.


Bar. Would that do it good?


Ros. My Physic says I.


Ber. Will you pricked with your eye.


Ros. No point, with my knife.


Ber. Now God save thy life.


Ros. And yours from long living.


Ber. I cannot stay thanksgiving.

Exit.
Enter Dumaine. Dum. Sir, I pray you a word, What Lady is that same?


Boyet. The heir of Alanson, Rosalin her name.


Dum. A gallant Lady Mounsir, fare you well.

Exit.
Longauill. I beseech you a word, What is she in the white?


Boyet. A woman sometimes, and you saw her in the light.


Lon. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name?


Bo She has but one for her self, to desire that were a shame.


Lon. Pray you sir, Whose daughter?


Bo. Her mothers, I have heard.


Lon. Gods blessing on your beard.


Bo. Good sir be not offended, She is an heir of Falcon-bridge.


Lon. Nay my collar is ended. She is a most sweet Lady.


Bo Not unlike sir, that may be.

Exit Longauil.
Enter Berowne. Bero. What Is her name in the capp?


Boy. Katherin by good happ.


Ber, Is she wedded or no?


Boy. To her will sir, or so.


Ber. O you are welcome sir, adieu.


Boy. Farewell to me sir, and welcome to you.

Exit Bero.
Lady M^ria. That last is Berowne, the merry madcap L.
Not a word with him but a jest.

Boy. And every jest but a word.


Prin. It was well done of you to take him at his word.


Boy. I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.


Lady Ka. Two hot Sheep marie.


Bo. And wherefore not Ships?
No Sheep (sweet Lamb) unless we feed on your lips.

La. You Sheep and I pasture: shall that finish the jest*


Bo. So you grant pasture for me.


Lad. Not so gentle Beast.
My lips are no Common, though several they be.

Bo. Belonging to whom?


La. To my fortunes and me.


Prin. Good wits will be iangling, but gentles agree,
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Nauar and his Bookmen, for here it is abused.

Bo. If my observation (which very seldom lies
By the hearts still rethoricke, disclosed with eyes.
Deceive me not now, Nauar is infected.

Prin. With what?


Bo. With that which we Lovers entitle Affected.


Prin. Your reason.


Bo. Why all his behauiours did make their retire,
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His heart like an Agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.
His tongue all impacient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his ey-sight to be,
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Me thought all his senses were lokt in his eye,
As Jewels in Crystal for some Prince to buy.
Who tendering their own worth from where they were glast,
Did point you to buy them along as you past,
His faces own margent did coat such amazes,
That all eyes saw his eyes inchaunted with gazes.
I Will give you Aquitai^e, and all that is his,
And you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.

Prin. Come, to our Pauilion, Boyet is disposde.


Bo. But to speak that in words, which his eye has disclosd.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.

Lad. Thou art an old Loue-monger, and speak skilfully.


Lad. 2. He is Cupids Graundfather, and learnes news of him.


Lad. 3. Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.


Boy. Do you hear my mad Wenches?


Lad. No.


Boy. What then, do you see?


Lad. I, our way to be gone.


Boy. You are too hard for me.

Exeunt omnes.
Enter Braggart and his Boy. Bra. Warble child, make passionate my sense of
hearing.


Boy. Concolinel.


Brag. Sweet Air, go tenderness of years, take this Key, give enlargement to
the Swain, bring him festinatly hither, I must employ him in a letter to my
love.


Boy. Master, will you win your love with a french braule?


Brag. How meanest thou? brawling in French.


Boy. No my compl^t Master, but to Iigge off a tune at the tongues end,
canarie to it with your feet, humor it with turning up your eylids, sigh a
note and sing a note sometime through the throat, if you swallowed love with
singing love sometime through: nose as if you snuff^ up love by smelling love
with your hat penthouse like o^e the shop of your eyes, with your arms crossed
on your thinbellies doblet like a Rabbet on a spit, or your hands in your
pocket like ^ man after the ol^e painting, and keep not too long in one tune,
but a s^ip and away: these are complementes, these are humors, these betraie
nice wenches that would be betrayed without these, and make them men of note:
do you note men that most are affected to these.


Brag. How have thou purchased this experience?


Boy. By my pen of obser^^tio^.


Brag. But o but o.


Boy. The Hobbie-horse is forg^t.


Brag. Calst thou my love Hobbi-horse.


Boy. No Master, the Hobbi-horse is but a ^olt, and your love perhaps, a
hacknie: But have you forgot your Love?


Brag. Almost I had.


Boy. Necligent student, learn her by heart.


Brag. By heart, and in heart boy.


Boy. And out of heart Master: all those three I will prove.


Brag. What will thou prove?


Boy. A man, if I live (and this) by, in, and without, upon the instan^* by
heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her: in heart you love her,
because your heart is in love with her: and out of heart you love her* being out
of heart that you cannot enjoy her.


Brag. I am all these three.


Boy. And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.


Brag. Fetch hither the Swain, he must carry me a letter.


Boy. A message well simpa^^isd, a Horse to be embassadoure for an Ass.


Brag. Ha ha, What say thou?


Boy. Marry sir, you must send the Ass upon the Horse, for he is very slow
gated: but I go.


Brag. The way is but short, away.


Boy. As swift as Lead sir.


Brag. The meaning pretty ingenius, is not Lead a metal heavy, dull, and
slow?


Boy. Minnime honest Master, or rather Master no.


Brag. I say Lead is slow.


Boy. You are too swift sir to say so.
Is that Lead slow which is fierd from a Gunne*

Brag. Sweet smoke of Rhetorike*
He reputes me a Cannon, and the Bullet that's hee^
I shoot thee at the Swain.

Boy. Thump then, and I fl^e.


Brag. A most acute Iuuenall, volable and free of grace,
By thy favor sweet Welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, Valor gives thee place.
My Herald is returned.

Enter Page and Clown. Page A wonder Master, Heers a Costard broken in a shin.


Ar. Some enigma, some riddle, ^ome, thy Lenuoy begin.


Clo. No egma, no riddle, no lenuoy, no salve, in thee male sir.
O sir, Plantan, a pline Plantan: no lenuoy, no lenuoy, no Salve sir, but a
Plantan.

Ar. By virtue thou inforcest laughter, thy silly thought, my spleen, the
heauing of my lunges prouokes me to rediculous smyling: O pardone me my
stars, does the inconsiderate take salve for lenuoy, and the word lenuoy for
a salve?


Page Do the wise think them other, is not lenuoy a salve?


A. No Page, it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain,
Some obscure presedence that has tofor^ bin feign.
I will example it.
The Fox, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were still at odds being but three.
There Is the morrall: Now the lenuoy.

Page I will add the lenuoy, say the morrall again.


Ar. The Fox, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.

Page Until the Goose came out of door,
And stayed the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your morrall, and do you follow with my lenuoy.
The Fox, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.

Arm. Until the Goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.

Page A good Lenuoy, ending in the Goose: would you desire more?


Clo. The Boy has sold him a bargain, a Goose, that is flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, and your Goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loo^^*
Let me see a fat Lenuoy, ^ that^ (...)

Ar. Come hithe^, come (...) argumen^ begin*


Boy. By saying that a Cost^^d was broken (...)
Then called you for the Lenuoy.

Clow. True, and I for a Plantan, thus came your argument in,
Then the boys fat Lenuoy, the Goose that you bou^^, and he ended the market.

Ar. But tell me, How was there a Costard broken in a shin?


Page I will tell you sencibly.


Clow. Thou have no feeling of it M^^h, I will speak thee
I Costard running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold, and broke my shin.

Arm. We will talk no more of this matter.


Clow. Till there be m^^^ matter in the shin.


Arm. Sir Costard, I will infranchise then.


Clow. O marry me to one ^rancis, I smell some Lenuoy, some Goose in this.


Arm. By my sweet soul, I mean^* s^tting thee as libertiy.
Enfreedoming thy person: thou wen emu^^ed, restrained, captiuated, bound.

Clown. True, true, and now you will be my purgation, and let me loose.


Arm. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from di^tance, and in lewe thereof,
impos^^n thee nothing but th^^ Bear^ this significant to the country Maid
Iaquenetta where is remuneration, for the best w^^d of mine honor, it
rewarding my dependants. M^^h, follow.


Page Like the sequ^ll I, Sign^^^ Costard adieu.

Exit.
Clow. My sweet ou^^ of man's flesh, my in-co^^ Ie^^
Now will I look to his remuneration.
Remuneration, O that is the latin word for three* fa^thing^*
Three-farthings remu^ation where the prier of this (...) i. d. no, I Will give
you a remuneration^ Why? (...) remuneration: Why* it is a f^yr^r name of (...)
I will never buy and (...)

(...) Ber. O my good (...)


Clow. Pray you (...) a man buy for a remuneration?


Ber. O what is a remuneration?


Cost. Marie sir, half penny farthing.


Ber. O, why then three farthing worth of Silk.


Cost. I thank your worship, God be wy you.


Ber. O stay slave, I must employ thee.
As thou will win my favor, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall in^reate.

Clow. When would you have it done sir?


Ber. O this afternoon.


Clow. Well, I will do it sir: Fare you well*


Ber. O thou know not what it is.


Clow. I shall know sir when I have done it.


Ber. Why villain, thou must know first.


Clow. I will come to your worship to morrow morning.


Ber. It must be done this after noone,
Hark slave, it is but this:
The Princess comes to hunt here in the Park,
And in her train there is a gentle Lady:
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosalin^ they call her, ask for her:
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This seald-vp counsel. There Is thy guerdon: go.

Clow. Gardon, O sweet gardon, better then remuneratio^, a leuenpence-farthing
better: most sweet gardon. I will do it sir in prinn gardon remuneration.


Exit. Ber. O and I forsooth in love, I that have been loves whip?
A very Bedell to a humerous sigh, a Crietick, nay a night-watch Constable.
A domineering pedant ore the Boy, then whom no mortal so magnificent.
This wimpled whyning purblind wayward Boy,
This signior Iunios giant dwa^ffe, dan Cupid,
Regent of Loue-rimes, Lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groones:
Liege of all loyterers and malcontents:
Dread Prince of Placcat^, King of Codpeece^*
Sole Emperator and great general
Of trotting Parrators (O my little heart.)
And I to be a Corporal of his field,
And wear his colors like a Tumblers hoope.
What* I love, I sue, I seek a wife,
A woman that is like a Iermane Cloak,
Still a repairing: ever out of frame,
And never going a right, being a Watch:
But being watched, that it may still go right.
Nay to be periurde, which is worst of all:
And among three to love the worst of all,
A whitly wanton, with a velvet brow,
With two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes.
I and by heaven, one that will do the deed,
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to: it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect,
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, shue, groan,
Some men must love my Lady, and some Ione.

Enter the Princess, a Forrester, her Ladies, and her Lords Quee. Was that
the king that spurd his horse so hard,
Against the steep up rising of the hill?

Forr. I know not, but I think it was not he.


Quee. Who ere a was, a showd a mounting mind.
Well Lords, to day we shall have our dispatch,
Ore Saturday we will return to France.
Then Forrester my friend, Where is the Bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?

Forr. Hereby upon the edge of yonder Coppice,
A Stand where you may make the fairest shoot.

Quee. I thank my Beauty, I am fair that shoot*
And thereupon thou speakst the fairest shoot.

Forr. Pardon me Madam, for I meant not so.


Quee. What, what? First praise me, and again say no.
O short lived pride. Not fair? alack for woe

For. Yes Madam fair.


Quee. Nay, never paint me now,
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glass) take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words, is more then dew.

For. No thing but fair is that which you inherrit.


Quee. See see, my beauty will be saved by merit.
O heresy in fair, fit for these days,
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the Bow: Now Mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well, is then accounted ill:
Thus will I save my Credit in the shoot,
Not wounding, pity would not let me doote.
If wounding then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise, then purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guyltie of detested crimes,
When for Fames sake, for praise an outward part,
We bend to that, the working of the heart.
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor Deares blood, that my heart means no ill.

Boy. Do not cursed wives hold that selfe-soueraigntie
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords ore their Lords?

Quee. Only for praise, and praise we may afford,
To any Lady that subdewes a Lord.

Enter Clown. Boyet, Here comes a member of the common wealth.


Clo. God dig-you-den al, pray you which is the head lady?


Que. Thou shall know her fellow by the rest that have no heads.


Clow. Which is the greatest Lady, the highest?


Quee. The thickest, and the tallest.


Clow. The thickest, and the tallest: it is so, truth is truth.
And your waste Mistrs were as slender as my wit,
One a these Maids girdles for your waste should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.

Quee. What Is your will sir? What Is your will?


Clow. I have a Letter from Monsier Berowne, to one Lady Rosaline.


Que. O thy letter, thy letter: He Is a good friend of mine.
Stand a side good bearer. Boyet you can carue,
Break up this Capon.

Boyet I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook: it imports none here.
It is writ to Iaquenetta.

Quee. We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the Wax, and every one give ear.

Boyet reeds. BY heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible: true that
thou art beauteous, truth it self that thou art lovely: more fairer then
fair, beautiful then beauteous, truer then truth it self: have comiseration
on thy heroical Vassal. The magnanimous and most illustrate King Cophetua set
eye upon the pernicious and indubitate Beggar Zenelophon: and he it was that
might rightly say, Veni, vidi, vici: Which to annothanize in the vulgar, O base
and obscure vulgar; videliset, He came, See, and overcame: He came, one; see,
two; couercame, three. Who came? the King. Why did he come? to see. Why did he
see? to overcome. To whom came he? to the Beggar. What saw he? the Beggar. Who
overcame he? the Begge^* The conclusion is victory: On whose side? the King:
the captive is inricht, on whose side? the Beggars. The catastrophe is a
Nuptial, on whose side? the Kings: no, on both in one, or one in both. I am
the King (for so stands the comparison) thou the Beggar, for so witnesses thy
lowlines. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy love? I could.
Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What, shall thou exchange for rags roabes,
for tittles tytles, for thy self, me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane
my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.


Thine in the dearest design of industri, Don Adriana de Armatho.

Thus do thou hear the nemean Lion roar,
Against thee thou Lamb, that stand as his pray:
Submissiue fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play.
But if thou strive (poor soul) what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.

Quee. What plume of feathers is he that indicted this letter?
What vain? What Wethercock? Did you ever hear better?

Boy. I am much deceived, but I remember the style.


Quee. Else your memory is bad, going ore it erewhile.


Boy. This Armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court.
A Phantasime a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the Prince and his Booke-mates.

Quee. Thou fellow, a word.
Who gave thee this letter?

Clow. I told you, my Lord.


Quee. To whom should thou give it?


Clow. From my Lord to my Lady.


Quee. From which Lord, to which Lady?


Clow. From my Lord Berowne, a good Master of mine,
To a Lady of France, that he calde Rosaline.

Quee. Thou have mistaken his letter. Come Lords away.
Here sweet, put up this, twilbe thine annother day.

Boy. Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?


Rosa. Shall I teach you to know.


Boy. I my continent of beauty.


Rosa. Why she that bears the Bow. Finely put off.


Boy. My Lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry, hang me by the neck, if
horns that year miscarrie.
Finely put on.

Rosa. Well then I am the shooter.


Boy. And who is your Dear?


Rosa. If we choose by the horns, your self come not near. Finely put on in
deed.


Maria. You still wrangle with her Boyet, and she strikes at the brow.


Boyet. But she her self is hit lower: Have I hit her now?


Rosa. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man when King
Pippen of Frannce was a little boy, as touching the hit it.


Boy. So I may answer thee with one as old that was a woman when queen
Guinouer of Britain was a little wench as toching the hit it.


Rosa. Thou can not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou can not hit it my good man.
Exit.
Boy. And I cannot, cannot, cannot: and I cannot, an other can.


Clo. By my troth most pleasant, how both did fit it.


Mar. A mark marvelous well shot, for they both did hit.


Bo. A mark, O mark but that mark: a mark says my Lady.
Let the mark have a prick in it, to meat at, if it may be.

Mar. Wide a'the bow hand, in faith your hand is out.


Clo. Indeed a'must shoot nearer, or hele near hit the clout.


Boy. And if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.


Clo. Then will she get the vpshoot by cleaving the is in.


Ma. Come come, you talk greasely, your lips grow foul.


Cl. Shes to hard for you at pricks, sir challeng her to bowl


Bo. I fear too much rubbing: good night my good owl.


Clo. By my soul a Swain, a most simple Clown.
Lord, Lord, how the Ladies and I have put him down.
O my troth most sweet iestes, most inconie vulgar wit,
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenly as it were, so fit.
Armatho ath toothen side* o a most dainty man,
To see him walk before a Lady, and to bear her Fann.
To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly a will swear:
And his Page at other side, that handful of wit,
Ah heavens, it is most patheticall nit.
Sowla, sowla.
Exeunt. Shoot. within.
Enter Dull, Holofernes, the Pedant and Nathaniel. Not. Very reverent sport
truly, and done in the testimony of a good conscience.


Ped. The Dear was (as you know) sanguis in blood, ripe as the Pomwater, who
now hangs like a Jewel in the ear of Celo the sky, the welken the heaven,
and anon falls like a Crab on the face of Terra, the soil, the land, the
earth.


Curat Nath. Truly M. Holofernes, the epythithes are sweetly vatried like a
scholar at the least: but sir I assure ye it was a Bucke of the first head.


Holo. Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.


Dull. It Was not a haud credo, it was a Pricket.


Holo. Most barbarous intimation: yet a kind of insinua^ion, as it were in via,
in way of explication facere: as it were replication, or rather ostentare, to
show as it were his inclination after his undressed, unpolished, vneducated,
vnpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest vnconfirmed fashion, to
insert again my haud credo for a Dear.


Dull. I said the Dear was not a haud credo, it was a Pricket.


Holo. Twice sodd simplicity, bis coctus, O thou monster ignorance, How
deformed do thou look.


Nath. Sir he has never fed of the dainties that are bred in a book.
He has not eat paper as it were: he has not drunk inck.
His intellect is not replenished, he is only an annimall, only sensible in the
duller parts: and such barren plants are set before us, that we thankful
should be: which we taste, and feeling, are for those parts that do fructify
in us more then he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indistreell, or a fool,
So were there a patch set on Learning, to see him in a schole.
But omne been say I, being of an old Fathers mind,
Many can brook the weather, that love not the wind.

Dull. You two are book-men, Can you tell me by your wit,
What was a month old at Cains birth, that is not five weeks old as yet?

Holo. Dictisima goodman Dull, dictisima goodman Dull.


Dull. What is dictima?


Nath. A title to Phebe, to Luna, to the Moon.


Holo. The Moon was a month old when Adam was no more.
And rought not to fiue-weeks when he came to fiuescore.
The allusion holds in the Exchange.

Dull. It Is true in deed, the Collusion holds in the Exchange.


Holo. God comfort thy capacity, I say the allusion holds in the Exchange.


Dull. And I say the polusion holds in the Exchange: for the Moon is never but
a month old: and I say beside that, it was a Pricket that the Princess kil^.


Holo. Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporall Epytaph on the death of the
Dear, and to humor the ignorault called the Dear: the Princess killed a Pricket.


Nath. Perge, good M. Holofernes perge, so it shall please you to abrogate
squirilitie.


Holo. I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The prayfull Princess pearst and pricked a pretty pleasing Pricket,
Some say a Sore, but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting.
The Dogs did yell, put ell to Sore, then Sorell iumps from thicket:
Or Pricket-sore, or else Sorell, the people fall a hooting.
If Sore be sore, then el to Sore, makes fifty sores o sorell:
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more I.

Nath. A rare talent.


Dull. If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a talent.


Nath. This is a gift that I have simple: simple, a foolish extrauagant spirit,
full of forms, figures, shapes, obiectes, Ideas, aprehentions, motions,
reuolutions. These are begot in the ventricle of Memory, nourisht in the womb
of primater, and delivered upon the mellowing of occasion: But the gift is
good^n those whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.


Holo. Sir, I praise the L. for you, and so may my parishioners, for their
Sons are well tuterd by you, and their Daughters profit very greatly under
you: you are a good member of the common wealth.


Nath. Me herele, if their Sons be ingenous, they shall want no instruction:
If their Daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But Vir sapis qui pauca
loquitur, a soul Feminine saluteth us.


Enter Iaquenetta and the Clown. Iaquenetta. God give you good morrow M.
Person.


Nath. Master Person, quasi Person? And if one should be perst, Which is the
one?


Clo. Marry M. Scholemaster, he that is liklest to a hoggshead.


Nath. Of persing a Hogshead, a good luster of conceit in a turph of Earth,
Fire enough for a Flint, Pearl enough for a Swine: it is pretty, it is well.


Iaque. Good M. Parson be so good as read me this letter, it was given me by
Costard, and sent me from (...) Armatho: I beseech you read it.


Nath. Facile precor gellida, quando pecas omnia sub vmbra ruminat, and so
forth. Ah good old Mantuan, I may speak of thee as the traueiler does of
Venice, vemchie, vencha, que non te vnde, que non te perreche. Old Mantuan,
old Mantuan,
Who understands thee not, loves thee not, vt re sol la mi fa:
Under pardon sir, What are the contents? or rather as Horrace says in his,
What my soul verses.

Holo. I sir, and very learned.


Nath. Let me hear a staff, a stauze, a verse, Lege domine.
If Love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed.
Though to my self forsworn, to thee I Will faithful prove.
Those thoughts to me were Oaks, to thee like Osiers bowed
Study his by as leaves, and makes his book thine eyes.
Where all those pleasures live, that Art would comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice.
Well learned is that tongue, that well can thee commend.
All ignorant that soul, that sees thee without wonder.
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire,
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thu^der
Which not to anger bent, is music, and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, Oh pardon love this woug,
That singes heavens praise, with such an earthly tongue.

Pedan. You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the accent. Let me
superuise the cangenet.


Nath. Here are only numbers ratefied, but for the elegancie, facility, and
golden c^dence of poesy caret: Ouiddius Naso was the man. And why in deed
Naso, but for smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy? the ierkes of
invention imitarie is nothing: So does the Hound his master, the Ape his
keeper, the tired Horse his rider: But Damosella virgin, Was this directed to
you?


Iaq. I sir from one mounsier Berowne, one of the strange Queens Lords.


Nath. I will ouerglaunce the superscript.
To the snow ^hite hand of the most bewtious Lady Rosaline.
I will look again on the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the
party written to the person written unto.
Your Ladyships in all desired employment, Berowne.

Ped. Sir Holofernes, this Berowne is one of the Votaries with the King, and
here he has framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger Queens: which
accidentally, or by the way of progression, has miscarried. Trip and go my
sweet, deliver this Paper into the royal hand of the King, it may concern
much: stay not thy complement, I forgive thy dewtie, adue.


Maid. Good Costard go with me: sir God save your life.


Cost. Have with thee my girl.

Exit.
Holo. Sir you have done this in the fear of God very religiously: and as a
certain Father says


Ped. Sir tell not me of the Father, I do fear colorable colors. But to
return to the Verses, Did they please you sir Nathaniel?


Nath. Marvelous well for the pen.


Peda. I do dine to day at the fathers of a certain pupil of mine, where if
(before repast) it shall please you to gratify the table with a Grace, I will
on my privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid child or pupil,
undertake your bien venuto, where I will prove those Verses to be very
unlearned, neither sauouring of Poetry, wit, nor invention. I beseech your
society.


Nath. And thank you to: for society (says the text) is the happiness of life.


Peda. And certes the text most infallibly concludes it.
Sir I do inuit you too, you shall not say me nay: pauca verba.
Away, the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.
Exeunt.
Enter Berowne with a paper in his hand, alone. Berow. The King he is hunting
the Dear,
I am coursing my self.
They have pitched a Toil, I am toyling in a pytch, pytch that defiles; defile,
a foul word: Well, set thee down sorrow; for so they say the fool said, and
so say I, and I the fool: Well proved wit. By the Lord this Love is as madd as
Ajax, it kills Sheep, it kills me, I a Sheep well proved again a my side.
I will not love; if I do hang me: I'fayth I will not. O but her eye: by this
light, but for her eye, I would not love her; yes for her two eyes. Well, I do
nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By heaven I do love, and
it has taught me to rhyme, and to be mallicholie: and here is part of my Rhyme,
and hear my mallicholie. Well, she has one a'my Sonnets already, the Clown
bore it, the Fool sent it, and the Lady has it: sweet Clown, sweeter Fool,
sweetest Lady. By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three were
in. Here comes one with a paper, God give him grace to groan.

He stands a side. The King enters. King. Ay me!


Be. Shot by heaven, proceed sweet Cupid, thou have thumpt him with thy
Birdbolt under the left papp: in faith secrets.


King, So sweet a kiss the golden Sun gives not,
To those fresh morning dropps upon the Rose,
As thy eye beams, when their fresh raise have smot.
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows.
Nor shines the silver Moon one half so bright,
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As does thy face through tears of mine give light:
Thou shinst in every tear that I do weep,
No drop but as a Coach does carry thee:
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But do not love thy self, then thou will keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O Queen of queens, how far do thou excel,
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? I Will drop the pader.
Sweet leaves shade folly. Who is he comes here?
Enter Longauill. The King steps a side. What Longauill, and reading: listen
ear.

Berow. Now in thy likeness, one more fool appear.


Long. Ay me! I am forsworn.


Berow. Why he comes in like a periure, wearing papers.


Long. In love I hope, sweet fellowship in shame.


Ber. One drunkard loves an other of the name.


Long. Am I the first that have been periurd so?


Ber. I could put thee in comfort, not by two that I know,
Thou make the triumpherie, the corner cap of society,
The shape of Loves Tiburne, that hanges up Simplicity.

Long. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
O sweet Maria, Empress of my Love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.

Ber. O Rimes are gardes on wanton Cupids hose,
Disfigure not his Shop.

Long. This same shall go.
He reads the Sonnet. I Did not the heavenly Rethorique of thine eye,
Against whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A Woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Thou being a Goddess, I forswore not thee.
My Vow was earthly, thou a heavenly Love.
Thy grace being gainde, cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapoure is.
Then thou fair Sun, which on my earth do shine,
Exhalst this vapour-vow in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, What fool is not so wise,
To loose an oath, to winn a Parradise?

Bero. This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity.
A green Goose, a Goddess, pure pure ydotarie.
God amend us, God amend, we are much out a the way.

Enter Dumaine. Long. By whom shall I send this (company?) Stay.


Berow. All hid, all hid, an old infant play,
Like a demie God, here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools secrets heedfully ore ey.
More Sacks to the myll. O heavens I have my wysh,
Dumaine transformed, four Woodcocks in a dysh.

Duma. O most divine Kate.


Berow. O most profane coxcombe.


Duma. By heaven the wonder in a mortal eye.


Ber. By earth she is not, croporall, there you ly.


Duma. Her Amber heirs for foul has amber coted.


Ber. An amber colored Raven was well noted.


Duma. As upright as the Ceder.


Ber. Stoop I say, her shoulder is with child.


Duma. As fair as day.


Ber. I as some days, but then no Sun must shine.


Duma. O that I had my wish?


Long. And I had mine.


King. And mine too good Lord.


Ber. Amen, so I had mine: Is not that a good word?


Duma. I would forget her, but a Fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will remembered be.

Ber. A Fever in your blood, why then incision
Would let her out in Sawcers, sweet misprison.

Dum. Once more I Will read the Odo that I have writ.


Ber. Once more I Will mark how Love can varrie Wit.
Dumaine reads his Sonnet. On a day, alack the day:
Love, whose Month is ever May:
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the Velvet, leaves the wind,
All unseen, can passage find:
That the Lover sick to death.
Wish himself the heavens breath.
Air (quoth he) thy cheeks may blow,
Air would I might triumph so,
But alack my hand is sworn,
Nere to pluck thee from thy throne:
Vow alack for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee:
Thou for whom Jove would swear,
Juno but an Aethiop were,
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thy love.
This will I send, and something else more plain.
That shall express my true loves fasting pain.
O would the King, Berowne, and Longauill,
Were Lovers too, ill to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a periurde note:
For none offend, where all alike do dote.

Long. Dumaine thy Love is far from charity,
That in loves grief desirst society:
You may look pale, but I should blush I know,
To be ore-hard and taken napping so.

King. Come sir, you blush: as his, your case is such.
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You do not love Maria? Longauile,
Did never Sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guyltie Rimes, obserude your fashion:
Saw sighs reeke from you, noted well your pashion.
Ay me says one! O Jove the other cries!
One her hairs were Gold, Crystal the others eyes.
You would for Parradise break Faith and troth,
And Jove for your Love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear.
How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit?
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it?
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.

Bero. Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah good my Leidge, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, What grace have thou thus to reprove
These Worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no couches in your tears.
There is no certain Princess that appears.
You Will not be periurde, it is a hateful thing:
Tush, none but Minstrels like of Sonnetting.
But are you not a shamed? nay, are you not
All three of you, to be thus much ore' shot?
You found his Moth, the King your Moth did see:
But I a Beam do find in each of three.
O what a Scaene of foolrie have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teene:
O me, with what strickt patience have I sat,
To see a King transformed to a Gnat.
To see great Hercules whipping a Gigge,
And profound Sallomon to tune a Iigge.
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And Crittick Tymon laugh at idle toys.
Where lies thy grief, o tell me good Dumaine?
And gentle Longauill, where lies thy pain?
And where my Liedges? all about the breast.
A Caudle hou!

King. Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betrayed thus to thy ouer-view?

Ber. Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Love? or spend^ (...) minutes time,
In pruning me when shall you hear that I will praise a hand, a foot, a
face, an eye: a gate, a stace, a brow, a breast, a wast, a leg, a limme.


King. Soft, Whither away so fast?
A true man, or a the^fe, that gall^ps so.

Ber. I post from Love, good Lover let me go.


Iaqu. God bless the King.

Enter Iaquenetta and Clown^.
King. What present have thou there?


Clow. Some certain treason.


King. What makes treason here?


Clow. Nay it makes nothing sir.


King. If it mart nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.

Iaqu^. I beseech your Grace let this Letter be read,
Our person misdoubts it: it was treason he said.

King. Berowne read it over.

He reads the letter.
King. Where had thou it?


Iaqu. Of Costard.


King. Where had thou it?


Cost. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.


Kin. How now, What is in yo^? Why do thou tear it?


Ber. A toy my Leedge, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.


Long. It did move him to passion, and therefore lets hear it.


Dum. It is Berownes writing, and here is his name.


Berow. Ah you whoreson loggerhead, you were borne to do me s^^me.
Gu^ltie my Lord, guilty: I confess, I confess.

King. What?


Ber. That you three fools, lackt me fool, to make up the mess*
He, he, and you* and you my Leege, and I,
Are pick-purse^ i^ Love, and we deserve to die.
O dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.

Duma. Now the number is even.


Bero. True true, we are four: will these turtles be gone*


King* Hence sirs, away.


Clow. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.


Ber. Sweet Lords, sweet Lovers* O let us embrace,
As true we are as flesh and blood can be,
The Sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face:
Young blood does not obey an old decree.
We can not cross the cause why we were borne:
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.

King. What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?


Ber. Did they quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
That (like a rude and sauadge man of Inde.)
At the first opning of the gorgious East,
Bows not his vassal head, and strooken blind.
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast.
What peromptorie Eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?

King. What zeal, what fury, has inspirde thee now?
My Love (her Mistres) is a gracious Moon,
She (an attending Star) scarce seen a light.

Ber My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne,
O, but for my Love, day would turn to night,
Of all complexions the culd sovereignty,
Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wantes, that want it self does seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,
F^e painted Rethoricke, O she needs it not,
To things of sale, a sellers praise belonges:
She passes praise, then praise too short does blot.
A witherd Hermight fiuescore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty does varnish Age, as if newborn,
And gives the Crutch the Cradles infancy.
O it is the Sun that makes all things shine.

King. By heaven, thy Love is black as Ebonie.


Berow. Is Ebonie like her? O word divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O who can give an oath? Where is a book?
That I may swear Beauty does beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.

King. O paradox, Black is the badge of Hell,
The hue of dungions, and the School of night:
And beauties crest becomes the heavens well.

Ber. Devils soonest tempt resembling spirits of light.
O if in black my Ladies brows be decked,
It mournes, that painting usurping hair
Should ravish dooters with a false aspect:
And therefore is she borne to make black fair.
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted paynting now:
And therefore redd that would avoid disprayse,
Paintes it self black, to imitate her brow.

Duma. To look like her are Chimnie-sweepers blake.


Long. And since her time are Colliers counted bright.


King. And Aethiops of their sweet complexion crake.


Duma. Dark needs no Candles now, for dark is light.


Ber. Your Mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colors should be washed away.

King. Twere good yours did: for sir to tell you plain,
I Will find a fayrer face not washed to day.

Ber. I Will prove her fair, or talk till doomse-day here.


King. No Devil will fright thee then so much as she.


Duma. I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.


Long. Look, here is thy love, my foot and her face see.


Ber O if the streets were paued with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.

Duma. O vile, then as she goes what upward lies?
The street should see as she walked over head.

King. But what of this, are we not all in love?


Ber. O nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.


King. Then leave this chat, and good Berowne now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

Duma. I marie there, some flattery for this evil.


Long. O some authority how to proceed,
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.

Duma. Some salve for perjury.


Ber. O it is more then need.
Have at you then affections men at arms,
For Charity it self fulfilles the Law:
And who can sever Love from Charity.

King. Saint Cupid then and Soldiers to the field.


Berow. Advance your standars, and upon them Lords.
Pell, mell, down with them: but be first aduisd,
In conflict that you get the Sun of them.

Long. Now to plain dealing* Lay these glozes by,
Shall we resolve to woe these gyrles of France?

King. And winn them too, therefore let us devise,
Some enterteinment for them in their Tents.

Ber. First from the Park let us conduct them thither,
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair Mistres, in the after noone
We will with some strange pastime solace them:
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
For Revels, Daunces, Maskes, and merry hours,
Forerunne fair Love, strewing her way with flower^.

King. Away, away, no time shall be omitted,
That will be time and may by us befitted.

Ber. Alone alone sowed Cockell, reapt no Corn,
And Justice always whirles in equal measure:
Light Wenches may prove plagues to men forsome,
If so our Copper byes no better treasure.

Enter the Pedant, the Curat, and Dull. Pedant. Satis quid sufficit.


Curat. I praise God for you sir, your reasons at Dinner have been sharp and
sententious: pleasant without scurillitie, witty without affection, audatious
without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange without heresy: I did
converse this quondam day with a companion of the kings, who is entitled,
nominated, or called, Don Adriano de Armatho.


Ped. Noui* hominum tanquam te, His humor is lofty, his discourse
peremptory: his tongue fyled, his eye ambitious, his gate maiesticall, and his
general behavior vain, rediculous, and thrasonicall. He is too picked, to
spruce, too affected, to od as it were, too peregrinat as I may call it.


Curat. A most singular and choice Epithat,


Draw-out his Table-booke. Peda. He draws out the thread of his verbositie,
finer then the staple of his argument. I abhor such phanatticall phantasims,
such insociable and point devise companions, such rackers of ortagriphie, as to
speak ^out fine, when he should say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt;
debt, not det: he clepeth a Calfe, Cause: half, haufe: neighbor vocatur
nebour; neigh abreuiated ne: this is abominable, which he would call
abbominable, it insinuates me of infamy: ^^ inteligis domine, to make
frantique lunatique?


Curat. Laus deo, been intelligo.


Peda. B^me boon for boon presci^n, a little scratcht, it will serve.


Enter Bragart, Boy. Curat. Vides ne quis venit?


Peda. Video, et gaudio.


Brag. Chirra.


Peda. Quari Chirra, not Sir?


Brag. Men of peace well incontred.


Ped. Most millitarie sir salutation.


Boy. They have been at a great feast of Languages, and stolen the scraps.


Clow. O they have lyud long on the almsbasket of words. I marvel thy M.
has not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as
honorificabilitudinitatibus: Thou art easier swallowed then a flapdragon.


Page. Peace, the peale begins.


Brag. Mounsier, are you not lettred?


Page. Yes yes, he teaches boys the Horne-booke: What is Ab speld backward
with the horn on his head?


Poda. Ba, puericia with a horn added.


Page Ba most seely Sheep, with a horn: you hear his learning.


Peda. Quis quis thou Consonant?


Page The last of the five Vowels if You repeat them, or the fifth if I.


Peda. I will repeat them: a e I.


Page The Sheep, the other two concludes it o u.


Brag. Now by the sault wane of the meditaranium, a sweet tutch, a quick vene
we of wit, snip snap, quick and home, it rejoices my intellect, true wit.


Page. Offered by a child to an old man: which is wit-old.


Peda. What is the figure? What is the figure?


Page. Horns.


Peda. Thou disputes like an Infant: go whip thy Gigg.


Page Lend me your Horn to make one, and I will whip about your Infamy vnu^
cita a gigge of a Cuckolds horn.


Clow. And I had but one penny in the world thou should have it to buy Ginger
bread: Hold, there is the very Remuneration I had of thy Master, thou half
penny purse of wit, thou Pidgin-egge of discretion. O and the heavens were so
pleased, that thou wart but my Bastard; What a joyful father would thou
make me? Go to, thou have it ad dungil at the fingers ends, as they say.


Peda. Oh I smell false Latin, dunghel for vnguem.


Brag. Arts-man preambulat, we will be singuled from the barbarous. Do you not
educate youth at the Charg-house on the top of the Mountain?


Peda. Or Mons the hill.


Brag. At your sweet pleasure, for the Mountain.


Peda. I do sans question.


Bra. Sir, it is the Kings most sweet pleasur and affection, to congratulate
the Princess at her Pauilion, in the posteriors of this day, which the rude
multitude call the afternoon.


Peda. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent, and
measurable for the after noone: the word is well culd, chose, sweet, and apt
I do assure you sir, I do assure.


Brag. Sir, the King is a noble Gentleman, and my familier, I do assure ye very
good friend: for what is inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee
remember thy courtesy. I beseech thee apparel thy head: and among other
importunt and most serious designs, and of great import in deed too: but let
that pass, for I must tell thee it will please his Grace (by the world)
sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal finger thus
dally with my excrement, with my mustachie: but sweet heart let that pass. By
the world I recount no fable, some certain special honors it pleases his
greatness to impart to Armado a Soldier, a man of travail, that has seen the
world: but let that pass; the very all of all is: but sweet heart, I do
implore secretie, that the King would have me present the Princess (sweet
chuck) with some delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or antique, or
fierworke: Now understanding that the Curate and your sweet self, are good at
such eruptions, and sudden breaking out of mirth (as it were) I have
acquainted you withal, to the end* to crave your assistance.


Peda. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Holofernes, as
concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of this day,
to be rended by our assistants the Kings command, and this most gallant
illustrate and learned Gentleman, before the Princess: I say none so fit as to
present the nine Worthies.


Curat. Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?


Peda. Joshua, your self, my self, and this gallant Gentleman Judas Machabeus;
this Swain (because of his great lim or joint) shall pass Pompey the great,
the Page Hercules.


Brag. Pardon sir, error: He is not quantity enough for that worthies thumb,
he is not so big as the end of his Club.


Peda. Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in minority: his enter
and exit shall be strangling a Snake; and I will have an Apology for that
purpose.


Page. An excellent device: so if any of the audience hiss, you may cry, Well
done Hercules, now thou crusshest the Snake; that is the way to make an offense
gracious, though few have the grace to do it.


Brag. For the rest of the Worthies?


Peda. I will play three my self.


Page. Thrice worthy Gentleman.


Brag. Shall I tell you a thing?


Peda. We attend.


Brag. We will have, if this fadge not, an Antique. I beseech you follow.


Peda. Via good man Dull, thou have spoken no word all this while.


Dull. Nor understood none neither sir.


Ped. Alone, we will employ thee.


Dull. I Will make one in a dance, or so: or I will play on the Taber to the
worthies, and let them dance the hey.


Peda. Most Dull, honest Dull, to our sport: away.

Exeunt.
Enter the Ladies. Quee. Sweet hearts we shall be rich ere we depart,
If Fayrings come thus plentifully in.
A Lady walde about with Diamondes: Look you, what I have from the loving
King.

Rosa. Madame, came nothing else along with that?


Quee. Nothing but this: yes as much love in Rhyme,
As would be crambd up in a sheet of paper
Writ a both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was feign to seal on Cupids name.

R^sa. That was the way to make his godhead Wax:
For he has been five thousand year a Boy.

Kath. I and a shrowde unhappy gallows too.


Ros. You Will near be friends with him, a killed your sister.


Kath. He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy,
And so she died: had she bin Light like you, of such a merry nimble stiring
spirit, she might a bin Grandam ere she died.
And so may you: For a light heart lives long.

Ros. What Is your dark meaning mouce, of this light word?


Kath. A light condition in a beauty dark.


Ros. We need more light to find your meaning out.


Kath. Yole mar the light by taking it in snuff:
Therefore I Will darkly end the argument.

Ros. Look what you do, you do it still in the dark.


Kath. So do not you, for you are a light Wench.


Ros. In deed I weigh not you, and therefore light.


Kath. You weigh me not, O that's you care not for me.


Ros. Great reason: for past care, is still past cure.


Quee. Well bandied both, a set of Wit well played.
But Rasaline, you have a Favor too?
Who sent it? and what is it?

Ros. I would you knew.
And if my face were but as fair as yours,
My Favor were as great, be witness this.
Nay I have Vearses too, I thank Berowne,
The numbers true, and were the numbering too,
I were the fairest Goddess on the ground.
I am comparde to twenty thousand fairs.
O he has drawn my picture in his letter.

Quee. Any thing like?


Ros. Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.


Quee. Beauteous as Incke: a good conclusion.


Kath. Fair as a text B in a Coppie book.


Ros. Ware pensalls, How? Let me not die your debtor,
My red Dominicall, my golden letter,
O that your face were not so full of Oes.

Quee. A Pox of that jest, and I beshrow all Shrowes.
But Katherine what was sent to you
From fair Dumaine?

Kath. Madame, this Glove*


Quee. Did he not send you twain?


Kath. Yes Madame: and moreover,
Some thousand Verses of a faithful Lover.
A hudge translation of hypocrisy,
Vildly compyled, profound simplicity.

Marg. This, and these Pearl, to me sent Longauile.
The Letter is too long by half a mile.

Quee. I think no less: Do thou not wish in heart
The Chain were longer, and the Letter short.

Marg. I, or I would these hands might never part.


Quee. We are wise girls to mock our Lovers so.


Ros. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne i will torture ere I go.
O that I knew he wore but in by the week,
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in booteles rimes*
And shape his service wholly to my device,
And make him proud to make me proud that iestes*
Their several counsels they vnboosome shall,
To Loves mistook, and so be mocked withal.
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With Visages displayde to talk and greet.

Ros. But shall we dance, if they desire us toot?


Quee. No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their pend speech render we no grace:
But while it is spoke each turn away his face.

Boy. Why that contempt will kill the speakers heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.

Quee. Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt,
The rest will ere come in, if he be out.
There Is no such sport, as sport by sport orethrowne:
To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own.
So shall we stay mocking intended game,
And they well mocked depart away with shame.
Sound Trom.
Boy. The Trompet soundes, be maskt, the maskers come.


Enter Black-moores with music, the Boy with a speech, and the rest of the
Lords disguysed. Page. All hail, the richest Beauties on the earth.


Berow. Beauties no richer then rich Taffata.


Page. A holy parcel of the fairest dames that ever turned their backs to
mortal viewes.


The Ladies turn their backs to him. Berow, Their eyes villain, their eyes.


Page That even turnde their eyes to mortal viewes.
Out

Boy. True, out in deed.


Page Out of your favors heavenly spirits vouchsafe
Not to behold.

Berow. Once to behold, rogue.


Page. Once to behold with your Sun beamed eyes,
With your Sun beamed eyes.

Boyet. They will not answer to that Epythat*
You were best call it Daughter beamed eyes.

Page They do not mark me, and that bringes me out.


Ber. Is this your perfectnes? begone you rogue.


Rosal. What would these stranges?
Know their minds Boyet.
If they do speak our language, it is our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would?

Boyet. What would you with the Princes?


Berow. Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.


Rosa. What would they, say they?


Boy. Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.


Rosa. Why that they have, and bid them so be gone.


Boy. She says you have it, and you may be gone.


King. Say to her we have measurd many miles,
To tread a Measure with her on this grass.

Boy. They say that they have measurd many a mile,
To tread a Measure with you on this grass.

Rosa. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easlie told.

Boy. If to come hither, you have measurde miles,
And many miles: the Princess bids you tell,
How many inches does fill up one mile?

Berow. Tell her we measure them by weerie steps*


Boy. She hears her self.


Rosa. How many weerie steps,
Of many weerie miles you have ore gone,
Are numbered in the travail of one Mile?

Bero. We number nothing that we spend for you,
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we (like savages) may worship it.

Rosa. My face is but a Moon, and clouded too.


King. Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
Vouchsafe bright Moon, and these thy Starts to shine,
(Those clouds removed) upon our waterie eyne.

Rosa. O vain peticioner, beg a greater matter,
Thou now requests but Mooneshine in the water.

King. Then in our measure, do but vouchsafe one change,


Quee. Berowne did swear him self out of all su^te.

Mar. Dumaine was at my service, and his sword,
No point (quoth I) my servant, straight was mute.

Kath. Lord Longauill said I came ore his heart:
And trow you what he calde me?

Quee. Qualme perhapt.


Kath. Yes in good faith.


Quee. Go sickness as thou art.


Ros. Well, better-wits have worn plain sta^^ Caps.
But will you hear; the King is my Love sworn.

Quee. And quick Berowne has plighted Faith to me.


Kath. And Longauill was for my service borne.


Mar. Dumaine is mine as sure as bark on tree.


Boyet. Madame, and pretty mistresses give ear*
Immediately they will again be here,
In their own shapes: for it can never be,
They will digest this harsh indignity.

Quee. Will they return?


Boy. They will they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change Favors, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet Roses, in this summer air.

Quee. How blow? how blow? Speak to be understood.


Boy. Fair Ladies maskt, are Roses in their bud:
Dismaskt, their dammaske sweet commixture shown,
Are Angels varling clouds, or Roses blown.

Quee. Auaunt perplexity, What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woe?

Rosa. Good Madame, if by me you will be aduisde,
Lets mock them still as well known as disguysde:
Let us complain to them what fools were hear,
Disguysd like Muscouites in shapeles gear:
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows, and Prologue vildly pende*
And their rough carriage so rediculous,
Should be presented at our Tent to us.

Boyet. Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand,


Quee. Whip to our Tents as Roes runs ore land.

Exeunt.
Enter the King and the rest. King. Fair sir, God save you: Where Is the
Princess?


Boyet. Gone to her Tent. Please it your Majesty command me any service to
her thither,


King. That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.


Boy. I will, and so will she, I know my Lord.

Exit.
Berow. This fellow peckes up Wit as Pidgions Pease,
And (...) again when God does please.
He is Wits Peddler, and retales his wares:
At Wakes and Wassels, meetings, markets, Faires*
And we that sell by gross, the Lord does know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This Gallant pins the Wenches on his sleeue*
Had he bin Adam he had tempted Eve.
A can carue to, and lispe: Why this is he
That kissed his hand, a way in courtisie.
This is the Ape of Form, Mounsier the nice,
That when he plays at Tables chides the Dice
In honorable terms; nay he can sing
A mean most meanly, and in hushering.
Mende him who can, the Ladies call him sweet.
The stairs as he treades on them kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smyles on every one.
To show his teeth as white as Whales bone.
And consciences that will not die in debt,
Pay him the due of honie-tonged Boyet.

King. A blister on his sweet tongue with my heart,
That put Armathoes Page out of his part.

Enter the Ladies. Bero. See where it comes. Behavior what were thou?
Till this mad man showed thee, and what art thou now?

King. All hail sweet Madame, and fair time of day.


Quee. Fair in all Hail is foul, as I conceive.


King. Consture my spaches better, if you may.


Quee. Then wish me better, I will give you leave.


King. We came to visit you, and purpose now,
To lead you to our Court, vouchsafe it then.

Quee. This Feelde shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God nor I delights in periurd men.

King. Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

Que. You nickname virtue, vice you should have spoke:
For virtues office never breaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honor yet as pure,
As the vnsallied Lilly I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your houses guest:
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly Oaths vowed with integrity.

King. O you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

Quee. Not so my Lord, it is not so I swear,
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game,
A mess of Russians left us but of late.

King. How Madame? Russians?


Quee. I in truth My Lord.
Trim gallants, full of Courtship and of state.

Rosa. Madame speak true: It is not so my Lord:
My Lady (to the manner of the days)
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four in deed confronted were with four,
In Russian habit: here they stayed an hour,
And talked apace: and in that hour (my Lord)
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would feign have drink.

Bero. This jest is dry to me, gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish when we greet
Wtih eyes best seeing, heavens fiery eye:
By light we loose light, your capacity
Is of that nature, that to your hudge stoore,
Wise things seem foolish, and rich things but poor.

Rosa. This proves you wise and rich: for in my eye.


Bero. I am a fool, and full of poverty.


Rosa. But that you take what does to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.

Ber. O, I am yours and all that I possess.


Rosa. All the fool mine.


Ber. I cannot give you less.


Ros. Which of the Vizards was it that you wore?


Ber. Where, when, what Vizard? why demand you this?


Rosa. There, then, that Vizard? that superfluous case,
That hid the worse, and showed the better face.

King. We were descried, they will mock us now dounright.


Duman. Let us confess and turn it to a jest.


Quee. Amazde my Lord? Why looks your highness sad?


Rosa. Help hold his brows, heel sound: why look you pale?
Sea sick I think coming from Muscouie.

Bero. Thus pooure the Stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I, Lady dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout.
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance*
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit.
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O never will I trust to speeches pend,
Nor to the motion of a Schoole-boyes tongue*
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme like a blind harpers songue.
Taffata phrases, silken terms precise,
Three pilde Hiberboles, spruce affection:
Figures pedanticall, these summer flies,
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white Glove (how white the hand God knows)
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas, and honest kersie noes.
And to begin Wench, so God help me law,
My love to thee is sound, sance crack or flaw*

Rosa. Sans, sans, I pray you.


Bero. Yet I have a trick,
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick.
I Will leave it by degrees; soft, let us see,
Write Lord have mercy on us, on those three,
They are infected, in their hearts it lies:
They have the Plague, and caught it of your eyes,
These Lords are visited, you are not free,
For the Lords tokens on you do I see.

Quee. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.


Berow. Our states are forfait, seek not to undo us.


Rosa. It is not so, for how can this be true,
That you stand forfait, being those that sue.

Bero. Peace, for I will not have to do with you.


Rosa. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.


Bero. Speak for your selves, my wit is at an end.


King. Teach us sweet Madame, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.

Quee. The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now, disguysde?

King. Madame, I was.


Quee. And were you well aduisde?


King. I was fair Madame.


Quee. When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your Ladies ear?

King. That more then all the world, I did respect her.


Quee. When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.


King. Upon mine honor no.


Quee. Peace peace, forbear: your Oath once broke, you force not to forswear.


King. Despise me when I break this oath of mine.


Quee. I will, and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?

Rosa. Madame, he swore that he did hold me dear,
As precious ey-sight, and did value me
Above this World: adding thereto more over,
That he would wed me, or else die my Lover.

Quee. God give thee joy of him: the Noble Lord
Most honorably does uphold his word*

King. What mean you Madame: by my life my troth,
I never swore this Lady such an oath.

Rosal. By heaven you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it sir again.

King. My faith and this, the Princess I did give,
I knew her by this Jewel on her sleeue.

Quee. Pardon me sir, this Jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne (I thank him) is my dear.
What? will you have me, or your Pearl again?

Berow. Neither of either: I remit both twain.
I see the trick ant: here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our meriment,
To dash it lik a Christmas Comedy:
Some carry tale, some please-man, some slight saine:
Some mumble news, some trencher Knight, some Dick
That smyles, his cheek in years, and knows the trick
To make my Lady laugh, when she is disposd:
Told our intentes before: which once disclosd,
The Ladies did change Favors; and then we
Following the signs, wood but the sign of she*
Now to our perjury, to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this it is: and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my Ladies foot by the squier?
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back sir and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our Page out: go, you are aloude.
Die when you will, a Smock shall be your shroude.
You leere upon me, do you: there is an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.

Boyet. Full merely has this brave nuage, this carre^re bin run.


Bero. Lo, he is tilting straight. Peace, I have don.


Enter Clown. Ber. Welcome pure wit, thou partst a fair fray.


Clow. O Lord sir, they would know,


Bero. My hat to a halfe-pennie, Pompey proves the best Worthy.


Enter Curate for Alexander. Curat. When in the world I liud, I was the worlds
commander:
By East, West, North, and South, I spread my conquering might:
My Scutchion plain declares that I am Alisander.

Boyet. Your Nose says no, you are not: for it stands too right.


Be. Your nose smells no in his most tender smelling knight.


Qu. The conqueror is dismayed: proceed good Alexander.


Cura. When in the world I lived, I was the worlds commander.


Boy. Most true, it is right: you were so Alisander.


Bero. Pompey the great.


Clow. Your servant and Costard.


Bero. Take away the Conqueror, take away Alisander.


Clow. O sir, you have overthrown Alisander the Conqueror: you will be scrapt
out of the painted cloth for this. Your Lion that holds his Polax sitting on a
close stool, will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy: a Conqueror,
and a feared to speak? Run away for shame Alisander. There ant shall please you
a foolish mylde man, an honest man; look you, and soon dash^. He is
marvelous good neighbor faith, and a very good Bowler: but for Alisander,
alas you see how it is a little oreparted, but there are Worthies a coming will
speak their mind in some other sort.

Exit Curat.
Quee. Stand aside good Pompey.


Enter Pedant for Judas, and the Boy for Hercules. Peda. Great Hercules is
presented by this Impe,
Whose Clubb kilde Cerberus that three headed Canus,
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimpe,
Thus did he strangle Serpents in his Manus,
Quoniam, he seems in minority,
Ergo, I come with this Appologie.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
Exit Boy.
Peda. Judas I am.


Dum. A Judas.


Pedan. Not Iscariot sir.
Judas I am, ecliped Machabeus.

Dum. Judas Machabeus clipped, is plain Judas.


Bero. A kissing traitor. How art thou proud Judas?


Peda. Judas I am.


Duma. The more shame for you Judas.


Peda. What mean you sir?


Boyet. To make Judas hang him self.


Pedan. Begin sir, you are my elder.


Bero. Well followed, Judas was hanged on an Flder*


Pedan. I will not be put out of countenance.


Bero. Because thou have no face.


Pedan. What is this?


Boyet. A Cytterne head.


Duma. The head of a Bodkin.


Bero. A deaths face in a Ring.


Long. The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.


Boyet. The pummel of Caesar's Fauchion.


Duma. The carud-bone face on a Flaske.


Bero. Saint Georges half cheek in a Brooch.


Duma. I and in a Brooch of Lead.


Bero. I and worn in the cappe of a Tooth-drawer:
And now forward, for we have put thee in countenance.

Peda. You have put me out of countenance.


Bero. False, we have given thee faces.


Peda. But you have outfaste them all.


Bero. And thou weart a Lion, we would do so.


Boyet. Therefore as he is, an Ass, let him go:
And so adue sweet Jude. Nay, Why do thou stay?

Duma. For the latter end of his name.


Bero. For the Ass to the Jude: give it him. Judas away*


Pedan. This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.


Boyet. A light for Mounsier Judas, it grows dark, he may stumble.


Quee. Alas poor Machabeus, how has he bin bayted.


Eeter Braggart. Ber. Hide thy head Achilles, here comes Hector in Arms.


Duma. Though my mockes come home by me, I will now be merry.


King. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.


Boyet. But is this Hector?


King. I think Hector was not so clean timberd.


Long. His Leg is too big for Hectors.


Duman. More Calfe certain.


Boy. No, he is best endued in the small.


Bero. This cannot be Hector.


Duma. He Is a God or a Painter: for he makes faces.


Braggart. The Armipotent Mars, of Lances the almighty, gave Hector a gift.


Duma. A gift Nutmegg.


Bero. A Lemmon.


Long. Stuck with Cloves.


Dum. No cloven.


Brag. Peace. The Armipotent Mars, of Lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Illion,
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea,
From morn till night out of his Pauilion.
I am that Flower.

Dum. That Mint.


Long. That Cullambine.


Brag. Sweet Lord Longauill rain thy tongue.


Long. I must rather give it the rain: for it runs against Hector.


Dum. I and Hector's a Greyhound.


Brag. The sweet War-man is dead and rotten,
Sweet chucks beat not the bones of the buried:
When he breathed he was a man:
But I will forward with my device; sweet royalty bestow on me the sense of
hearing.

Berowne steps forth. Quee. Speak brave Hector, we are much delighted.


Brag. I do adore thy sweet Graces Slipper.


Boyet Loves her by the foot.


Dum. He may not by the yard.


Brag. This Hector far surmounted Hanniball,


The party is gone. Clow. Fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two months on her
way.


Brag. What meanest thou?


Clow. Faith unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench is cast away:
she is quick, the child bragges in her belly already: it is yours.


Brag. Do thou infamonize me among potentates:
Thou shall die.

Clow. Then shall Hector be whipped for Iaquenetta that is quick by him, and
hanged for Pompey that is dead by him.


Duma. Most rare Pompey.


Boyet. Renowned Pompey.


Bero. Greater then great, great, great, great Pompey: Pompey the hudge.


Dum. Hector trembles.


Bero. Pompey is moved more Ates more Atees stir them or stir them on.


Duma. Hector will challenge him.


Bero. I, if a'haue no more man's blood in his belly then w suppe a Flea.


Brag. By the North Pole I do challenge thee.


Clow. I will not fight with a Pole like a Northren man;
I Will slash, I Will do it by the Sword: I bepray you let me borrow my Arms again.

Duma. Room for the incensed Worthies.


Clow. I Will do it in my shyrt.


Duma. Most resolute Pompey.


Page. Master, let me take you a button hole lower. Do you not see, Pompey is
uncasing for the Combat: What mean you? you will loose your reputation.


Brag. Gentlemen and Soldiers, pardon me, I will not combat in my shyrt.


Duma. You may not deny it, Pompey has made the challenge.


Brag. Sweet bloodes, I both may and will.


Bero. What reason have you fort.


Brag. The naked truth of it is, I have no Shirt.
I go Woolward for penance.

Boy. True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of Linen: since when, I Will
be sworn he wore none, but a dishcloute of Jaquenetta^s, and that a wears
next his heart for a Favor.


Enter a Messenger Mounsier Marcade. Marcad. God save you Madame.


Quee. Welcome Marcade, but that thou interrupptest our merriment.


Marcad. I am sorry Madame for the news I bring is heavy in my tongue. The
King your father


Quee. Dead for my life.


Marcad. Even so: my tale is told.


Ber. Worthies away, the Scaene begins to cloud.


Brag. For mine own part I breath free breath: I have seen the day of wrong
through the little hole of discretion, and I will right my self like a Soldier.

Exeunt Worthys
King. How fares your Majesty?


Quee. Boyet prepare, I will away to night.


King. Madame Not so, I do beseech you stay.


Quee. Prepare I say: I thank you gracious Lords
For all your fair endeavors and entreat:
Out of a new sad-soule, that you vouchsafe,
In your rich wisdom to excuse, or hide,
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If ouerboldly we have borne our selves,
In the converse of breath (your gentleness
Was guyltie of it.) Farewell worthy Lord:
A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue.
Excuse me so coming too short of thanks,
For my great suit, so easily obtainde.

King. The extreme parts of time extremely forms,
All causes to the purpose of his speed:
And often at his very loose decides
That, which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smyling courtecie of Love,
The holy suite which feign it would convince,
Yet since Loves argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of Sorrow iustle it
From what it purposd, since to wayle friends lost,
Is not by much so holdsome profitable,
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.

Quee. I understand you not, my griefs are double.


Bero. Honest plain words, best pearce the ear of grief,
And by these badges understand the King,
For your fair sakes, have we neglected time.
Plaide fouleplay with our oaths: your beauty Ladies
Has much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our ententes.
And what in us has seemed rediculous:
As Love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain.
Formd by the eye, and therefore like the eye.
Full of straying shapes, of habites and of forms*
Varying in subjects as the eye does roll.
To every varied object in his glaunce:
Which party coted presence of loose love
Put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecombd our oaths and grauities.
Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make, therefore Ladies
Our love being yours, the error that Love makes
Is likewise yours: we to our selves prove false,
By being once falce, for ever to be true
To those that make us both fair Ladies you.
And even that falsehood in it self a sin,
Thus purifies it self and turns to grace.

Quee. We have receiud your Letters, full of Love:
Your Favors, ambassadors of Love.
And in our maiden counsel rated them,
At courtshyp pleasantiest and courtecie,
As bombast and as lyning to the time:
But more devout then this our respects,
Have we not been, and therefore met your Loves,
In their own fashyon like a merriment.

Dum. Our letters madame, showed much more then jest.


Long. So did our looks.


Rosa. We did not cote them so.


King. Now at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.

Quee. A time me thinks too short,
To make a world-without-end bargain in:
No no my Lord, your Grace is periurde much,
Full of dear guiltines, and therefore this,
If for my Love (as there is no such cause)
You will do ought, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked Hermytage,
Remote from all the pleasurs of the world:
There stay until the twelve Celestial Signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If ^his Austere insociable life,
Change not your offer made in heat of blood.
If ^ro^^es and fastes, hard lodging, and thin weeds,
Nip not the gaudie blossoms of your Love:
But that it bear this trial, and last Love,
Then at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts:
And by ^his Virgin palm now kissing thine,
I wi^be thine: and till that instance shutt
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
Rayning the tears of lamentation,
For the remembrance of my Fathers death.
If this thou do deny, let our hand^s part,
Neither intiled in the others heart.

King. If this, or more then this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The s^d^ine hand of death close up mine eye.
Hence herrite then my heart, is in thy breast.

Berow. And what to me my Love? and what to me?


Rosal. You must be purged to, your sins are rackt.
You are attaint with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favor mean to get,
A tweluemonth shall you spend and never rest,
But seek the weery beds of people sick.

Duma. But what to me my Love? but what to me?


Kath. A wife? a beard, fair health, and honesty,
With three fold love I wish you all these three.

Duma. O shall I say, I thank you gentle Wife?


Kath. Not so my Lord, a tweluemonth and a day,
I Will mark no words that smothfast wooers say,
Come when the King does to my Lady come:
Then if I have much love, I Will give you some.

Duma. I Will serve thee true and faithfully till then.


Kath. Yet swear not, least ye be forsworn again.


Longauill. What says Maria?


Mari. At the tweluemonths end,
I Will change my black Gown for a faithful friend.

Long. I Will stay with patience, but the time is long.


Mari. The liker you, few taller are so young.


Berow. Studdies my Lady? Mistres look on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye:
What humble suite attendes thy answer there,
Impose some service on me for thy Love.

Rosa. Often have I heard of you my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you: and the worlds large tongue
Proclaymes you for a man repleat with mockes,
Full of comparisons and wounding floutes:
Which you on all estetes will execute,
That lie within the mercy of your wi^
To weed this wormwood from your fructfull brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won:
You shall this tweluemonth term from day to day,
Visit the speachlesse sick, and still converse,
With groaning wretches: and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit,
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.

Berow. To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

Rosal. Why that's the way to choke a gibing spirrit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace,
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools,
A iestes prosperity lies in the ear,
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then if sickly ears
Deaft with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns; continue then,
And I will have you, and that fault withal.
But if they will not, throw away that spirrit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.

Berow. A tweluemonth? well; befall what will befall,
I Will jest a tweluemonth in an Hospital.

Queen. I sweet my Lord, and so I take my leave.


King. No Madame, we will bring you on your way.


Berow. Our wooing does not end like an old Play:
Jack has not Gill: these Ladies courtesy
Might well have made our sport a Comedy.

King. Come sir, it wants a tweluemonth an' aday.
And then twill end.

Berow. That Is too long for a Play.


Enter Braggart. Brag. Sweet Majesty vouchsafe me.


Queen. Was not that Hector?


Duma. The worthy Knight of Troy.


Brag. I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave.
I am a Votarie; I have vowde to Iaquenetta
To hold the Plough for her sweet love three year.
But most esteemed greatness, will you hear the Dialogue that the two Learned
men have compiled, in praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? it should have
followed in the end of our show.

King. Call them forth quickly, we will do so.


Brag. Holla, Approach.


Enter all. Brag. This side is Hiems, Winter.
This Ver, the Spring: The one maynteined by the Owl, the other by the Cuckoo.

B. Ver begin.


The Song.
When Dasies pied, and Violets blew,
And Cuckow-budds of yellow hew:
And Ladi-smockes all silver white,
Do paint the Meadows with delight:
The Cuckoo then on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus singes he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
When Shepherds pipe on Oten Strawes,
And merry Larkes are Ploughmens Clocks:
When Turtles tread and Rookes and Dawes,
And Maidens bleach their summer smockes:
The Cuckoo then on every tree,
Mockes married men, for thus singes he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
Winter.
When Isacles hang by the wall,
And Dicke the Shepherd blows his nail:
And Thom bears Logges into the hall,
And Milk coms frozen home in paile:
When Blood is nipt, and ways be full,
Then nightly singes the staring Owl
Tu-whit to-who.
A merry note,
While greasy Ione does keele the pot.
When all aloude the wind does blow,
And coffing drownes the Parsons saw*
And Birds sit brooding in the Snow,
And Marrians nose looks red and raw:
When roasted Crabbs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly singes the staring Owl,
Tu-whit to-who.
A merry note,
While greasy Ione does keele the pot.

The words of Mercury, are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
FINIS.

