THE Confession of Faith Of the KIRK of SCOTLAND, SVBSCRIBED By the Kings
Majesty and his Household, in the year of God, 1580.

With a Designation of such acts of Parliament, as are expedient, for justefying
the Union, after mentioned.

And subscribed by the Nobles, Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers, and
Commons, in the year of God, 1638.

IOSHVA Chap. 24. verse. 25. So Joshua made a Covenant with the people the same
day, and gave them an Ordinance and Law in Sichem.

2 KINGS 11.17. And Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord and the King,
and the people, that they should be the Lords people: likewise between the
King and the people.

ISAIAH. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords: another shall be called by the
name of Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, etc.

The Kings Majesty's Charge, to all Commissioners and Ministers, within this
Realm, in the year of God 1580.
SEeing that We, and our Household, have Subscribed and given this public
Confession of our Faith, to the good example of our Subjects: We command and
charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the same Confession of their
Parochinars, and proceed against the refusers, according to our Laws and order
of the Kirk, delivering their names, and lawful process to the Ministers of our
House, with all haste and diligence, under the pain of forty pound to be
taken from their stipend, that We, with the advice of our Counsel, may take
order with such proud contemners of GOD and our Laws.

Subscribed with our hand, at Halyrudhouse, 1580. The 2. day of March, the 14.
year of our Reign.
The Confession of Faith, OF The Kirk of SCOTLAND.
THe Confession of Faith, subscribed at first by the Kings Majesty and his
Household, in the year of God 1580. Thereafter, by Persons of all ranks, in
the year 1581, By ordinance of the Lords of the Secret Counsel, and Acts of
the general Assembly. Subscribed again by all sorts of Persons in the year
1590, By a new Ordinance of Counsel, at the desire of the general Assembly:
With a general Band for maintenance of the true Religion and the Kings Person.
And now subscribed in the year 1638. By Us, Noblemen, Barrons, Gentlemen,
Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons, under subscribing: Together, with our
resolution and promises for the causes after specified, To maintain the said
true Religion, and the Kings Majesty, according to the Confession foresaid,
and Acts of Parliament. The Tenor whereof here follows.

WE All, and every one of Us underwritten, Protest, that, after long and due
Examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved of the Truth, by the Word and Spirit of God, and
therefore we believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God, and the whole Word: that this
only is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, which now is by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Evangell.

And received, believed, and defended, by many and sundry notable Kirkes and
Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and three
estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal Truth, and only ground of our
Salvation: as more particularly is expressed in the Confession of our Faith,
stablished, and publicly confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliaments, and now of
a long time has been openly professed by the Kings Majesty, and whole body
of this Realm, both in Burgh and Land. To the which Confession and form of
Religion, we willingly agree in our consciences in all points, as unto Gods
undoubted Truth and Verity, grounded only upon his written Word. And
therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion, and Doctrine: But
chiefly, all kind of Papistrie, in general and particular heads, even as
they are now damned and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland: but
in special we detest and refuse the usurped authority of that Roman
Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Kirk, the civil Magistrate,
and consciences of men, All his tyrannous laws made upon indifferent things
against our Christian liberty, His erroneous Doctrine, against the
sufficiency of the written Word, the perfection of the Law, the office of
Christ, and his blessed Evangell. His corrupted Doctrine concerning original
sin, our natural inabilitie and rebellion to Gods Law, our Justification by
faith only, our imperfect Sanctification and obedience to the Law, the nature;
number and use of the Holy Sacraments. His five bastard Sacraments, with all
his Rites, Ceremonies, and false Doctrine, added to the ministration of the
true Sacraments without the Word of God. His cruel judgment against Infants,
departing without the Sacrament: his absolute necessity of Baptism: his
blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or real presence of Christ's body in
the Elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodies of men. His
dispensations with solemn Oaths, Perjuries, and degrees of Marriage forbidden
in the Word: his cruelty against the innocent divorced: his divellish Mass:
his blasphemous Priesthood: his profane Sacrifice for the sins of the dead
and the quick: his Canonization of men, calling upon Angels or Saints
departed, worshipping of Imagerie, Relicts, and Crosses, dedicating of Kirks,
Altars, Days, Vows to creatures; his Purgatory, Prayers for the dead,
praying, or speaking in a strange language, with his Processions and
blasphemous Letanie, and multitude of Advocates or Mediators: his manifold
Orders, Auricular Confession: his desperate and uncertain Repentance; his
general and doubtsome Faith; his satisfactions of men for their sins: his
Iustifications by works, opus operatum, works of Supererogation, Merits,
Pardons, Peregrinations, and Stations: his holy water, baptising of Bells,
conjuring of Spirits, crossing, saning, anointing, conjuring, hallowing of GODS
good creatures, with the superstitious opinion, joined therewith: his worldly
Monarchy, and wicked Hierarchy: his three solemn vows, with all his
shavelings of sundry sorts, his erroneous, and bloody decrees made at Trent,
with all the subscribers and approvers of that cruel and bloody Band,
conjured against the Kirk of GOD: and finally, we detest all his vain
Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions, brought in the Kirk, without, or
against the Word of GOD, and Doctrine of this true reformed Kirk; to the which
we join our selves willingly, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline, and
use of the Holy Sacraments, as lively members of the same, in Christ our Head:
promising and swearing by the Great Name of the Lord our GOD, that we shall
continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, and
shall defend the same according to our vocation and Power, all the days of our
lives, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of Body and
Soul, in the day of GODS fearful Judgment: and seeing that many are stirred
up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to promise, swear, subscribe, and for
a time use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk, deceitfullie against their own
consciences, minding thereby, first, under the external cloak of Religion, to
corrupt and subvert secretly GODS true Religion within the Kirk, and
afterward, when time may serve, to become open enemies and persecutors of the
same, under vain hope of the Popes dispensation, devised against the Word of
GOD, to his greater confusion, and their double condemnation in the day of the
LORD JESUS.

We, therefore, willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such
double dealing with GOD and his Kirk, Protest, and call The Searcher of all
hearts for witness, that Our minds and hearts, do fully agree with this our
Confession, Promise, Oath, and Subscription, so that We are not moved for any
wordly respect, but are persuaded only in our Consciences, through the
knowledge and love of Gods true Religion, printed in Our hearts, by the holy
Spirit, as we shall answer to him in the day, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed. And because we perceave, that the quietness and stabilitie
of our Religion and Kirk, does depend upon the safety and good behavior of
the Kings Majesty, as upon a comfortable instrument of Gods mercy; granted
to this Country, for the maintaining of his Kirk, and ministration of Justice
amongst us, we protest and promise with our hearts under the same Oath,
Hand-writ, and pains, that we shall defend his Person and Authority, with
our goods, bodies, and lives, in the defense of Christ his Evangell, Liberties
of our Country, ministration of Justice, and punishment of iniquity, against
all enemies within this Realm, or without, as we desire our GOD to be a
strong and merciful defender to us in the day of our death, and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Honor
and Glory Eternally.

LIKE as many Acts of Parliament not only in general do abrogate, annull, and
rescind all Laws, Statutes, Acts, Constitutions, Canons, civil or municipall,
with all other Ordinances and practique penulties whatsoever, made in prejudice
of the true Religion and Professors thereof: Or, of the true Kirk discipline,
jurisdiction, and freedom thereof: Or in favors of Idolatry and
Superstition: Or of the Papisticall Kirk: As, Act 3. Act. 31. Parl. 1. Act. 23.
Parl. 11. Act. 114. Parl. 12. of King James the sixth, That Papistrie and
Superstition may be utterly suppressed according to the intention of the Acts
of Parliament repeated in the 5. Act. Parl. 20. K. James 6. And to that end they
ordain all Papists and Priests to be punished by manifold Civil and
Ecclesiastical pains, as adversaries to Gods true Religion, preached, and by
Law established within this Realm, Act. 24. Parl. 11. K. James. 6. as common
enemies to all Christian government, Act. 18. Parl. 16. K. James 6. as
rebellers and gainstanders of our Souveraigne Lords Authority, Act. 47. Parl.
3. K. James 6. and as Idolaters. Act. 104. Parl. 7. K. James 6. but also in
particular (by and attour the Confession of Faith) do abolish and condemn the
Popes Authority and Jurisdiction out of this Land, and ordaines the
maintainers thereof to be punished, Act. 2. Parl. 1. Act. 51. Parl. 3. Act.
106. Parl. 7. Act. 114. Parl. 12. K. James 6. do condemn the Popes erroneous
doctrine, or any other erroneous doctrine repugnant to any of the Articles of
the true and Christian religion publickely preached, and by law established in
this Realm: And ordaines the spreaders and makers of Books or Libels, or
Letters, or writts of that nature to be punished, Act. 46. Parl. 3. Act. 106.
Parl. 7. Act. 24. Parl. 11. K. James 6. do condemn all Baptism conform to
the Popes Kirk and the Idolatry of the Mass, and ordaines all sayers,
wilful hearers, and concealers of the Mass, the maintainers and resetters of
the Priests, Jesuits, traffiquing Papists, to be punished without any
exception or restriction, Act. 5. Parl. 1. Act. 120. Parl. 12. Act. 164. Parl.
13 Act. 193. Parl. 14. Act. 1. Parl. 19. Act. 5. Parl. 20. K. James 6. do
condemn all erroneous books and writtes containing erroneous doctrine against
the Religion presently professed, or containing superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies Papisticall, whereby the people are greatly abused, and ordaines the
homebringers of them to be punished, Act. 25. Parl. 11. K. James 6. do
condemn the monuments and dregs of bygane Idolatry, as, goeing to the
Crosses, observing the Feastivall days of Saints, and such other
superstitious and Papisticall Rites, to the dishonor of GOD, contempt of true
Religion, and fostering of great error among the people, and ordaines the
users of them to be punished for the second fault as Idolaters, Act. 104. Parl.
7. K. James 6.

Like as many acts of Parliament are conceaved for maintenance of Gods true and
Christian Religion, and the purity thereof in Doctrine and Sacraments of the
true Church of God, the liberty and freedom thereof, in her national,
Synodall Assemblies, Presbyteries, Sessions, Policy, Discipline and
Jurisdiction thereof, as that purity of Religion and liberty of the Church
was used, professed, exercised, preached, and confessed according to the
reformation of Religion in this Realm. As for instance, the 99. Act. Parl. 7.
Act. 23. Parl. 11. Act. 114. P. 12. Act. 160. Parl. 13. of K. James 6. Ratified
by the 4. Act of King Charles. So that the 6. Act. Parl. 1. and 68. Act. Parl.
6. of King James 6. in the year of God 1579. declares the Ministers of the
blessed Evangell, whom GOD of his mercy had raised up, or hereafter should
raise, agreeing with them that then lived in Doctrine, and Administration of
the Sacraments, and the people that professed Christ, as he was then offered in
the Evangell, and does communicate with the holy Sacraments, (as in the
reformed Kirkes of this Realm they were publicly administrate) according to
the Confession of Faith, to be the true and holy Kirk of Christ Jesus within
this Realm, and decernes and declares all and sundry, who either gainesayes
the Word of the Evangell, received and approved, as the heads of the Confession
of Faith, professed in Parliament, in the year of God 1560. specified also in
the first Parliament of King James 6. and ratified in this present Parliament,
more particularly do specify, or that refuses the administration of the holy
Sacraments, as they were then ministrated, to be no members of the said Kirk
within this Realm, and true Religion, presently professed, so long as they
keep themselves so divided from the society of Christ's body: And the
subsequent Act. 69. Parl. 6. of K. James 6. declares, That there is none other
Face of Kirk, nor other Face of Religion, then was presently at that time, by
the Favor of GOD established within this Realm, which therefore is ever
styled, Gods true Religion, Christ's true Religion, the true and Christian
Religion, and a perfect Religion Which, by manifold acts of Parliament all
within this Realm, are bound to profess to subscribe the articles thereof,
the Confession of Faith, to recant all doctrine and errors, repugnant to any
of the said Articles, Act. 4. and 9. Parl. 1. Act. 45.46.47. Parl. 3. Act. 71.
Parl. 6. Act. 106. Parl. 7 Act. 24. Parl. 11. Act. 123. Parl. 12. Act. 194. and
197. Parl. 14. of K. James 6. And all Magistrates, Shirefs, etc. on the one
part are ordained to search, apprehend, and punish all contraviners, For
instance, Act. 5. Parl. 1. Act. 104. Parl. 7. Act. 25. Parl. 11. K. James 6.
And that notwithstanding of the Kings Majesty's licenses on the contrary which
are discharged and declared to be of no force, in so far as they tend in any
ways, to the prejudice and hinder of the execution of the Acts of Parliament
against Papists and adversaries of true Religion, Act. 106. Parl. 7. K. James
6. On the other part in the 47. Act. P. ^. K. James 6. It is declared and
ordained, seeing the cause of Gods true Religion, and his highness Authority are
so joined, as the hurt of the one is common to both: and that none shall be
reputed as loyal and faithful subjects to our Sovereign Lord, or his
Authority, but be punishable as rebellers and gainstanders of the same, who
shall not give their Confession, and make their profession of the said true
Religion, and that they who after defection shall give the Confession of their
Faith of new, they shall promise to continue therein in time coming, to
maintain our Souveraigne Lords Authority, and at the uttermost of their power
to fortify, assist, and maintain the true Preachers and Professors of Christ's
Evangell, against whatsoever enemies and gainestanders of the same: and
namely, against all such of whatsoever nation, estate, or degree they be of:
that have joined, and bound themselves, or have assisted, or assists to set
forward, and execute the cruel decrees of Trent, contrary to the Preachers and
true Professors of the Word of God, which is repeated word by word in the
Articles of Pacification at Perth the 23 of Februar. 1572. approved by
Parliament the last of Aprile, 1573. Ratified in Parliament, 1587. and related,
Act. 123. Parl. 12. of K. James. 6. with this addition, that they are bound to
resist all treasonable uproares and hostilities raised against the true
Religion, the Kings Majesty, and the true Professors.

Like as all liedges are bound to maintain the K. Majesty's Royal Person, and
Authority, the Authority of Parlaments, without the which neither any laws or
lawful judicatories can be established, Act. 130. Act. 131. Parl. 8. K. James
6. and the subjects liberties, who ought only to live and be governed by the
Kings laws, the common laws of this Realm allanerlie, Act. 48. Parl. 3. K.
James the first. Act. 79. Parl. 6. K. James the 4. repeated in the Act. 131.
Parl. 8. K. James 6. Which, if they be innovated or prejudged, the commission
anent the union of the two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, which is the sole
Act. of the 17. Parl. of K. James 6. declares such confusion would ensue, as
this Realm could be no more a free Monarchy, because by the fundamental
laws, ancient privileges, offices and liberties of this Kingdom, not only
the Princely Authority of his Majesty's Royal descent has been these many
ages maintained, but also the peoples security of their Lands, livings,
rights, offices, liberties, and dignities preserved, and therefore for the
preservation of the said true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom,
it is statute by the 8. Act Parl. 1. repeated in the 99. Act. Parl. 7. Ratified
in the 23 Act Parl. 11. and 114. Act. Parl. 12. of K. James 6. and 4. Act. of
K. Charles. That all Kings and Princes at their Coronation and reception of
their Princely Authority, shall make their faithful promise by their solemn
oath in the presence of the Eternal God, that, enduring the whole time of
their lives, they shall serve the same Eternal God to the uttermost of their
power, according as he has required in his most holy Word, contained in the
old and new Testament. And according to the same Word, shall maintain the true
Religion of Christ Jesus, the preaching of his holy Word, the due and right
ministration of the Sacraments now received and preached within this Realm
(according to the Confession of Faith immediately preceding) and shall
abolish and gainstand all false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule
the people, committed to their charge, according to the will and command of
God, revealed in his Foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and
Constitutions received in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said will of
the Eternal God, and shall procure, to the uttermost of their power, to the
Kirk of God, and whole Christian people true and perfect peace in all time
coming: and that they shall be careful to root out of their Empire all
Heretics, and enemies to the true worship of God, who shall be convicted by
the true Kirk of God, of the foresaid crimes, which was also observed by his
Majesty, at his Coronation in Edinburgh, 1633. as may be seen in the order of
the Coronation.

In obedience to the Commandment of GOD, conform to the practice of the godly
in former times, and according to the laudable example of our Worthy and
Religious Progenitors, and of many yet living amongst us, which was warranted
also by act of Counsel, commanding a general band to be made and subscribed
by his Majesty's subjects, of all ranks, for two causes: One was, For defending
the true Religion, as it was then reformed, and is expressed in the Confession
of Faith, abovewritten, and a former large Confession established by sundry
acts of lawful general assemblies, and of Parliament, unto which it has
relation set down in public Catechismes, and which had been for many
years with a blessing from Heaven preached, and professed in this Kirk and
Kingdom, as Gods undoubted truth, grounded only upon his written Word. The
other cause was, for maintaining the Kings Majesty, His Person, and Estate:
the true worship of GOD, and the Kings authority being so straightly joined, as
that they had the same Friends, and common enemies, and did stand and fall
together. And finally, being convinced in our minds, and confessing with our
mouths, that the present and succeeding generations in this Land, are bound to
keep the foresaid national Oath and Subscription inviolable, We Noblemen,
Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons under subscribing,
considering diverse times before, and especially at this time, the danger of the
true reformed Religion, of the Kings honor, and of the public peace of the
Kingdom: By the manifold innovations and evils generally contained, and
particularly mentioned in our late supplications, complaints, and
protestations: Do hereby profess, and before God, his Angels, and the World
solemnly declare: That, with our whole hearts we agree and resolve all the
days of our life constantly to adhere unto, and to defend the foresaid true
Religion, and (forbearing the practice of all novations, already introduced in
the matters of the worship of GOD, or aprobation of the corruptions of the
public Government of the Kirk or civil places and power of Kirkmen, till
they be tried and allowed in free assemblies, and in Parlaments) to labor by
all means lawful to recover the purity and liberty of the Gospel, as it
was established and professed before the Foresaid novations: and because after
due examination, we plainly perceave, and undoubtedlie believe, that the
Innovations and evils contained in our Supplications, Complaints, and
Protestations have no warrant of the Word of God, are contrary to the Articles
of the Foresaid Confessions to the intention and meaning of the blessed
reformers of Religion in this Land, to the above writtin Acts of Parliament, and
do sensibly tend to the re-establishing of the Popish Religion and tyranny,
and to the subversion and ruin of the true Reformed Religion, and of our
Liberties, Laws and Estates. We also declare, that the Foresaid Confessions
are to be interpreted, and ought to be understood of the Foresaid novations and
evils no less than if every one of them had been expressed in the Foresaid
confessions, and that we are obliged to detest and abhore them amongst other
particular heads of Papistrie abjured therein. And therefore from the knowledge
and consciences of our duty to God, to our King and Country, without any
wordly respect or inducement, so far as humane infirmity will suffer,
wishing a further measure of the grace of God for this effect. We promise, and
swear by the Great Name of the Lord our GOD, to continue in the Profession and
Obedience of the Foresaid Religion: That we shall defend the same, and resist
all these contrary errors and corruptions, according to our vocation, and to
the uttermost of that power that GOD has put in our hands, all the days of
our life: and in like manner with the same heart, we declare before GOD and
Men, That we have no intention nor desire to attempt any thing that may turn
to the dishonor of GOD, or to the diminution of the Kings greatness and
authority: But on the contrary, we promise and swear, that we shall, to
the uttermost of our power, with our means and lives, stand to the defense of
our dread Sovereign, the Kings Majesty, his Person, and Authority, in the
defense and preservation of the foresaid true Religion, Liberties and Laws of
the Kingdom: As also to the mutual defense and assistance, every one of us of
another in the same cause of maintaining the true Religion, and his Majesty's
Authority, with our best counsel, our bodies, means, and whole power against
all sorts of persons whatsoever. So that whatsoever shall be done to the least
of us for that cause, shall be taken as done to us all in general, and to
every one of us in particular. And that we shall neither directly nor
indirectly suffer our selves to be divided or withdrawn by whatsoever
suggestion, allurement, or terror from this blessed and loyal Conjunction,
nor shall cast in any let or impediment, that may stay or hinder any such
resolution as by common consent shall be found to conduce for so good ends. But
on the contrary, shall by all lawful means labor to further and promove the
same, and if any such dangerous and divisive motion be made to us by Word or
Writ, We, and every one of us, shall either suppress it, or if need be shall
incontinent make the same known, that it may be timeously obviated: neither do
we fear the foul aspersions of rebellion, combination, or what else our
adversaries from their craft and malice would put upon us, seeing what we do
is so well warranted, and arises from an unfeined desire to maintain the true
worship of God, the Majesty of our King, and peace of the Kingdom, for the
common happiness of our selves, and the posterity. And because we cannot
look for a blessing from God upon our proceedings, except with our Profession
and Subscription we join such a life and conversation, as beseems
Christians, who have renewed their Covenanant with God; We, therefore,
faithfully promise, for our selves, our followers, and all other under us, both
in public, in our particular families, and personal carriage, to endeavor to
keep our selves within the bounds of Christian liberty, and to be good
examples to others of all Godliness, Soberness, and Righteousness, and of
every duty we owe to God and Man, and that this our Union and Conjunction may
be observed without violation, we call the living GOD, the Searcher of our
Hearts, to witness, who knows this to be our sincere Desire, and unfeigned
Resolution, as we shall answer to JESUS CHRIST, in the great day, and under
the pain of Gods everlasting wrath, and of infamy, and loss of all honor
and respect in this World, Most humbly beseeching the Lord, to strengthen us by
his holy Spirit for this end: and to bless our desires and proceedings with a
happy success, that Religion and Righteousness may flourish in the Land, to
the glory of GOD, the honor of our King, and peace and comfort of us all. In
witness whereof we have subscribed with our hands all the premises, etc.


