AMORVM EMBLEMATA, FIGVRIS AENEIS INCISA STVDIO OTHONIS VAENI
BATAVO-LVGDVNENSIS.

Emblemes of Love. with verses in Latin, English, and Italian.

AMOR OMNIA VINCIT



ANTVERPIAE, Venalia apud Auctorem. M.DC.IIX.

To the most honorable, and worthy brothers, William Earl of Penbroke, and
Philip Earl of Mountgomerie, patrons of learning and cheualrie.
SO it is most honorable, that fame flying over the seas, out of your British
I Will; has left unto our spacious continent the report of your honors
woorthynesse: and therefore in my self a desire to do your honors such service
as might be vvorthie your esteem. But seeing no occasion has concurred
whereby I might have bin so fortunate as by you to be commanded, I have
presumed to make demonstration of my redynesse thereunto, by dedicating unto
your honors (for your recreation) these my invented emblemes of that subject,
that subiecteth princes no less then subjects. Vouchsafe my Lords to be
honored from these forreyn parts by a stranger, who to serve your honors in
the best parts he has, will make himself no stranger.

Thus in all dutiful respect I kiss your honors hands from Antwerp this.20.
of August. 1608.

Otho Vaenius.

In Emblemata Amatoria Othonis Vaeni Hugonis Grotii epigramma.
Questus Amor nondum sua respondere triumphis
Praemia, nec famae quod satis acta sequi,
Mill per artificum spatiatus millia, legit
Ottonis doctas aes animare manus.
Ipse regit ferrum, vultus ipse imprimit aeri,
Et gaudet duris durior ipse puer.
At laetus monimenta Dei victricia mundus
Accipti, and plaudit cladibus ecce suis,
Ecce Cupidineas omnis iam dextra tabellas,
Et Paphios lusus iam sinus omnis habet.
Praeda puellarum iuuenes, iuuenumqueue puellae,
Cernite quid valiant tela potentis heri.
At vos ite procul, tuto quibus ista videre
Spes erat, and pictus laedere nouit Amor.
In Amores ab Othone Vaenio delineatos.
Cum primum patrio visa est e gurgite Cypris
Tollere fessa caput rore fluentis aquae,
Qualis erat, talem venienti reddidit aeuo,
Et secum iussit viuere Coa manus.
Paulatim niueae cedebant corpore guttae,
Iurares tremulum surgere semper opua.
Laeua videbatur lymphis illudere palma,
Stringebat tenues altera palma sinus.
Doctior Ottonis tot dextera pinxit Amores,
Quot gemitus and quot gaudia nutrit Amor.
Armati pharetris occurrunt vndique Diui,
Attollunt rigidas, sed fine luce, faces.
Et quamuis maneant, geminas librantur in alas,
Et nil cum noceant, spicula saeua gerunt.
Si fas est, Venus ipsa tuo concedit honori,
I am toties nati cuspide laesa sui.
Si fas est, similes, Vaeni, speramus Amores,
Saeuius armatos, and magis innocuos.
Daniel Heinsius.
In Cupidines Othonis VaenI.
VIderat in vulgum tot se prodire figuris
Nudus Amor, varios quot struit ipse dolos;
Plumbea sollicito quot spicula miscet amaro,
Aurea quot dulci tingit inuncta fauo.
Viderat, and late artificem vestigat, at illi
Obuia quaerenti fit Dea forte Venus.
Substitit, and curas maternam effatur ad aurem
Risit, and an tantus te latet auctor! ait.
Tot Veneres meminisse tuas, propriamque Parentem
Si potes, and VaenI tu meminisse potes.
Quod sibi Praxiteles de me licuisse putauit,
Corporis hoc nudi cum similauit ebur;
Hoc quoque permisit de te sibi Vaenius audax,
Pictori and Vati quod lubet, omne licet.
Adspicc quicquid humus, quicquid creat vnda, vel aer,
Adspice quot facies discolor orbis habet;
Ars quoque tot species effingit and aemula formas,
Saepius and matris filia vincit opus.
Affabra quos tauros non lusit vacca Myronis,
Quas non vitis aues, carbasa picta viros?
Quod licuit priscis, cur non praesenti;bus annis?
Non solet artifici longa nocere dies.
Crescit, and ingenium vires acquirit ab aeuo,
Tu quoque te puero nequior ipse cluis.
Apta dies fructus maturat in arbore, messes
Serior Autumnus and bona musta vehit,
Candidus and simplex imberbi sub Jove Mundus
Qui fuit, ah quantum nunc vafer ille sapit!
Canicie viridi succreuit and Art magistra,
Creuerunt arcus and tua tela pucr.
Mill ioca, and fraudum creuerunt mill figurae,
Et mirum, has VaenI mire operosa manus
Pingere si potuit viuoque animasse color!
Quo sine, tu caecum nil nisi funus eras.
Nulla Deum Deitas, si non notescat ab vsu,
Nullum Numen adest, si modo cultus abest.
Hoc tibi cum nostri dederit sollertia VenI,
An potes auctori non bonus esse bono!
Haec Venus. Erubuit picto tener ore Cupido,
Terque agili penna, ter pede planxit humum.
Maternumque prius male quem culpabat Apellem
Mox amat, and gemini fratris ad-instar habet.
Max. Vrientius.
In comendation of the adorned author with many rare parts. M. Otho Venius.
ORpheus does not still his harp high tuned strayn,
To play the Giants war when hill on hill they brought,
Nor how their proud attempt was labor spent in vain,
By force of powerful Jove that turned all to noght.
Sometime he changes tune to lays of mylder grace,
And plays how Venus fell in her own Cupids snare,
And did Adonis woo, and kiss, and kind embrace,
And how sweet love is seen encumbred often with care.
So Venius for repose from learned labors done,
In Horace worthy theames and sage philosophy,
In subject of delight another praise has won,
By showing here of love each perfect property.
And in this and the rest his many worthy parts,
Himself sufficiently has to the world approved,
Which yields more cause of love to all those goodly arts,
And makes himself for them the more to be beloved.
R. V.
GEnera il genitor' un suo simile,
D'arme, e di giostre parla il caualliero,
Il pastorel de campi, e del ouile,
E de mari, e de venti il buon nocchiero:
Tu Venius noua Venere gentile
Coui parti d' Amor, sei padre vero,
E rinouando i giouenili errori
l' Animo stanco alleggi and aualori.
Come no sempre vdia l'hostili squille
Che un tempo ten anchor l'orecchie sorde,
Ne cinse spada il generoso Achille
Tra l'armi greche sol di sangue ingorde,
Ma per sfogar d' Amor l'alte fauille
De la cetra tocco le molli cord:
Cosi tu tra li graui tuoi lauori
Per respirar rimembri i primi ardori.
Petro Benedetti
scene with Venus and Cupid PROM QVANTA POTENTIA REGNI EST VENUS ALMATVI,


Haec regna tenet puer immitis,
Spicula^ cuius sentit tit imis
Caerulus vndis grex Nereidum,
Flammasque nequit eleuare mari.
Ignes sentit genus aligerum.
Poeni quatiunt colla leones,
Cum mouit amor, tum svlua gemit
Murinure saeuo, amia^t insani
Bellua ponti, lucaeque boues.
Vendicat onines natura sibi.
Seneca Cupids epistle to the younger sort.
When oght with ardent heart I kindle and inflame,
Then is accomplished and brought in orders frame,
That forcefull word of yore, wherein still force dothly,
That wild each thing at first, encreasse and multiply,
What after nature lives, lives subject unto me,
All yiedling to my law must all my vassalles be.
Obedience unto me importes not any blame,
Since all-comaunding will ordayneth so the same.
My vnrestrayned force to all that move and live,
A lust to procreate, most liberally does give.
In elements all four, all what appeers to be,
By inclination show accordance unto me.
Yea even as well the things that reasonlesse are found,
As that same race wherein reason does most abound,
The fish amiddes the deep and fowls that fly above,
Do all well know and find what thing it is to love.
The Salamander does not leave deer loves desire,
Since I it do conserve with him admiddes the fire.
Behold the Sun and Moon, resembling man and wife,
How they remayn in heaven in love and lasting life.
By whose conjunction all what men on earth do find,
Are both produced and kept in novvriture and kind.
Their springing and increase and food they freely give,
Unto the trees and plants which by them grow and live.
For trees have living spirits, although they senseless be,
Observing my comaund, as by the Palm ye see,
When as some river does female and male diseuer,
Each to the other bends, as fayn to be together.
Just nature did at first devise and well ordayn,
The woman and the man divided into twayn.
But by uniting both, by either sweetened is,
The kind and loving use of this deuisions bliss.
The well establisnt law of nature and of kind,
To do oght reasonlesse may never any find,
For nothing is unfit by nature put in trayn,
But all is well, and well in order does remayn,
What man then may he seem which lives still alone,
Vnioyn'd unto a wife which makes two in one?
He is but half a man, for man without a wife,
I do esteem no more if he so end his life.
A lustlesse living thing, bereft of his delight,
A fostrer of sad thoghts, a solitary wight.
One whom vnpleasantnes best seems for to please,
Borne to his only care, and ignorant of ease.
Depryu'd of life and joy, undone and vnbeloued,
For louelesse must he live, that not to love is moved.
Where he that to sweet love houes to afford his favor,
The sweetness of his life more sweetly makes to savor,
He does diminish much his sorrow and his woe,
Or makes that his cares do seem not to be so.
His being borne anew, he in his children sees,
And their encreasse again in more and more degrees.
Thus love to mortal man so great a favor gives,
That him immortal makes, so that he ever lives.
The man that lives alone I may unhappy call,
For who will help him up if he do chance to fall?
Who will partake his pain, who will his woe bemone?
All burdens heavier be when they be borne alone.
Two twisted cords in one, in dooble strenght do last,
When no one single string can dure or hold so fast.
And he that yields no fruit whereby the world must live
The honor also wants which children parents give.
And thou of female sex, who can thy worth approve?
That from thy inward thoghts sequestreth kyndest love.
More woeful then the man, void of supporte and stay,
What will thee benefit thy ever saying nay?
When time thy froward will, in swiftnes shall outrunne,
And cause thy rofie red and lilly white be done,
And make thy fair plum cheeks and coral lips look than.
Abated and full thin, unseemly pale and wan.
When thy fair frisled hear set up and pleated brave,
To greynesse shall be turned, or that thou baldness have.
^hen furrows ouerspred the forehead of thy face,
^hen may thou rue thy years lost in sweet loves disgrace
and being but alone, deuoyd of comfort left,
^o think thou haest thy self even of thy self bereft,
^o husband nor no child, thou haest to hope upon,
^hy fortune, youth, and joy, is altogether gone.
and being gone and past are not to be regayned,
^here love had honor brought that longer had remained.
^hen shall thy beauty past have served thee no more,
^hen gold the miser does that hoords it still in store.
Or some ritche diamond deep hid within the grownd,
Which turns to nomannes good because it lies unfound.
To be of Man beloved, thou in the world art borne,
Wilt thou thy sweetest good so fondly hold in scorn.
What can there be more sweet, then deerly loved to be,
Of such an one as has most deer esteem of thee.
That to thee day and night will show himself so kind,
That will to thee disclose the secrets of his mind.
That will with thee imparte his dolor and his joy;
and bear his part with thee of solace and annoy,
His passions lovingly to read upon his face,
His anger to convert to favor and to grace.
Him oft-tymes in himself forlorn for to see,
But joyfully again, to find himself in thee.
Thus right well may thou here the joys of heaven prove,
Unless thou fondly pass thy youthful time to love.
Therefore you that are youg live in the course of kind,
And lovingly ensue what nature has assygn'd.
My reasons always will associate your desires,
Who nature not ensues, fortune from him retyres.
Read and regard this book which I to thee imparte,
My force here shall thou find, my custom and my art.
And whoso shall this vvoork in good esteem retayn,
Shall yield the only meed that vvil reward the pain.
Even as we do the year in seasons four deuyde,
So is the age of Man accordingly contryued.
When chyldhead, youth, mid-age, and old age is arrived.
Ruled in each degree by course of time and tide.
This book for childrens view has not intended been,
Nor yet for aged men who rather do deuyse,
On honor, virtue, wealth, or to be demed wise.
All thease for such as they are here not to be seen.
Loves fassion and his trade how he with youth proceeds,
What means he uses most in acting lovers deeds.
His passion and his pains, his bitter and his sweet,
His constancy and troth his virtues most esteemed.
His power, his war and peace, and else what may be deemed,
The younger sort may see, in all occasions meet.
Cupidine alla gionentu.
ALbov ebe del mio foco un cor si accende,
l'Alna voce di Dio viene ad effetto
Che di crester al monde impone e apprende
Voce d'alto poter, d'ardente affette
Tutto cio che nel mondo si comprende
d'Obedir a mia leg vien costretto
Adunque non e biasino, adunque lice
Seneir del dolce Amor la fiamma altrice.
Seguir l'orme d' Amor non e disnore,
Commandato civien dal sommo Iddie,
Domo egn' akro poter IN Dio d'Amore,
B desto in voi di generar desio.
Sanno i quatro elementi il mio valor,
Ricenon le mie leggi, e il mio bell fio,
Seguon' Amor' i Brutti in dolci paci,
B gl' amimali di raggion capaci.
Senton gl' augei del aria, e i posei in mare
Quel dolce mal' che Amor dispensar snole,
La salamandra in foce monstra amare,
Quasi buom' e Donna e'n ciella Luna e il Sole
A vicenda si vanne a rincontrare,
E per li corfi lor generar puole,
O gni cosa creata in questo immense,
Herb, piante, metalli senza senso.
Sent il foco d'Amor la pietra dura
Benche sia senza spir to e senza vita,
l'Vna palma per l'altra con gran cura
s' Incurua alfiume, e al'union l'inuita,
Sen za ragion l'bumana alma Natura
Non fu creata, e in donna, e'n buom partila,
Ma perch vnendo insieme i corpi, e l'alme
Desse ristoro a le mondane salme.
Nessuna cosa e state fatta a caso
Da la madre Natura in questo mondo,
Tutto quan to contien Porto, e Poccaso,
Fu col compasso misurato a tondo,
Il tutto e con bell' ordine rimaso,
Il tutto e buono and vtile, e fecondo,
Tu dunque, o mortal folle che disprezzi
La donna, e sdegui gl' amorosi vezzi
Ch' altro se tu, ch'un huom di te nemico?
Huom priuo d'ogniben, d'ogni contento,
d'Ogni animal seluaggio piu mendico
Vinendo in solitudine, e tormento
Huomo inhuman da non stimar un fico,
Priuo di spirto, e d'ogni sentimento:
Ben ti troui a ragion pieno d'horrore
Come nemico al dolce Dio d'Amore.
Amor de gl' anni tempra l'amarezza,
Adolcisse il dolor, rende l'huom page
Tu senza Amor non hauerai dolcezza,
Ne ne figli vedraila propria imago,
Cadera l'human seem, e ogni allegrezza
Se di moltiplicar non e l'huom vago;
Guai a te se cadi essendo solo
Alcun non to alzera, starai nelsuolo.
Il laccio seempio debole, e sottile
Men resist che il doppio, e presto e mance,
Chi non produce al mondo un suo simile
Non dee la giouentu honorar' un quanco:
O qual piacer, quando il figlioul gentile
Honora te, che il padre honnorast' anco!
E tu non men sei folle o Donniciuola
Ch' Amor fuggi sdegnosa, e viui sola,
Qual gusto haurai viuendo in questa guisa?
Qual frutto coglieranno i tuoi rifiuti?
Quando la tua belta sara diuisa,
Quando i tuoi biondi crin saran canuti,
Quand' ogni ruga nella front assisa,
Stomaco al huom fara si che nesputi,
Quando l'aurate guancie ben pregiate
Diuerranno odiose, e inargentate,
Quando i coralli de le labra belle.
Il tempo imbianchera, che il bello affrena,
E quando de bell' occhi le due stelle
s'Oscuriranno, e curua hauraila schena,
Alh'or d'hauer estinto le fiammelle
Del dolce Amor' haurai dolor e pena,
E ripentita, e mesta piangerai
Il tempo, che fuggito non vien may.
Per Amorfiorirai con gran decore,
Eia senza Amor la tua belezza un niente,
Che a teno seruira piu che il thesore,
Che l'vsurario in terra tien latents,
O come gemma non legata in oro,
Nascosta viuerai sola, and algente,
Alcun non t'amera, sarai schernita
Dal tempo, almondo aschifo, and abborrita.
Qual maggior ben che di veder l'amante
Seruirti, evagheggiarti consospirit
Hor qual Nume adorar'il tuo sembiante,
Hora spiegarti i dolcisuoi martiri,
Hor mesto, hor lieto, hor stabile, hor tremante,
E sempre obediente a tuoi desiri,
O'che gioia, o che spazzo, o che dolcezza,
Se non lasci perir latua belezza,
Florida giouentu feconda e vaga
Segui lieta pero l'alma Natura;
Chi di si degna guida non s'appaga,
Mena vita infelice acerba, e dura,
t'Ensegnera ogni amorosa piaga
Questa ch'bumil ti done mia pitturd,
Seguita la ragion', imita il buono,
E segno da, che ti sin gruto il done,
Qual in quatro stagion l'anno e diuiso,
Tal la vita in infantia, in giouanezza
E nel' eta virile, and in vecchiezza
Con diuersi desiri; habito, e viso,
Non si da questo libro al vecchio anciso.
Che pien di cure abborre ogni doloezza,
Sol per seguir l'honore, e la richezza,
Ne dassi a fantolin degno di riso.
La potenza d'Amor l'arte, l'effetto,
Le passion del cor, gl'inganni, i modi,
l'Amaro, il dolce, il pianto, il sub d'iletto,
La sua guerra, la pace, i strali, i nodi,
E la virtu d'Amor con caldo affetto.
Offro a virili giouanetti, e prodi.
AMOR AETERNVS. Senec.

Nulla dies, tempusue potest dissoluere amorem,
Neue est, perpetuus sit nisi, verus Amor,
Annulus hoc anguis'que tibi curuatus in orbem,
Temporis aeterni signa vetusta, notant.
Love is everlasting.
No time can ruin love, true love we must intend,
Because not lasting still it has not that esteem,
The endless serpent-ring vnending time does seem,
Wherein love still remains from over having end.
Amor eterno.
l'Innanellate serpe mostra e apprende
La ferma eternita: l'Amor verace
In quella vine sempre, e non si sface,
Il Tempo distruttor nulla l'offende.


PERFECTVS AMOR NON EST NISI ADVNVM. Arist.

Vnum amat, en effert vnum, vnum ecce coronat,
Et reliquos numeros, en, pede calcat Amor.
In lures quoties niuos deducitur amnis,
Fit minor, atque vnda deficiente perit.
Elige cui dicas, Ovid.
tu mihi sola places.
Only one.
No number else but one in Cupids right is claymed,
All number else besides he sets his foot upon,
Because a lover ought to love but only one.
A stream dispersed in parts the force thereof is maimed.
Un solo.
l'Vnita vnol Cupido, e perehe pecca
l'Amor diuiso, il numero nel suolo
Calca col pie, del' vno good solo.
Sparso in piu vene un rio presto si secca.


CRESCENT ILLAE, CRESCE IT IS AMORES. Virg.

Felix insitio, qua ramun ramus adoptat,
Arbore de duplici fiat vt vna, facit:
Atque Amor e geminis concinnat amantibus vnum:
Two united.
The graffe that in the tree by art is fixed fast,
Kind nature does conioyn to grow in one together,
So two loves joined in one root does nowrish either,
In one heart and desire they both do live and last.
Duo son' unto.
Quasi piantache porta doppio frutto,
Sono due alme strette in dolce nodo
Che viuono in un corpo fermo, e sodo,
Hanno vncor solor, e lor commune e il tutto.


AMANTISVERI COR, VT SPECVLVM SPLENDIDVM. Plutarch.

Vt purum, nitidum, haud fallens speculum decet esse;
Sic verus quoque sit, non simulatus Amor;
Verum candidus, and qui animum fert front in aperta.
Conueniunt dolus, and fucus, Amorque male.
Clear and pure.
Even as the perfect glass does rightly show the face,
The lover must appeer right as he is in deed.
For in the law of love has loyalty decreed,
That falsehood with true love must have no byding place.
Chiaro, e puro.
Come mostra lo specchio un viso tale
Qual' e, cosi dourebbe l'amatore
Mostrar di fuori, com' e dentro, il core.
Conuien che al detto sia la voglia eguale.


OPTIMVM AMORIS POCVLVM, VT AMERIS, AMA. Seneca.

Sum meas, Philostrat.
sumam ipse tuas, mea vita, sagittas;
Nonaliter noster conciliatur amor.
Nihil minus hominis esse videtur, Cic.
quam non respondere in amore ijs, a quibus prouocere.

A wished war.
The wounds that lovers give are willingly received,
When with two darts of love each hits each others heart,
Tho'ones hurt the others cures and takes away the smarte,
So as no one of both is of his wish bereaved.
Reciproco.
Di reciproche piaghe Amor si good;
Qui si feriscon duo leali amanti,
Et ambo lieti godono ne i pianti,
Scoccando tiensi l'vn', e l'altro prode.


GRATA BELLI CAVSSA.
Cupidinem enixa Venus, Porphyr.
illumqueue paruulum remanere videns, oraculum adijt, a quo intellexit tum
demum fore vt cresceret, cum alium parcret filium: peperit Anterotem, qui
Cupidini oppositus, and cum co de amoris palma decertans, ipsius incrementi
caussa fuit.

Contending increases love.
Cupid and Anteros do styue the palm to have,
Loving and being loved together do contend,
The victory does most on loving best depend,
Which either rightly deemes his truest love may crave.
Dolci ire, dolci sdegni, e dolci paci.
Gareggian duo Amori, ogn' un s'afferra
Per rapportar la vincitrice palma,
Vuol vincer l'vn del' altro il corpo, e l'alma.
l'Vna finita nasce l'altna guerna.


AMANTIBVS OMNIA COMMVNIA.
Fortuna (en) geminis cyatho dat amoribus vno
Intermista sua dulcia amara vice.
Tac. de Mor. Germ.
Nese mulier extra virtutum cogitationes extraque bellorum casus putet, ipsis
incipientis matrimonij auspicijs admonetur, venire se laborum periculorumque
sociam, idem in pace, idem in praelio passuram, ausuramqueue.

Like fortune to both.
Fortune one cup does fill equal to lovers twayn,
And how-so-ere the taste be either sour or sweet,
To one and unto both it equally is meet,
That either have his part in pleasure or in pain.
Commune e il tutto.
Fortuna mele e feel in vna tazza
Versa a gl'amanti, il been e il male insieme
Ambo si godon' fino al' hoar estreme;
(Ahijch' vccide ambeduo chi l'vno amazza.


DVO SIMVL VIVENTES AD INTELLIGENDVM ET AGENDVM PLUS VALENT QVAM VNVS. Arist.

Caeci humeris gestatur Amor pede claudus vtroque:
Mutuat hic oculos, commodat ille pedes.
Candido amore nthil maius, nil dulcius, atque
Vberius, magis ac auxiliare nihil.
As the one hand washes the other.
Love aydfull unto love kind actions do descry,
The lover being lame directs him that is blind,
The blind that bears the lame declares his loving mind,
Thus the defects of the one the other does supply.
l'Vna mano laua l'altra.
Le gambe al zoppo, and istroppiato presta
Il pouer cieco, per hauer la guida;
La scambieuol' aita i cori affida,
E gioua a sopportar la vita mesta.


AMORIS FINIS EST, VT DVO VNVM FIANT VOLVNTATE ET AMORS. Socrat.

Amantium copulatio spiritalis fieri potest Leo Hebr.
, corporalis nequaquam, etc. idcirco geminantur eorum aegritudines propter
vnionis corporeae defectum.

Namque in eo spes est Lucret.
, vnde est ardoris origo,
Restingui quoque posse ab eodem corpore flammam,
Qoud fieri contra coram natura repugnat.
Union is loves wish.
The lovers long desire his hope does keep contented,
That lastly with his love united he agree.
One mind in bodies twayn may well conjoined be,
But yet with pain to both when bodies are absented.
l'Vnione e il fin d'amore.
Duo cori in vno Amor stringe, e congiunge,
Lo spirto vnisce si, ma egli e impotente
A vnir duo corpi in vno, e solamenice
Nel lieto Amore questo mal ci punge.


CEDERE NOLO IOVI, SED CEDERE COGOR AMORI.
Disce cupidineis concedere Termine dextris,
Cedere quem dicunt non voluisse loui.
Qui been coepit Amor, non hune long aeua vetustas,
Fortuna, aut tandem terminet vlladies.
Quis legem det amantibus? Boe^th.

Mayor lex Amor est sibi.
Nothing hinders love.
None else but Cupid can put back the term of love,
To which all must give place, yea Jove himself and all,
Each being, by his power brought in subiectyue thralle.
Save only love it self which force may not remove.
Nulla impedisce Amore.
Trapassa Amor' il termine, che molto
Temuto e dal gran Gioue, che in effetto
Nol puo fuggir' al termine soggetto;
Per tutto passa Amor libero, e sciolto.


VICIT ET SVPEROS AMOR. Senec.

-- loquitur sic Poebus Amori, Ovid.

In face, nescio quos, esto contentus amores
Irritare tua: nec lauds assere nostras.
Filius huic Veneris; Figat tuus omnia Phoebe,
Te meus arcus, ait: quantoque animalia cedunt
Cuncta Deo, tanto minor est tua gloria nostra.
Love subdueth all.
When Cupid drew his bow bright Phoebus breast to wound,
Although quoth he to him, thou Python down haest brought
As beasts far less then Gods in all esteem are thought,
So thy force less then mine know that it shall be found.
Vince ogni cosa Amore.
A Phebo Amor tirando vna saetta
Disse da grane, Al mio tremendo impero
Soggiace il cielo, and ogni Dio altiero,
A te cosa mortal sol' e soggetta.


NIHIL TAM DVRVMET FERREVM, QVOD NON AMORIS TELIS PERFRINGATVR.
Defendit Parthi celeres lorica sagittas,
Ferreus vmho aciem ferri inhibere valet;
At nihil a telis pharetrati munit Amoris;
Quem ferit hic volucri cuspide, transadigit.
-- contra quis ferat arma Deos? Tibull.

Nothing resists love.
No iron nor no steel the force of love can sheeld,
The little archers darte does pierce where-so he list,
And makes the force of Mars unable to resist,
Thus by him all the world is vanquished and must yield.
Trapassa il tutto.
Ne acciar, ne ferro, ne valor, ne pondo
E ch' al dardo d' Amor resister possa,
Leggiermente trapassa i cori, e l'ossa,
Cede a suoi strali quanto abbraccia il mondo.


QVI BINOS INSECTATVR LEPORES, NEVTRVM CAPIT.
Vnum age: nam geminos simul insectatur eodem
Tempore qui lepores, saepe and vtroque caret.
Cautus amans vnam tantum venatur amicam;
Nam Spem multiuolus ludificatur amor.
He that catches at much takes hold of little.
He that two hares does chase gets sildome any one,
So lykwyse does he speed that does two loves embrace,
For true love still by kind flies from a double face,
Divided love deserves the loyal love of none.
Chi molto abbraccia, poco stringe.
Chi con leggiero cor duo lepri caccia,
E chi non men leggier serve a due Dame,
Per appagare l'amorose brame,
d' Ambe due perdera l'orme, e la traccia.


PEDETENTIM.
Ac veluti primo taurus detrectat aratra, Propert.

Post venit assueto mollis ad arua iugo:
Sic primo inuenes trepidant in amore feroces,
Post domiti, mites aequa and iniqua ferunt.
By little and little.
The ox will not at first endure to bear the yoke,
But trained is in time to be therewith enured,
So he lykwyse that will to love not be alured,
Must be content in time that love shall bear the stroke.
Poco a poco.
Il toro da principio il giogo scuote,
Ma lo sopporta al fin con patienza;
Se da principio l'huom fa resistenza,
Al fin l' Amore dominarlo puote.


ILLE FVGA SILVAS SALTVSQVE PERAGRAT, Frustra: nam HAERET LATERI LETHALIS
ARVNDO. Virg.

Quo fugis, Propert.
ah, demens? nulla est fuga: tu licet vsque
Ad Tanaim fugias, vsque sequetur Amor.
Non si Pegaseo vecteris in era dorso,
Nec tibi si Persei mouerit ala pedes.
To late to fly.
It Is now in vayn to fly fond lover as thou art,
It boots thee not at all to run thou worst not where,
For that which makes thee fly thy self in thee do bear.
But to fly thy self surpasses all thy art.
Troppo tarda fuga.
Pian piano, o la? si ratto non fuggire,
Pouer' amante, ch' hai lo stral nel core
Como pensi fuggir' il Dio d' Amore,
Che teco alberga, e che ti vuol seguire?


RES IMMODERATA CVPIDO EST.
Calcat Amor pede mensuram, atque domantia frena, hunc
Nulla lupata modus, lex, retinacla mouent.
Errat, Propert.
qui finem vesani quaerit Amoris.
Verus Amor nullum nouit habere modum.
Love is not to be measured.
The measure and the rayn Cupid rejects quyte,
For love is measurelesse and does no rule contayn
To strive to bridle love is labor spent in vayn.
For each thing measure keeps save only Cupids might.
Amor non ha misura.
Freni, e misure Amor dissolve, e vieta,
Nessuna leg o forza a lui contend,
Piu alto vola che non si comprende.
Eccetto in ben' amar', in tutto e meta.


VIRTVTIS RADIX AMOR.
Anima immersa corpori, Plato.
Amoris expergiscitur stimulis: and hinc primi ad honesta impetus capiuntur.

Cic.
Sine studio and ardore quodam Amoris in vita nihil quidquam fit egregium.

Love is the cause of virtue.
Most great and worthy deeds had never bin atchyued,
If in respect of love they had not bin begun,
Loves victory has made more victories be won,
From loue-bred virtue then thus were they first deryued.
Virtu radice d'Amore.
Non fora Hercole illustre che si ammira,
Se d'Amor non sentiua il dolce ardore,
A' virtu non s'arriua senza Amore,
Ne certo dardo al suo bell fin si tira.


CONSERVAT CVNCTA CVPIDO. Empedocles.

Ni caelum ac mundi totius machina Amore,
Concordi vnita ac pace ligata forent,
Omnia deficerent vinclis elementa solutis;
Coelum and terrae orbem, cunctaque seruat Amor.
All depends upon love.
The little God of love transpearseth with his darts
The heavens, and eke the earth in musical accord,
For without love it were a chaos of discord,
That's fastened no in one of well conjoined parts.
Conserua il tutto Amore.
Fanciullo Amore il ciel, l'onde, e la terra
Trapassa con sui dardi, vnisce i cori;
Il mondo fora un chaos pien d'horrori
Senza Amor, ch' ogni cosa nutre, e serra.


ATLATE MAYOR.
Caelum humeris Atlas tulit, Alcides'que vicissim:
At Caelum and terram fert simul vnus Amor.
Robur Amoris enim non cedit viribus vllis;
Hercule and Atlante hinc mayor bahendus Amor.
More strong then Atlas.
Atlas the heavens bore as poets have us told,
Whom Hercules did help, for which both are admyred,
But more is Cupids power, where no aid is required,
Which by mayn force of love does heaven and earth uphold.
Piu forte d'Atlante.
Sostiene Atlante il Ciel, l'emulo Alcide
Si sforza di portar l'eccelso albergo:
Sol porta Amor Jul pargoletto tergo
La terra, e'l ciel, e ogni potenza ancide.


ERO NAVIS AMORIS, HABENS TE ASTRVM LVCIDVM. Mus.

Fata regunt homines: blandi iunguntur amantes,
Ipso (quis credat?) conciliante Deo.
Hic facit, vt, veluti magnetem Parrhasis vrsa,
Ducat amatorem dulcis amica suum.
The north-starre of love.
From supreme power and might almost to every one,
Ordained is a mate of it self proper kind,
Which as the Adamant atrackts the lovers mind,
What heaven and love once does can be undone by none.
l'Occhio amato e la mia stella.
Il supremo motor quasi prescriue
A Tutti un mezzo che l'amante inuita,
Come il settentrion la calamita;
Non puo fuggir' alcun quelche'l ciel scriue.


PRIMOS ADITVS DIFFICILES HABET Terent.

Quid leporis te vincla tenent? quin pergis, and omnem
Exuis in primo limine fando metum?
Scilicet omnis amans, vt primum cernit amicam,
Praeque timore stupet, praeque stupore timet.
Beginings are dificill.
When love first makes approach access to love to gayn,
Seeking by suit to get his ladies love and grace,
Fears pulles him back behynd, and shame does mash his face,
And so twixt hope and fear perplexed he does remayn.
Ogni principio e duro.
Frena il timor l' Amante al primo arriuo,
Impallidisce innanzi al suo bell sole:
Non sa scuoprirsi, balbe ha le parole,
La speranza, e'l timor fallo si schiuo.


MEDIO TVTISSIMVS IBIS. Ovid.

Daedalus, en, medium tenet, extrema lcarus; ille
Transuolat, hic mersus nomine signat aquas.
Gaudet Amor medio, nec summa nec infima quarit;
Si qua voles apt nubere, nube pari.
Fly in the midst.
See that thy course be right with Dedalus addressed,
For if thou fly to high disdayn may thee disgrace,
Or if to low thou fly thou do thy self debase,
For like to love his like befitteth ener best.
Tienti al mezzo.
Di Dedalo, e del figlio habbi lo specchio,
Segui la via di mezzo, affrena il passo,
Tropp' alto non volar, ne troppo basso,
Il meglio e d'amar sempre il suo pareccehio.


AMOR CERTVS IN RE IN CERTA CERNITVR. Ennius.

Nummi-vt adulterium exploras prius indice, quam sit
Illo opus: haud aliter rite probandus Amor.
Scilicet vt fuluum spectatur in ignibus aurum:
Tempore sic duro est insicienda sides.
Loves traill.
As gold is by thefyre and by the fournace tryde,
And thereby rightly known if it be bad or good,
Hard fortune and destresse do make it understood,
Where true love does remayn and sayned love resyde.
Come l'oro nel foco.
Su la pietra, e nel foco l'or si proua,
E nel by sogno, come l'or nel foco,
Si dee mostrar leale in ogni loco
d'Amante; e alhor si vee d'Amor la proua.


QVID SENTIAM OSTENDERE MALIM QVAM LOQVI. Senec.

Transfixum cor Amor clam testificatur amicae:
Nam voce effectus plus in amore valet
Irrita verba volant, and is falluntur amantes
Saepius, at re ipsa rite probatur Amor.
Demonstration more effectual then speech.
Love rather is in deed by demonstration shown,
Then told with sugared words whose value is but wynd,
For speech may please the ear, and not disclose the mind.
But fraudlesse is the love whereas the heart is known.
l'Effetto piu che'l detto.
E meglio di scuoprir la fiamma atroce
Con l'opra, che col detto vago, e arguto;
Souente il vero Amor si vede muto,
E piu l'effetto serve, che la voce.


HABET SVA CASTRA CVPIDO. Ovid.

Militiae species Amor est, discedite segnes:
Non sunt haec timidis signa tuenda viris.
Quis nisi vel miles, vel amans and frigora noctis.
Et denso mistas perferet imbre niues?
No love without war.
Love has his formed camp, his soldiers lovers are,
They keep watch day and night within their court of guard,
The harm of heat or cold they little do regard,
Against enury they are set to make defenfyue war.
Sempre guareggia Amore.
Ha li suoi campi Amor, sono i soldati
Gl' Amanti, e fanno guardie notte, e giorno,
Al caldo, al freddo, al muro amato intorno,
E son contra l'Inuidia sempre armati.


AMORIS VMBRA INVIDIA.
Gestit ouans Amor, and de re sibi plaudit amata;
Nesoius inuidiam se, velut vumbra, sequi.
Hoc habet omnis Amor, vt apertum liuor adunat,
Tuius ab inuidia cum sit opertus Amor.
Envy is loves shadow.
The more the Sun shynes clear the darker shadows be,
The more love does appeer the more is envy seen,
For envy has of love the shadow cuer been,
And love securest lies within dark secrecy.
Inuidia e ombra d'Amore.
Quanto piu luce il sol, piu appar l'oscuro,
Quanto piu bello sembra Amor, piu versa.
Tosco l'Inuidia, ombra di lui peruersa.
l'Amor ch'e piu secreto e piu securo.


VIRTVTE DVCE.
Herculis insignis virtus dux praesit Amori;
Hunc ne praecipitem deuius error agat;
Vt'que sui capiat felicia praemia voti.
Laus est cuvirtus dux in Amore praeit.
Virtue the guyd of love.
Hercules leads love and love thereby does gayn,
Great cowrage to perform what-so loves duty byndes,
For love by virtue led no difficulty fyndes,
To undergo for love attemps of any pains.
Virtu per guida.
Hercole inuitto a la virtu simile
Esse deue d'Amor la guida a segno
Di perueuir' al desiato pegno.
Virtu guidando Amor fallo virile.


INCONCVSSA FIDE.
Fallere nolle fidem, Lampson.
Gygis licet annulus adsit,
Sic inconcussa dixeris esse fide.
In A more nihil fictum, Cicero.
nihil simulatum, and quidquid in eo est, idem verum and voluntarium est.

Love requyres sincerity.
Love in what ere he does, does nor disguise his face,
His heart lies on his tongue, unseen he never goes,
He wears no Giges ring, he is not one of those,
He does unclose his thoghts, to gayn unfeigned grace
Sincero.
Non si maschera Amor, ne in fatti, o in detti.
Non va intuisibil come Gygi fea
In virtu d'vn' anel, che quelli hauea,
Non finge, and e nel cor qual nei concetti,


PERPOLITINCVLTVM PAVLLATIM TEMPVS AMOREM.
Vrsa nouum fertur lambendo fingere foetum,
Paullatim and formam, quae decet, ore dare:
Sic dominam, vt valde sit cruda, sit aspera, amator
Blanditijs sensim mollit and obsequio.
Love is wroght with time.
The bear her young-ones does to shape by licking bring,
Which at the very first but lumps of flesh are thought,
So by kind loving arts love is to fassion brought,
How so at first it seem a strange unformed thing.
Col Tempo.
Leccando forma il proprio parto l'orso,
Che da principio brutta massa appare:
Per ben far, ben seruir, e ben parlare
Si forma, e cresce Amor con egual corso.


SPES AMORIS NVTRIX OPTIMA. Pindar.

Spes est quae foueat, spes est quae pascat amantem:
Quidlibet haec perfert lenius ac leuius,
Susceptumque semel constanter seruat Amorem.
At miser est vere, spe sine quisquis amat.
Hope feeds.
Hope is the nurs of love, and yeildeth sweet relief,
Hope ouercomes delays and eases lingering smarte,
Hope in the lovers breast maintaynes a comstant heart,
For hopelesly to love is but a cureles grief.
La speranza nutrisce.
La speme e del' Amor l'alma nutrice,
Tien vtuo il foco, soffre, non si sdegna,
d'Acquistare, e godere il modo insegna.
Senza speranza amar tropp' e infelice.


AMANS QVID CV PIAT SCIT. QVID SAPIAT, NONVIDET. P. Sir.

Caece quid a recto declinas call Cupido?
Audi, quod Ratio quod'que Minerua monet.
Caecus es, and caecos pariter tu reddis amantes,
Qui clausis oculis in sua fata ruunt.
Seneca
Amare and sapere vix Deo conceditur.
Love blyndeth.
Love by his fancies led does lightly go a side,
And though starck blind he be he stumbling forward goes,
Because his wysest way he neither sees nor knows,
Wildome to be in love is even to Gods denyde.
l'Amor e cieco.
Brancolando Cupido a lento piede
Per trouar la sua strada, in un cantone
Lascia la sapienza, e la ragione.
Esser saggio, and amar non si concede.


OMNIS AMATOREM DECVIT COLOR.
Quod cupis, id cupio; quod spernis, sperno: tuumque
Velle meum velle est, nolleque, nolle meum.
Te propter varios, vt Proteus, induo vultus,
Inque modum chamae, creed, leontis ago.
As love will.
As the camelion is, so must the lover be,
And often his color change, like that whereon he stands,
His lovers will his will, her bidding his comaunds,
And altered from himself right altered as is she.
Com' amor vuole.
Come il cameleonte e variante
Conform del' obietto al vario lume:
Cosi l'amante a voglia del suo Nume
Si dee cangiar, and obedir costante.


NESCIT AMOR MAGNIS CEDERE DIVITIIS. Ovid.

Nobilium gazas Amor, atque insignia calcat;
Nescit enim priscis cedere imaginibus.
Nobilitas sub Amore iacet: nam rustica Regi,
Regia rurali saepe puella placet.
Love excels all.
With Cupid is no birth esteem or wealth preferred,
A King a shepherds less to love he makes seen,
And that a shepherds love may light upon a Queen,
Equality of state love little does regard.
Amor sopra tutto.
Grandezza, e Nobilta stima Amor poco;
Di Pastorella un Rege, o di Pastore
Vna Reina accendera nel core.
Ancho a stato ineguale Amor da loco.


OMNIS AMOR SVRDIS AVRIBVS ESSE SOLET. Ovid

Si dominam rumor vel vulgi fabula differt,
Verus amans surdis auribus esse solet.
Omnia dat ventis and nubibus: exsulat omnis
Prorsus ab illius pectore suspicio.
Love often deaf.
What ever fame brutes forth which tends to disgrace,
Of loves deer prysed love; he not endures to hear,
But makes himself be deaf by stopping either ear,
To show he will not give to ill opinion place.
Spesso e sordo Amore.
Sdegna l' Amante il diuulgato grido,
Sordo non ode quel, ch' ogn' vno intend,
Ne cieco vede quello che l'offende,
Non ha sospetto alcun, ma sempre e fide.


OS CORDIS SECRETA REVELAT.
Vbi dolet, Plutarch.
ibi manum adhibemus: sic si quid delectet, ibi linguam.

The mouth is the discouerer of the mind.
There where the smarte is felt the hand is lightly laid,
And what the heart contaynes that does the mouth discover,
Much for to speak of love does manifest the lover,
By often speech of love love often is betrayed.
La lingua corre dove il dente duole.
Ponsi la man la dove duole, o cuoce,
Di quel che s'ama si ragiona ogn'hora;
Parlando assai scuopresi Amor anchora.
Alleggia il cor quelch' a l'amante noce.


NOCET ESSE LOCAVTVM.
Labra premens digitis Amor, interdicit amare
Hunc, qui rimosum pectus habere volet.
Ovid.
Praecipue Cytherea iubet sua sacra taceri
Admoneo, veniat ne quis ad illa loquax.
Loves secrecy is in silence.
Both by the peach and goos is silence signified,
The lover must in love to silence be enclynd,
For speaking of his love bewrayes the lovers mind,
But silence used in love does make it vnespyed.
Leale, e secreto.
Del silentio d'Amor quest' e figura;
Dolce e it silentio, e la sonara voce
Genera inuidia amara, che ci noce.
Chi sa tacer, d'Inuidia non si cura.


GRATVM AMANTI IVGVM.
Si mihi seruitium video, Tribul.
dominamque paratam,
Iam mihi libertas illa paterna vale.
Libertas quoniam nulli iam restat amanti, Propert.

Nullus liber erit, si quis amare volet.
For freedom servitude.
The cap of liberty love under foot dot tread,
And holds fast the yoke of thraldom seeming sweet,
The name of being free is to no lover mere,
For love him freely does to willing bondage lead.
Grato e il giogo d'Amore.
Celpestra Amor la liberta col piede,
Erge di seruitu lo giogo stolto,
Chi serve Amor nomar non si puo sciolto,
E pur felice il misero si creed.


QVO PERGIS, EODEM VERGO.
Corpus vbi Dominae est, ibi cor reperitur amantis:
Et licet absit, eam sperat, anhelat, amat.
Instar solisequi, quocumque ea pergit, eodem
Dirigit ille oculos, cor animumqueue suum.
Loves shyning Sun.
As the flower heliotrope does to the Suns course bend,
Right so the lover does unto his love enclyne,
On her is sixth his thoghts, on her he casts his eyes,
She is the shyning Sun whereto his heart does wend.
Verso il mio sole.
Segue i raggi del sol questo bell fiore
Girando sempre; e drizza anchor l'amante
A suoi amori il cor, l'occhio, e le piante.
l'Amata e il chiaro sol del' amatore.


AD AMVSSIM.
Vt perpendiculo cunctos manus ipsa labores
Dirigit artificis: sic quoque verus amans.
Verus amans recto numquam de tramite flectet,
A domina pendens totus, and in domina.
Not swaruing from right.
Even as the plomet does depend directly down,
The lover must not sway to the one or the other side,
But ever to his love direct and rightly bide,
For swaying once awry he loses his renown.
Ne qua, ne la.
Con misura l'artista opra, and corregge;
l' Amante il ben seruir' ha per misura,
Sol la sua Diua d'aggradir procura,
E d'ogni suo volere a se fa leg.


PLANTAE RIGATAE MAGIS CRESCVNT.
Quod teneris herbis genitabilis aura FauonI,
Perque aestum irriguae lenior imber aquae:
Hoc in amore favor est mutuus: hinc alimenta
Sumit, and ad frugem protinus ille venit.
Love grows by favor.
The young and tender sproutes we often watered see,
And thereby to grow up and fragrantly to flowrish,
So favor done to love kind love the more does nowrish
Whereby the fruits of love at last enjoyed be,
Per favor cresce,
s'Inaffian l'herbe ^enere, e le foglie
Vanno crescendo, e nasce il frutto, o il fiore:
Per fauori, e carezze cresce Amore,
E il frutto de la gioia al fin si coglie.


AMOR FACIT ESSE DISERTVM.
Mercurij dat Amor virgam subtilis amanti
Auream, and eloquij flumina blanda simul,
Moribus atque illum placituris format amicae.
Cui fauet almus Amor, sponte disertus erit.
Love is author of eloquence.
Love does the lovers tongue to eloquence dispose,
With sweet conceats of love his ladies ears to please,
And thereby move her heart his restless care to ease,
For loves inventions often great science do disclose,
Il ben parlar' insegna.
Insegna al' Amator alta eloquenza,
E soaui concetti Amor sagace,
Da trouar nel amata e gratia, e pace.
Amore e mastro anchora di scienza.


AMOR ADDOCET ARTS.
Ingeniosus Amor varias nos edocet arts;
Rebus nosque habiles omnibus ille facit.
Illius inuento concordant carmina neruis:
Molliaque Alcides pensa trahebat herae.
Love is the schoolmaster of arts.
Cupid does teach by note the lover well to sing,
As sometime Hercules he learned for to spinne,
All arts almost that be did first from love begin,
Love makes the lover apt to every kind of thing.
E maestro dell' arti.
Insegna Amor la Musica al' Amante;
Ad Hercole insegno volger'il fuso;
Affina i spirti nostri fuor del' vso,
E rende accorto un rozzo, and ignorante.


FACIT OCCASIO FVREM.
Non facile esuriens posita retinebere mensa, Ovid.

Et multam saliens incitat vnda sitim.
Occasion causes theft.
The hungry having meat can hardly it refrayn,
The thirsty at the well can il forbear to drink,
The lover with his love time serving one would think,
For to enjoy her love as little can abstayn.
Spesso l'occasion fa l'huomo ladro.
A la viuanda l'affamato corre,
Et al' acque stillanti il sitibondo:
l' Amante a la sua Dea corre giocondo,
Ne lascia al' occasion tempo interporre.


DVLCES AMORVM INSIDIAE.
Ludendo capimur, bibimus ridendo venenum,
Atque iocos inter vincula miscet Amor.
Si timeas laqueos, and si te vincula terrent,
Terreat and lusus luctaque liber eris.
Good earnest happens in sport.
The subtle snares of love in sport and unaware,
As if it were but in jest do catch the lover fast,
Unwittingly he is loves prisner at the last,
Sport not therefore with love if thou wilt shun his snare.
Dolci lacci d'Amore, e dolci inganni.
O che secreta e l'arte di Cupido!
Scherzando ne suoi lacci egli ci auenta,
Nel maggior rischio manco ci spauenta.
Fugga chi e saggio questo scherzo infido.


SAEPE OBSTINATIS INDVIT FRENOS AMOR. Senec.

Quid metuis puerile iugum? quid frena recusas?
Tene resistendo vincere posse putas?
Falleris; immiti obluctans pugnabis Amori.
Inijcere inuitis nam solet ille iugum.
Love parforce.
Cupid does often constrayn those of contrary will,
To bring them unto love that to no love will bend,
By brydling he them tames and makes them condescend
Against those of greatest force, he sets his force and skill.
A suo dispetto.
Met souente Amor' un freno altiero
Al' huomo piu seluaggio, il rende humile,
Debilitando ogn' animo virile,
E superbo al superbo, e fiero al fiero.


AMOR ODIT INERTES.
Aspice, ab irato testudo fugatur Amore;
Cunctanti nimium quae pede repeat humi.
Impiger est Amor, and res non in crastina differt.
Nempe in Amore nocet saepius alta mora.
Tardo amante nihil est iniquius. Plaut.

The slow lover speeds not.
The tortes by the which is signified sloth,
Cupid does from him beat for slothfullnes he hates,
On watchful speedynes he diligently waits,
To use delay in love the lover must be loath.
Odiosa pigritia.
Scaccia Amore amator di vigilanza
La testudine lenta, ei may non dorme,
Sempre trauaglia, segue l'amate orme,
Odia l'otio, l'inutile tardanza.


VIA NVLLA EST INVIA AMORI.
Quae non tentet Amor perrumpere opaca viarum,
Qui infidi spernit caeca pericla maris?
Pro rate cui pharetra est, pro remo cui leuis areus;
Vt portum obtineat, quidlibet audet Amor.
Love fyndeth means.
Behold how Cupid here to cross the sea does prove,
His quiver is his bote, his bow he makes his ore,
His wings serve for his sails, and so love evermore
Leaves nothing to be done to come unto his love.
Ben sa trouar la strada.
Vedete il Dio d'Amor che solcar' osa
Il profondo Ocean sul suo turcasso,
IN Arco serve di remo, e non e lasso,
Per veder la sua Dea, tenta ogni cosa.


ERRAT, ET' IN NVLLA SEDE MORATVR AMOR. Ovid.

Acer and irrequietus amans animo omnia versat,
Ardet, and haud vllis permanet ille locis.
Sumne ego miser, Plaut.
qui nusquam been queo quiescere.
Si domi sum, foris est animus: si foris sum, animus domi est:
Ita mihi in pectore atque in cord facit Amor incendium.
Love has no rest.
Love cannot be in rest in any seat or place,
He never takes repose but daily does dcuyse,
By pleasing to obtayn grace in his mistress eyes,
Which never watchful love omitts in any case.
Senza riposo.
Non siede Amor, ma vigilante abbraccia
Qualunque bella impresa, ha per le mani
Hor questa, hor quella, e va d'hoggi in domani,
Dando al' albergo del suo ben la caccia.


VVLNVS ALIT VENIS, ET CAECO CARPITVR IGNE. Virg.

Exta velut clausis feruor consumit in ollis:
Sic mea consumit viscera caecus Amor.
Love inwardly consumes:
The licor in a pot though closed away it flies,
Consuming through the fire that is without it placed,
So does the lovers heart within him wear and waste,
By those bright radiant beams of his fair mistress eyes.
Ardo di fuori, e dentro mi consumo.
Chiuso il liquor nel vaso si consuma
Quantunque il foco sol di fuori il tocehi:
I radianti rai di duo bei occhi
Consumano l'amante che s'alluma.


FESTINA LENT.
Exemplo assidui tibi sit testudo laboris,
Quae leporem vicit, semper eundo, vagum.
Semper amans amat, and tandem potietur amata:
Non been amat, quisquis non amat assidue.
Perseverance wins.
The hare and tortes laid a wager of their speed,
Who first of both should come unto a place they meant,
The hare ran often and rested, the tortes always went,
The tortes wan, and so the lover must proceed.
Chi la dura, la vince.
La testudine vinse vna scommessa
Nel corso al lepro, giunse vigilante
Al segno, e'l lepro ritardo le piante.
Tal un good d'Amor che may non cessa.


AMOR TIMERE NEMINEM VERVS POTEST. Senec.

Aduersus pedibus premit, ecce, Cupido timorem.
Non trepidat duras res animosus amans,
Cui locuples satis est audacia testis amoris.
Degeneres animos arguit vsque timor.
Love has no fear,
The hare denoting fear, love treads down we see,
For his cowragious mind may not thereby be moved,
He shows unto his love how well she is beloved,
And lets his fearlesse mind thereof the witness be.
Amore non ha timore.
Calca Amor coraggioso ogni timore,
Ben risoluto amante non pauenta,
Piu caldo al maggior rischio si presenta.
Certo segno e l'ardir di grand' Amore.


BREVISET DAMNOSA VOLVPTAS.
Lumina delectant culices, perimuntque petita;
Sic nobis spes est optima caussa mali.
Qui circumuolitat deceptus Amoris ad ignes,
Numquid naturam papilionis habet?
For one pleasure a thousand pains.
Even as the moth with joy about the candle flies,
But by the flame is burnt if he therein do light,
So at the fire of love the lover takes delight,
But buys his pleasure deer when in the flame he dies,
Breue gioia.
Qual la farfalla al lume lieta muore
Spinta da lo splendour, tale l'amante
Dal raggi spinto di belta prestante,
A' gl' occhi muor d'adamantino cuore.


AMOR FACILIVS EXCLVDITVR, QVAM EXPELLITVR. Senec.

Principys obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
Quisquis in primo obstitit
Depulitque, Senec.
Amorem, tutus ac victor fuit.
Love is resisted at first or never.
Whosoever will shun to love and live at freedoms rate,
Must shut love out of doors in any manner wise,
For if he once get in then can thou not devise,
To get him to be gone because it is to late.
Resisti al principio.
Se sciolto viuer' vuoi, chiudi la porta
Al' amoroso ardor, crudele, e prauo,
s' Entra in tua casa, ti fara suo schiauo
Remedio tardo poca aita apporta.


AVDACES FORTVNA IVVAT. Virg.

Pellenti inuidiam sors auxiliatur Amori:
Auient rerum nam alae fausta cadit.
Qued si deficiant vires, Propert.
audacia certe
Laus erit, in magnis and voluisse sat est.
Audendum est fortes adiuuat ipsa Venus. Ovid.

Fortune aydeth the audatious.
Fortune the lover aids in combat he is in,
When valiantly he fights with envy and with shame,
And shows he not deserves a coward lovers name,
Faint lovers merit not fair ladies for to win.
Gli audaci la fortuna aiuta.
Gl' arditi la fortuna fauorisce,
E piu l' Amor, che intrepido combbate,
La vergogna, el Inuidia Amor' abbatte:
Vu codardo amator may non gioisce.


FINIS CORONAT OPUS.
Ni ratis optatum varys iactata procellis
Obtineat portum, tum perysse puta.
Futilis est diuturnus amor, ni in fine triumphet;
Nam been coepit opus, qui been finuit opus.
Where the end is good all is good.
The ship toste by the wanues does to no purpose sail,
Unless the port she gayn whereto her course does tend,
Right so the event of love appears in the end,
For loss it is to love and never to prevail.
Il fine corona l'opere.
Inutile e la naue, che in mar vaga
Senza prender giamai l'amato porto:
Impiagato d'Amor quel cor' e a torto,
Che con vano sperar may non s'appaga.


CELEREM OPORTET ESSE AMATORIS MANVM. Plaut.

Quam tibi sors vltro, aut occasio donat amicam,
Ne spernas, celeri sed cape dona manu.
Bold and ready.
A swift and ready hand belongs to a lover,
To take hold where he sees advantage to be sought,
That no occasion chance to slip away vncaught,
Because if he it lose, he can it not recover.
Ardito, e presto.
Porta alata la destra Amor' alato,
Per volar ratto, il forte braccio stende,
Pocht lascia fuggir, molti ne prende.
Accorto, e presto sia l'mnamorato.


CELARI VVLT SVA FVRTA VENUS. Ovid.

En, Tibull.
ego cum tenebris tota vagor anxius vrbe,
Securum in tenebris me facit esse Venus.
Love lyketh darkness.
To use love in the light that Cupid lyketh not,
But in some secret place, or where no light is left,
That there unseen he may comitt dame venus theft,
As if bread sauor'd best that were by stealing got.
Ama la notte Amore.
Cupido ama l'horror di grotta oscura,
Per goder a suo modo il suo diletto,
E gustar' il venereo dolce affetto.
Da piu gusto il boccon quando si fura.


AMOR ADDIT INERTIBVS ALAS.
Nemo adeo est stupidae, natura, mentis asellus,
Cui cor and ingenium haud indere possit Amor.
Pegaseas pecori Arcadico ille accommodat alas:
Mopsum habetem in blandum format and art procum.
Love altreth nature.
Thear's not so dull an ass but Cupid has the power,
Through love to whet his wits, and mend his doltish mind,
The flow he makes quick, he often altreth kind,
He gives many gifts, but mixeth sweet with sour.
Amore fa gl'asini leoni.
Nessuno e si grand' asino, o si grosso,
A cui non possa Amor' impennar l'ali,
Gl'ignoranti rende egli a i saggi equali.
Peruiene a porto chi da Amore e mosso.


FORTIOR EST AGITATVS AMOR.
Non est arbor fortis, Senec.
nisi in quam ventus frequens incursat: ipsa enim vexatione constringitur, and
radices certius figit.

Strengthened by travail.
Even as the stately oak whom forcefull wyndes do move,
Does fasten more his root the more the tempest blows,
Against disastres love in firmnes greater grows,
And makes each aduers chance a witness of his love.
Tanto piu fermo, quanto piu scosso.
l'Arbor da venti scossa e da tempesta
Piu s'interna, e resist ad ogni assalto,
Contr'ogni disfauor qual fermo smalto
Si mostra il vero amante, e immobil resta.


CONCRESCIT AMOR MOTV.
Quemadmodum lac coagulo concrescit: Plutarch.
sic amantes vnum fiunt Amore.

Moving makes uniting.
The milk being moved long his nature seems to leave,
And in another kind is unto union brought,
Right so two lovers minds may not in one be wroght,
Before the lover first repulses do receive.
s'Vnisce Amor col moto.
Come s'vnisce il latte ben battuto,
E il denso suo liquor diuien migliore:
Cosi si giunge col suo oggetto Amore,
Dopo un lungo penar, dopo il rifiuto.


IVVATINDVLGERE DOLORI.
En, medicam auersatur opem, en Podaleiria spernit
Pocula, que ratio porrigit, aeger amans.
Omnes humanos sanat medicina dolores, Propert.

Solus Amor morbi non amat artificem.
Love refuses help.
Love lying sick in bed rejects phisiks skill,
The cause of all his grief it grieves him to remove,
He knows love woorks his grief, yet will not leave to love,
No reason nor no herb can then recure his ill.
Good del suo male.
Il medico al bisogno si ritroua:
l' Amante infermo la ragion rifiuta,
Per dar rimedio al' aspra sua feruta,
Nessun' herba, o ragion' al Amor gioua.


IN TENEBRIS SINE TE.
Cum te non video, mea lux, vel nigra videntur
Lilia, and hand lucent lucida signa poli,
Luridus and solis mihi, creed, estaureus orbis:
Ipsi etiam melli fellis amaror inest.
Absence kills.
Not to enjoy the sight of mu fair ladies face,
Makes nothing unto me to yield his true delight,
The lilly seems black, the Sun to lack his light,
Through absence of my love thus altered is the case.
La gioia m'annoia.
Priuo di voi cor mip, ho guerra in pace,
Mi sembran neri i gigli, oscuro il sole,
E putenti le rose, e le viole.
Per l' absenza al' Amante il tutto spiace.


EST MISER OMNIS AMANS.
^ll.
Acer Amor fractas vtinam tua tela sagittas,
Scilicet exstinctas aspiciamque faces.
Tu miserum torques, tu me mihi dira precari
Cogis, and infanda mente nefanda loqui.
Loves misery.
Love lines in meserie and often does sustayn,
The harms of heat and cold, and therefore does desire,
That Cupids bow were broke and quenched were his fire,
All lovers or the most of misery complayn.
Meseria d'Amore.
Miser' e ben l'amante, il cui desire
Nessuna cosa alleggia; state, e verno
Viue come sepolto in vn' Inferno,
E sempre mal si duol del suo martire.


AMANS SECVNDVM TEMPVS.
Plutarch.
Speculum, vt leuis amans, quidquid obijcitur recipit.
Perdit vt obiecto speculum, pereunte figuras,
Atque alias alio mox veniente capit:
Sic etiam inconstans mutatis, credit, terris,
Quantum oculis, animo tam procul ibit Amor.
Out of sight out of mind.
The glass does show the face while thereon on does look,
But gone, it does another in like manner show,
Once being turned away forgotten is the view,
So absence has bin cause lover love forsook,
Lunge da gl'occhi, lunge dal core.
Ne lo specchio l'imagine apprisce,
Ma se s'aretra, in un momento sgombra:
Cosi l' Amante mobile com' ombra
Si cangia; col partir l' Amor suanisce.


AVRO CONCILIATVR AMOR. Ovid.

Cur Amor (heu) donis nunc illaqueris and auro?
Qui dum simplicitas illa paterna fuit,
Ex mero amore soles facilem aspirare fauorem;
Nunciacet (ah) virtus; in pretio at pretium est.
Love bought and sold.
Love justly may complayn, and great abuse relate,
In seeing love to be somtymes for treasure sold,
As though high prysed love were no more worth then gold,
And merchants might it sell at ordinary rate.
A Donna dona.
Gia si solea trouar per cortesia
Gratia, e fauor' amando, hor' al rouerso,
Nulla puo la virtu, sol l'or peruerso
Al tuo disegno t'aprira la via.


ANTEIT VENATIO CAPTVM.
Venator saltus atque inuia lustra pererrat,
Sectaturque vagas per iuga summa fer as:
Nec cessator eris qui amas; venere necesse est.
Non petet ipsa tuum praeda cupita sinum.
Pindar.
Si vero aliqua est inter homines felicitas, eanon fine labor existit.

The chasing goes before the taking.
Before the deer be caught it first must hunted be,
The Lady eke pursued before she be obtaynd,
Pain makes the greater worth of ought that's thereby gaynd,
For nothing easly got we do esteemed see.
Nulla senza fatica.
Si segue il ceruo al monte, e nell' asprezza:
Cosi la Dama anchora si procaccia;
Folle chi pensa ch' ella dia la caccia.
Quel che presto s'ottien, presto si sprezza.


LITTERIS ABSENTES VIDEMVS. Cic.

Viuis in extremis ignoti partibus orbis,
Et procul ex oculis dulcis amica meis.
At te praesentem, absentem licet, esse putabo
Si mihi sit verhis charta notata tuis.
Si imagines amantibus, Seneca.
etiam absentium, iucund sunt, quod memoriam renouent, and desiderium absentiae
falso atque inani solatio leuent: quanto iucundiores sunt litterae, quae vera
amantis vestigia, veras notas afferunt.

Loves joy is reuyued by letters.
When houe impatient grows through absence and delay,
And with his love to be no remedy can find,
Love letters come to him and tell his lovers mind,
Whereby his joy is kept from dying and decay.
Congiunto sempre.
Per lunga absenza Amore impatiente
Il modo ritrouo da giunger l'alme,
Benche sian sparte le corporee salme.
l'Amor lontant per lettere e present.


FLAMMESCIT VTERQVE.
Exprimitur validis extritus virubus ignis, Lucret.

Et micat interdum flammai feruidus ardor,
Mutua dum inter se rami stirpes'que teruatur.
Love enkindleth love.
A kind of wood there is, that rubbed with the same,
Does first increase in heat and lastly come on fire,
So do two lovers eyes increase their hot dysyre,
When loves augmented force does both their hearts, inflame.
Cosi s'infiamma.
Duo legni insieme scossi a poco a poco
Dan fiamma aredente: arede non men l' Amente,
Che palpa, o scontra vna belta prestante,
Esi sent nel core un viuo foco.


AGITATA REVIVO.
Vt paene exstinctum cinerem si sulphur tangas, Ovid.

Viuet, and ex minimo maximus ignis erit:
Sicnisivitaris, quidquid reuocabit amorem,
Flamma redardescet, quae modo nulla fuit.
Lost loves speedy recovery.
The canlde that's blown out, may be blown in again,
If straight-wayes it be done, while fire does yet endure,
So love by chance put out, love may perchance recure,
But it must be in time, else blowing is in vayn.
Chi vi torna, si raccende.
Presto s'accende la candela spenta,
Se'llusignuolo anch' arde: Amor' anchona
Con poca cosa accende, and innamora.
Ben fugge il mal chi la cagion pauenta.


QVIS ENIM SECVRVS AMAVIT. Tibull.

Vt flamma nec premi potest, nec quiescere: Plutarch.
sic leuis quietus semper amantis est animus.

Love lacks quietness.
The flickering flame of fire may not be holden fast,
But too and fro it fleets and never can be stayed,
So does the lovers mind through loves distraction strayd,
As both in wish and will resolved not to last,
Non quieta may.
Non si puote arrestar la fiamma viua
Ne il core d'vn' amante, che viuace
Forma mill pensier, non ha may pace
Ne la mente ansiosa, e fuggitiua.


AMORIS IVSIVRANDVM POENAM NON HABET. Callimach.

Nulla fides inerit: periuria ridet amantum
Iuppiter, and ventis irrita far iubet.
Gratia magna Ioui: Tibull.
vetuit pater ipse valere,
Iurasset cupide quidquid ineptus Amor.
Love excused from perjury.
The lover freedom has to take a lovers oath,
Whith if it prove untrue he is to be excused,
For venus does dispense in lovers oaths abused,
And love no fault comitts in swearing more then troth.
Giuramento sparso al vento.
Se ben l'amante assai promette, e giura,
Non si da pena a le sue voci infide,
Anzi Venere, e Gioue se ne ride.
l'Amoroso spergiuro non si cura.


POST NVBILA PHOEBVS.
Post Boream Zephyrus, surgit post nuhila Phoebus;
Cum desaeuit biems, tum aequora strata iacent.
Non prius, inuidiae quam cesset saeua procella
Fortunae'que atrtox turbo, quiescet amans.
After a tempest a calm.
The sea is never still but when the wynd appeaseth,
Right so the lovers mind is never in repose,
Till fortunes rage be done, and envy force does lose,
The cause of ill removed, the ill soon after cease.
Dopo la tempesta bonaccia.
Mentre che spira il vento, non e calma,
E mentre inuidia versa il suo veleno
Di verace amator nel caldo seno,
Di tosco infetta non riposa l'alma.


APPARET DISSIMVLATVS AMOR. Ovid.

Dissimulas frustra: quis enim celauerit ignem?
Lumen ab indicio proditur vsque suo.
Love will appeer.
The fire of Cupids heat can hardly hidden be,
Some crannie or some hole can make love be espyde,
And oftentimes the more when lovers do it hyde,
For love may not be sure that noman shall it see.
s'Asconde in vano.
Celar non puossi l'Amoroso ardore,
Monstrasi sempre in qualche part aperto:
Difficilmente puo tener coperto
l'Amante la passion del miser core.


CRESCIT SPIRANTIBVS AVRIS.
Sumit flamma nouas Boreae spiramine vires:
Si Domina aspiret, sumam and ipse nouas
Aspira ergo meis facilis conatibus, addat
Aura serenantis plena favor is opem.
Favor increases loves force.
The flame does more increase by blowing of the wynd,
So the sweer breath of love in kind words vttred forth,
Increases love the more and makes it more of worth,
Love not by favor fed can no increasing find.
Per fauore cresce Amore.
Per la forza del vento il foco cresce:
E per fauori del' amato viso,
d'Vn dolce sguardo, e d'vn leggiadro viso
Piu s'infiamma l'Amante, e men gl'incresce.


AMOR DIVRNVS NOCTVRNVSQVE COMES. P. Sir.

Quam fidus Pylades Amor est noctuque diuqueg!
Quam turbat somnos sape Cupido meos!
Somne quies rerum, placidissime somne Deorum,
Huc huc ad nostros lumina verte lares.
Love night and day attendant.
Love always does attend the lover day and night.
For if he sleep or wake still with him will he be,
Awake to him he speaks, In dreams he does him see,
Repose enjoyed of all, denies him delight.
Sempre punge.
Giorno e notte gl' amanti l'Amor rode,
Gli turba la quiet, e il dolce sonno,
Onde gl' afflitti respirar non ponno.
Il ben commun l'amante sol non good.


AMOR, VTLACRYMA, EX OCVLIS ORITVR, IN PECTVS CADIT. P. Sir.

Nil opus est armis Veneris tibi nate, nec arcu;
Ecce oculis telum nostra puella gerit.
Iugiter hoc ferit illa, facitque in vulnere vulnus.
Ah nimium in penas lumina pulchra meas!
Looks are loves arrows.
My loves looks unto me, the force of love empartes,
Each glance an arrow is, which from her eyes proceed,
Now Cupid rest thy self, to shoot thou haste no need,
For her looks wound my heart as well as do thy darts.
Piaga de suoi bell' occhi.
Deh tienti in pace Amor con l'arco, e i strali,
che la mia Dama armata de suoi sguardi
m'Auenta al core piu pungenti dardi,
Che pungon meglio che li tuoi fatali.


PECTVS MEVM AMORIS SCOPVS.
Hic scopus est, cunclas huc verte, Cupido, sagittas,
Nam patet in vulnus pectus inerme meum.
Non tot ieiunus Tityo dat vulnera vultur,
Quot tua visceribus tela dedere meis.
The lovers heart is Cupids white.
Right at the lovers heart is Cupids aim adrest,
He takes it for his white and never shootes awry,
Nor does he cease to shoot, but shaft on shaft lets fly.
And glories in the fame of his own shooting best.
Segno d'Amore il core.
Il berzaglio d'Amor' e questo petto,
Nel core i strali suoi diritto caccia,
E al muro come immobile m'allacia,
E in varij modi m'ange a suo diletto.


NVLLIS MEDICABILIS HERBIS. Ovid.

Cerua venenato venantum saucia serre
Dyctamno quaerit vulneris auxilium.
Hei mihi, quod nullis sit Amor medicabilis herbis,
Et nequeat medica pellier art malion!
No help for the lover.
The heart that wounded is, knows how to find relief,
And makes by dictamon the arrow out to fall,
And with the self-same herb he cures his wound withal,
But love no herb can find to cure his inward grief.
Solo senza rimedio.
Cerca il fugace ceruo saettato
Il dittamo, che il mal gli disacerba:
Et io meschin pur cerco, ne trouo herba,
Che risani il mio cor d'Amor piagato.


ET CVMFORTVNA STATQVE CADITQVE FIDES. Ovid.

Non solum ipsa fortuna caeca est: Cic.
sed etiam plerumque caecos efficit quos complexa est: adeo vt spernant amores
veteres, ac indulgeant nouis.

Blind fortune blyndeth love.
Sometime blind fortune can make lone be also blind,
And with her on her globe to turn and wheel about,
When cold preuailes to put light loves faint feruor out,
But fervent loyal lone may no such fortune find.
Fortuna l'accieca.
Benda gl'occhi al Amor fortuna cieca,
E mobile lo tien sul globo tondo,
E miracol non e s'ei cade al-fondo,
Poiche l'vn cieco l'altro cieco accieca.


SINE FOMITE FRVSTRA.
Qui cupiens lentae nimium tepidaeque puellae est,
Frustra est, ac nugas, illius instar, agit,
Qui silice abstrusum sien fomite quaeritat ignem.
Mutuus est vere fomes Amoris Amor.
Loves labor spent in vayn.
The fire is struck in vayn where tinder there is none.
So is the love but lost where it enkinndleth not,
For love must nowrish love and keep it kyndly hot,
No love can ener line where it must live alone.
Indarno.
La pietra senza l'esca in van si batte
Per trarne foco: in vano si procura
Di riscaldar' alma agghiacciata, and dura.
La rocca d'vn cor duro mal s'abbatte.


ARMAT SPINA ROSAS, MELLA TEGVNT APES.
Suauem Amor (ecce) rosam dum deligit vngue rosetis,
A rigidis spinis saucia membra dolet.
Quod iuuat, exiguum; plus est quod laedit amantes:
Quaeque ferunt, multo spicula fell madent.
No pleasure without pain.
In plucking of the rose is pricking of the thorn,
In the attayning sweet, is tasting of the sour,
With joy of love is mixed the sharp of many a shower,
But at the last obtaynd, no labor is forlorn.
Non e gioia senza noia.
Punge la spina chi la rosa coglie:
Ne si puo corre il bell piacer d'Amore
Senza amari sospir, pena, e dolor.
La sua dolcezza e chiusa ne le doglie.


PRECIBVS HAVD VINCI POTEST. Senec.

Nec lacrymis crudelis Amor, Virg.
nec gramina riuis,
Nec Cythiso saturantur apes, nec fronde capellae.
Love is pitiless.
As Mars with humayn blood and spoils and overthrows,
Is not to pity moved, when he in rage is heated,
So Cupid by no plaints nor tears will be entreated,
The more that he is prayed the less he pity shows.
Senza pieta.
Giamai di sangue Mart sanguinoso
Si satia, ne di pianto il Dio d'Amore,
Di lamenti, di stridi, e di dolor,
E quanto e piu pregato, e men pietoso.


CELEREM HABET INGRESSVM AMOR, REGRESSVM TARDVM. P. Sir.

Amor ingressus non facile discedit, Plutarch.
quamuis alatus, nec penitus liberam relinquit animam, remanetqueue in ea
vestigium, veluti siluae exustae aut fumantis, neque penitus ex ossibus
eijcitur.

Slow in departing.
Cupid does come in haste, but slow away he goth,
A speedy cause he fynds that his return may stay,
Hope makes him to believe there is comfort in delay,
Fear of departing pain, to part does make him loath.
Lento al partire.
Con un volo leggier, con mezzo sguardo
Impiaga prima Amor, ma diuien zoppo
Al ritirarsi, and met al' ali un groppo
Ben presto entra l' Amor', esce ben tardo.


AMANS, QVOD SVSPICATVR, VIGILANS SOMNIAT. P. Sir.

Ante meos oculos praesto est tua semper imago, Ovid.

Et videor vultus meante videre tuos.
Hi qui amant, Terent.
ipsi sibi somnia fingunt.
Dreams do produce joy.
Loves fancies in the day, turn into dreams by night.
Then thinks he that his love before him present is,
And that he does enjoy his hearts defyred bliss,
But waxing once awake he loses that delight.
Vani, e dolci sogni.
Forma l'amante ne la mente vaga
Gran sogni, e creed al suo desir ben folle;
Ma nel mar caccia, e case in aria estolle.
Di menzogne l'amante ancho s'appaga.


AMANS AMANTI MEDICVS.
Discite sanari, Ovid.
per quem didicistis amare,
Vna manus vobis vulnus opemque feret:
Terra salutiferas herbas, eademque nocentes
Gignit, and vrticae proxima saepe rosa est.
Love is loves physician.
By whom the harm is wroght the remedy is found,
The causer of the smart, is causer of the ease,
He cures the sickness best, that caused the disease,
Love must the plaster lay, where love has made the wound.
l'Vno Amor sana l'altro.
Chi impiaga sani, and paghi del piagato
Il chirurgo chi die il colpo mortale;
Deue emendar col ben, chi fece il male.
Solo Amor dal' Amor vien risanato.


OF FICIT OF FICIO.
Aestuo nec flammas potis est restinguere nimbus,
At flammae, vires adycit vnda nouas
Quae metamorphosis? mihi sunt medicamina virus,
Et mea per densas flamma fauillat aquas.
Amans, P. Sir.
ita vt fax, agitando ardescit magis.

Loves fire is unquenchable.
No water slakes loves heat, but makes his fire to flame,
Cupids heart burning fire, makes water for to burn,
By coldness he does cause increasing heates return,
Where love has hope of help, his harm lies in the same,
Soccorso mi nuoce.
Non puo l'acqua, ne'l vento render spenta
l'Alta fiamma d'Amor, anzi piu sale.
Qual rimedio poss'io dar' al mio male.
Se per la medicina piu s'aumenta?


ALBA LIGVSTRA CADVNT, VACCINIA NIGRA LEGVNTVR. Virg.

-- placuit Cepheia Persei Ovid.

Andromade, patriae fusca color suae.
Et violae nigrae sunt, Virg.
and vaccinia nigra.
Brown beries are sweet of taste.
Cupid not always does, shoot at the fairest white,
But at the lovely brown, most often draws his bow,
Good gesture and fine grace, he has the skill to know,
Delighting for to choose, the cause of his delight.
Gratia piu che color.
La bianca Amor per la brunetta lassa
Talhora; e perch no? se piu souente
La gratia de la bruna e piu possente?
Piu fermo e' l bruno, el' color bianco passa.


VNDECVMQVE OCCASIO PROMTA.
Vt hedera vndeuis inuenit, Plutarch.
quose alliget: sic amans quaecumque occurrunt, ad amicae adaptat nutum.

Love uses many means.
The iuie ought can find his weakness to supporte,
So does the lover seek his fastening hold to take,
Of each occasion meet, advantage for to make,
For naught must ouerslip that may his good importe.
d'Ognicosa frutto.
Troua l'hellera sempre o pianta, o muro
Dove salga; da quel che parla, e dice
l'Amata, l'amator profitto elice.
Vtile e il tutto al saggio, e va sicuro.


MORBVM NOSSE, CVRATIONIS PRINCIPIVM.
Sanus Amor morbum nosse aegro suadet Amori,
Consulto and medico in tempore poscere opem.
Morbum quippe suum nosse est pars prima salutis,
Quem metuens, perijt, prodere creber amans.
Showing causes curing.
The paynfull wounded wight may boldly plain his grief,
And open lay his wound before his Surgions eyes,
So to thy lover show where thy hearts dolor lies,
The knowing the disease, is first cause of relief.
Mal celato non vien curato.
l'Infermo dee scuoprir senza paura
Al medico il suo male, e dee mostrare
Al' amata il suo amor chi voul sanare.
Per conoscer il mal, viensi a la cura.


NEGARE IVSSI, PERNEGARE NON IVSSI.
Cedere non subito suadent sexusque pudorque
Sed modus in cunctis optimus est habitu,
Est cu difficilem quae sese praebuit olim,
Ingemit, and nimiun lenta fuisse dolet.
Proffred service past the date, Is wished when it is to late.
Loves offered service may for fassion be refused,
If yiedling at the first vnseembly shall be thought,
But often rejecting it, may make it to be soght,
And wished again to late, with folly vnexcused.
Tal fugge, che poi caccia.
Che la figlia rifiuti honesta vuole,
Ma non saprei pregiar troppo quest' atto
Perch si e visto, che chi sprezza il patto.
Ben spesso si ripente, e se ne duole.


NEC REGNA SOCIVM FAR, NEC TAEDAE SINVNT. Senec.

Te socium vitae, Propert.
te corporis esse licebit,
Te dominum admitto rebus amice meis:
Lecto te solum, lecto te deprecor vno:
Riualem possum non ego far Iouem.
Love endures no compagnion.
Love none with him admits, in love to have a part,
All were it Jove himself he will make him to be gone,
Love nor yet Lordship do endure a paragon,
Love will alone enjoy his ladies loving heart.
Amor, esignoria non vuol compagnia.
l'Amante vuol godersi la sua Dina
Solo, e non vuol soffrir alcun riuale,
Oude Amor scaccia Gioue Dio fatale.
Il dominio, e l'Amor compagni schius.


DETEGIT AMOREM FORVNA. P. Sir.

Eurip.
Vt speculum puellae faciem arguit sic amantem fortuna.

Fortune it loves looking-glas.
Even as a perfect glass does represent the face,
Just as it is in deed, not flattring it at all.
So fortune tells by advancement or by fall,
The Event that shall succeed, in loves luck-tryed case.
Fortuna specchio d'Amore.
Si come il fido specchio i gesti, e l'opre
Di bella, e brutta faccia manifesta,
Cosi per sort prospena o molesta
Nei successi l'amante si discuopre.


AMOR, QVI DESINERE POTEST, NVMQVAM VERVS FVIT.
Si cruci affigatur, Senec.
snigni comburatur, semper amat qui vere amans est.

Love in enduring death.
If loves beloved should, all mortal hatred show,
Against him by sword and fire, by torment and by death,
Yet constant he remaynes, while has any breath,
True love in death it self, none can unconstant know.
Sempre constante.
Se l'amata al' amante e cruda, e giostra,
E a foco e sangue lo guerreggia e sface,
Non sen vengia il meschin, ma soffre, e tace.
Ancho in morte l'Amor costanza mostra.


QVO QVIS MAGIS AMAT, HOC MAGIS TIMET. Senec.

Numquam non animum formido tangit amantis,
Et stultus stulto saepe timore tremit.
Quo plus crescit Amor, plus hoc suspectio crescet.
Res est solliciti plena timoris Amor.
The greater love, the greater fear.
The greater love does grow, the more does fear abound,
Since for what most we love most care we ever take,
Thus love does make our fear, and fear our love does make,
He that has fear of loss, is careless never found.
Crescendo Amore, cresce il timore.
Piu s'ama, piu la tema al cor s'aumenta;
Del' amata l'amante e in grand' affanno,
Ch' vn' altro se la godi con suo danno;
La tema ouunque e Amore si presenta.


SVNT LACRYMAE TESTES.
Ecquid adhuc dubitas? testis sit lacryma slammae,
Semper vt occlusa stillat ab igne liquor.
Loves tears are his testimonies.
The tears of love do serve for witnessing his woe,
His ardent love the fire, the fournace is his heart,
The wynd that blows it, sighs, that rise from inward smarte,
The limbeke his two eyes, from whence his tears do flow.
Ne fa feed il pianto.
Struggemi Amor in pianto a stilla a stilla,
Serve il mio Amor di foco, di furnace
Il core, i miei sospir d'aura viuace,
E di lambico gl' occhi, e l'acqua stilla.


QVOD NVTRIT, EXSTINGVIT.
Vt qua nutritur pinguedine teda liquescit,
Qua viuo, hac morior; quam pereo hac pereo.
Love killed by his own nouriture.
The torche is by the wax maintained while it burns,
But turned vpfyde-down it straight goes our and dies,
Right so by Cupids heat the lover lives likewise,
But thereby is he killed, when it contrary turns.
Quel che nutre, estingue.
Nutre la cera il foce, e ne lo priua
Quando e riuolto in giu: d'Amor l'ardore
Nutre e sface l'Amante in un calore.
Contrario effetto un sol soggetto auiua.


AMORIS FRVCTVS AT QVE PROEMIVM SOLA QVANDOQVE COGITATIO EST. P. Sir.

Mente mihi es praesens, licet absis corpore, mente
Te fruor, and totos te gero mente dies.
Me tua ieiunum saltem satiabit imago,
Si Superi iungi corpora nostra vetent.
Amare liceat, Menand.
si potiri non licet.
Contentment in conceat.
Loves recompense is often, but even the thoghts of love,
Imagining he sees his mistress lovely face,
And though she absent be, he thinks she is in place,
And thus this all he has, nothing at all does prove.
De sol pensier m'appago.
Spesso il premio d'Amor non e che cieca
Imagination del ben bramato,
Onde l'Amante tiensi fortunato;
l'Impression del ben contento arreca.


MAONI CONTEMTOR HONORIS.
Calcat Amor fastum, nee inanes captat honores,
Gaudet and abiecto viuere vbique loco.
At quo fis humilis magis, Propert.
and subiectus amori,
Hoc magis effecto saepe fruare bono.
Love hates pride.
The tail love treads down of the proud pecock brave,
Because he hates pride, and has it in disdayn,
Equality in love he thinks does love mayntayn,
And for to please his love will please to be a slave.
Odia l'orgoglio.
Col pie l'augel superbo Amor discaccia,
Sdegna l'andar da grave, e la grandezza,
Anzi che gouernar serve in tristezza.
Lostato Amor d'vn schiauo ama, e procaccia.


HOSPITIVM VERENDVM.
In hospitium ad Cupidinem'diuerti, Plant.
insanumest malum:
Nam qui in Amore praecipitauit, peius perit, quam si saxo saliat.
Love gives cold entretaynment.
Unwise is he that will in that inn lodged be,
Where as love is the host that must him entertayn,
And there in steed of wine does make him drink his bayn,
How can he peril escape that seeks it not to flee.
Doloroso albergo.
Mal saggio e quel, che vanell' hosteria
Dove l'hoste e l'Amor. (ahi)gli da a cena
Tosco in vece di vin, che l'auelena.
Piange chi cerca il mal la sua pazzia.


HAVD TIMET MORTEM, CVPIT IRE IN IPSOS OBVIVS ENSES. Senec.

Non me per altas ire si iubeas niues,
Pigeat gelatis ingredi Pindi iugis:
Non si per ignes ire and infesta agmina,
Cunctis paratus ensibus pectus dare.
Loves endurance.
Where ever love is placed in either hill or dale,
By south or else by north, in either cold or heat,
Even at the push of pyke or perilles nere so great,
No danger nor no dread against him can prevail.
Sprezza ogni rischio.
Mandami a i monti nel gelato horrore,
O nel piu caldo ardor del' Austro ardente.
Comanda a tuo piacer. Amor possente
Ferri, o rischi nou teme, ne timore.


NVLLI CVPIAT CESSISSE LABORI. Claudian.

Onus non est appellandum, Cic.
quod cum laetitia feras, ac voluptate.
Solus Amor est, qui nomen difficulatis erubescit.
No labor wearisome.
Love only is ashamed to call his labor pain,
How heavy so it be, for toyling is his ease,
As he that hunts or hawks, his trauail does him please,
Because his whole content lies in the hope of gayn.
Ogni fatica e lieue.
Si gran peso non e, che sul volante
Dorso non porti Amor, restando dritto,
A li trauagli, a i pesi e sempre inuitto.
Nulla cosa e difficile al'Amante,


EXSATVRATVS AERVMNIS.
Litore quot conchae, Ovid.
tot sunt in amore dolores,
Et quot silua comas, sidem Olympus habet.
Loves infinite pains.
There are not in the sea more billows to be found,
Nor on the sandy shore more cast up cocle shelles,
But that the griefs of love those numbers far excelles
When aduers fortune does in her mishappes abound.
Pene infinite.
Se diuentan' auerse, o se ribelle
Son le cose al' amante, ha pianti, e guai,
Piu de le conche in mar maggiori assai,
O piu che non ha il ciel lucide stelle.


AMANS SE SVAQVE PRODIGIT.
En, vt Auaritiae loculos extorqueat infans
Penniger: ingentes nam odit amator opes.
Prodigit ille suum, dominae quo seruiat, aurum,
Laetus in obsequio cuncta dedisse suo.
Love causes liberality.
The wretched gredie mind by avarice oppressed,
Love liberal can make, how fast his pursse be closed,
No locks nor stringes can hold, but lightly they are losed,
When love has with his darte, but pricked him in the breast.
Spande e spend.
Dal' Auaritia abietta a forza prende
La borsa Amor, rende l'auaro eguale
Sua natura cangiando, al liberale,
Alhor ch' al vino punge, e i cori accende.


AMORI QVAE PVLCHRA NON SVNT, EA PVLCHRA VIDENTVR. Theocr.

Lusca puella placet cupido (ceu cernis) Amori,
Ducit and hanc iuncta, qua lubet, ille manu:
Sic and amica omnis formosa videtur amanti,
Iudicio cacus nam vacat ille furor,
Love had never foul mistress.
She whom love does affect he holds to be fair,
His deer-beloued foul he not at all esteems,
What in her is amiss, amiss he never deemeth,
For love does all defects of his beloved repair.
Nessuna amata e brutta.
Vero amante giamai trouo l'amata
Brutta, ben che nel volto ella sia tale,
O in qualche membro sconcio, e diseguale.
Cela il difetto Amore in cosa grata.


NEMO ADEO FERVS EST, QVINON MITESCERE POSSIT. Horat.

En, strictum Martis manibus puer eripit ensem,
Et sua bellacem vincla subire iubet.
Nemo adeo ferus est, qui non mitescere discat,
Cuon sua trans fibras spicula iecit Amor.
Love pacifyeth the wrathful.
Cupid the sword of Mars out of his hand can wring,
And soon aswage his wrath how furious so he be,
Love can do more then stryf, by this effect we see,
The sturdie and the stout love does to myldnes bring.
Di fero dolce.
Al fero Mart Amore toglie l'armi,
Vien facilmente un cor di smalto molle,
Per un dolce sorriso di quel folle,
l'Huom' piu crudo vien dolce per suoi carmi.


DVRATE.
Nonne vides, silices vt duros gutta perennis
Saxaque stillicidi casus and ipsa cauet,
Vtque annosa cadat repetitis ictibus ilex?
Sic dabit vrgenti victa puella manus,
By continuance.
Not with one stroke at first the great tree goes to grownd,
But it by many strokes is made to fall at last,
The drop does pierce the stone by falling long and fast,
So by enduring long long soght-for love is found.
Patiente, e frequente.
Al primo colpe l'arbore non cade,
Ma non colpi iterati, ancho souente
Strutta e la pietra dal' humor cadente.
A patienza Amor mostra humthade.


INGENS COPIA, INGENSINOPIA.
Vt puella in pratis alium post alium florem carpens priores negligit: sic qui
plures amare instituit, Plutarch.
nullam retinet.

Choice breeds confusion.
Like to the wench that comes where fragrant flowers grows,
And still that flower plucks whereof first choice she makes,
But it as soon forgets as she another takes,
So does the wavering mind, for new choice elder lose.
Abondanza confunde.
Come chi colgie i fior di prato in prato
Presto il primier' oblia, ch' hauea raccolto,
Cosi fa quei, ch' a nouo Amor' e volto.
Quell' ama in van, che ogn' hor caugia l'amato.


TELORVM SILVA PECTVS.
Non tot Achaememjs armantur Susa sagittis, Propert.

Spicula quot nostro pectore fixit Amor.
Without ceasing.
Behold a wood of shafts in the hart-placed side,
Which Cupid there has shot and cease not to shoot,
Each day new dolor breeds, and playning does not boot,
Yet all this, and yet more, will constant love abide.
Colpo a colpo
Miri chi. vuol veder selua ingombrata
Questo mio petto, dove Amor mi fiede
Co' mill dardi il cor senza mercede.
Viuendo muor l'amante per l'amata.


INVERSVS CROCODILVS AMOR.
Tali ratura crocodilus dicitur esse,
Vt lacrymans homines enecet, at que voret.
Est Amor innersie sed conditions, amantes
Nimiriun ridens ille perire facit.
The unkind lover kills with laghing countenance.
the Crocodil sheds tears when she a man destroys,
The lover that's unkind does lagh when she does kill,
But laght-at in distress denotes a hateful will,
The laghing serpent most the loving heart annoyes.
Fera piu che fera.
Suenando l'huomo il cocodrillo piange:
Ma colei che m'ancide, di mia morte
Si ride, e'l mio dolor cresce piu forte,
Che m'e crudele al doppio, e vie piu m'ange.


QVOD CITO FIT, CITO PERIT.
Vt subito est stipularum flamma, citoque
In cineres, stipula deficiente, cadit:
Sic properatus Amor subito euanescit in auras.
Principium feruens soepe tepere solet.
Soon kindled soon consumed.
Straw straightwayer kindled is, and straightwayes it does flame,
But as it kindles soon soon it consumes away,
So love enkindled soon does even asson decay,
All things begun in haste end also as the same.
Presto acceso, presto spento.
Ratto la paglia s'arde, oltre misura,
Ma si tosto si estingue che si alluma:
Presto arso Amore, presto si consuma.
Violente principio poco dura.


EST SIMVLARE MEVM.
Laruatus licet incedo, copertus and ora,
Non est quod metuas, cara puella, dolos.
Sum tibi syncerus, populo fucatus; Amoris
Garrula ne nostrum lingua reuelet opus.
Dissimulation is loves wisdom.
Not to deceive his love does love the visard use,
Although disguys'd he seem his mistress need not fear,
It is those to deceive, that secret malice bear,
Thereby to be secure from evil tounges abuse.
Simulato, e nascosto.
Celi l'amante l'inuido suo foca,
Solo scuopri al' amata un cor discreto,
Piu securo e l' Anor, che va secreto,
Che al biasmo, and al'inuidia non da loco.


PRIMO DELECTAT, MOX VRIT.
Mane recens orto Titan delectat Eoo,
Vrit at in medio cuncta calore die.
Falamma saeui Amoris paruo quidem primo vapore delectat: sed fomento
consuetudinis exaestuans, Apul.
immodicis ardoribus, totos adurit homines.

First pleasant and afterward painful.
Even as the Sun yields joy when it begins to rise,
And at noontyde does scortche in greatness of his hear,
So love appeering first, yields pleasure passing great,
But burning in his rage, there pain for pleasure lies.
Il troppo e troppo.
Ci piace il sole si, quando si leua,
Ma non quando nel' Austro e troppo ardente:
Cupido piace a noi primieramente,
Ma non quando a la fin n'arde, and n'aggreua.


FIT AMOR VIOLENTIOR AVI.
En, frustra fortuna facem remoratur Amoris,
Nam ferus est, alis fallit and ille moras;
Atque retenti instar violentius astuat aminis.
Sic fit and a remoris plus furiosus amans.
By force made more forceible.
When there is ought that will the running stream restrayn,
It does enrage with noise though it before were still,
If fortune or ought else force love against his will,
Then his desire gainsayd, by force he seeks to gayn.
Impedito piu feroce.
Quando un ruscel corrente inciampo troua,
l' Acqua che dolce giua diulen fiera;
Se fortuna al' amante opposi altiera,
Di superarla con piu cor fa proua.


MIHI NVLLA QVIES, VT LAPIS AEQVOREIS VNDIQVE PVLSVS AQVIS. Ovid.

Quisquis amat, vario curarum fluctuat aestu
Nec misero noctu pausa diuque datur:
Saxea ceu repes vndeundique tunditur vndis,
Vento Alpinis nata iugis abies.
Love never vntroobled.
As billows in the sea against the rocks do beat,
So thoghts both day and night perturb the lovers mind,
For love right sildome can reposed quiet find,
Because his restless thoughts his rest so ill entreat,
Combattuto sempre.
Qual duro scoglio da li salsi humori
E combattuto: tal l'amante e scosso
Da pensier mill, pena a piu non posso.
Albergan sempre i guai ne i nostri cori.


MEA VITA PER IGNEM.
Hei fatum crudele mihi! mea vita per ignes
Crescit, and in medyedys ignibus esse iuuat.
Me nutrit, veluti salamandram, Cyprius ardor:
Plus iuuat in te, quam te sine flamma mori.
Love Lives by fire.
Vnhu'rt amidds the fire the Salamander lives,
The lover in the fire of love delight does take,
Where love thereby to live his nouriture does make,
What others does destroy life to the lover gives.
Nel foco viuo.
Viue la salamandra in foco ardente,
E nel foco d'Amor viue l'amante,
Quest e suo cibo, e gloia trionfante
In quel, ch' altrui da morte, ei vita sent.


SEMPER IDEM.
Amica non est vtendum, vt floribus; tam diu gratis, quamdiu recentibus.

Ever the same.
When flowers are fresh and fair we take in them delight,
But vaded once and done, all their esteem is paste,
Love does contrariwise in all times live and last,
For time must not bereave true love of due and right.
Stabile il ogni tempo.
Non, qual si suole amor bell fiore, amate,
Che tanto tempo s' ama quanto e verde,
Se pur l'amate e vecchia, o stagion perde
Non le diate dolor, non la sdegniate.


AD EXTREMVM.
Quamdiu funis erit, tamdiu quoque flamma manebit,
Deficiente etiam fomite flamma perit.
Crudelis sic verus Amor nisi morte peribit,
Qui potis est vita deficiente mori.
Even to the end.
The match that kindled is, lasts burning to the end,
So when the fire is once in the true lovers heart,
There does it lasting burn, and never does depart,
For on still lasting does the lovers truth depend.
Insino al fine.
l'Accesa corda sino al fin si sface;
s'Vna sol volta Amore il core infiamma
d'Vn vero amante, auniua ogn'hor la fiamma.
l'Amar fin' a la morte ad Amor place.


ET ANNOSA CAPITVR VVLPES.
Quid non vincit Amor? quid non puer alme coerces?
Qui vulpem annosam vincula far doces.
Non robur iuuenes, non experientia canos
Eximit, aequali quoslibet art capis.
The old fox is often beguyled.
Look look how love sometime the old fox does ensnare,
Or with his arrow hit while he would run away,
Not only youth is caught in snares that love does lay,
But even the crafty old want craft for to beware.
E giouani leggieri, e vecchi esperti.
Scorgete, come Amor con laccio duro
Coglie la vecchia volpe, o col fire dardo;
Se a lui soggiace il giouine gagliardo,
l'Esperto vecchio anchor non va securo.


MEN'S IMMOTA MANET. Virg.

Tempus edax rerum pennas decurtat Amoris,
Sed vim, tela, faces non domat vlla dies.
Sic licet imminuat Venerem aetas languida amanti:
Non tamen affectus tollitur omnis ei.
Loves heart is ever young.
It Is only time that can the wings of Cupid clip,
And make him fly more low then he was wont to do,
But Time clips not away his good will thereunto,
The aged carter loves to hear the lashing whip.
Mal grado il tempo rio, l'animo e franco.
Taglia il tempo d'Amor l'ali, e percuote,
Si che non puo volar come soleua,
Ma l'animo suo franco non aggreua.
d'Vn voler senza possa amar si puote.


VINCIT AMOR ASTV.
Centum front oculos, Ovid.
centum post terga gerebat
Argus, and hos vnus saepe fefellit Amor.
Love exceeds in subtlety.
Though Argus do not want an hundredth eyes to see,
Yet Cupid by his pype can bring them closse a-sleep,
But who a-sleep can ought from Cupid safely keep?
When watchfulnes it self deceau'd by him may be.
Vigil' Amor la vigilanza inganna.
Pon' Argo in van ne gl' occhi suoi speranza,
Che Amor l'accieca, e dolcemente appanna,
Scorge, and fura ogni cosa, and ancho inganna
Con la scaltrezza sua la vigilanza.


AMARE VOLO, POTIRI NOLO.
Stulte quid assiduo tua membra labor fatigas?
En tibi, quam sequeris, praeda supina iacet.
Quam stultum est in Amore suam consamere vitam,
Et numquam caro pignore velle frui?
Only for the chase.
Love sometime does delight to hold his hunting race,
And having hit the deer that first he lyked best,
Some other does pursue and let the former rest,
Not seeking for to have, but only for to chase.
Solamente per la caccia.
Molti amanti l'amata procacciando,
Fanno come l'arcier che fere caccia,
Fatta vna preda, segue vn' altra traccia;
Non per gioir, ma per andar cacciando.


QUAM BEEN NAVIGANT, QVOS AMOR DIRIGIT?
Si quis amat, Tibul.
quod amare iuuat feliciter ardet,
Gaudeat, and vento nauiget ille suo.
Eurip.
Quicumque homines amore capti fuerint,
Si commodos nanciscantur amores,
Nullum eis abest voluptatis genus.
It is good sailing before the wynd.
Loves happynes is here by wynd and tides accord,
Borne forward with full sail unto the wished port,
But of this fortune few can justly make report,
That enny should not one contrary blast afford.
Felicita d'Amore.
Felici son gl'amanti, che Amor guida,
Con un prospero vento a lor diporto;
Arriuan quelli al desiato porto,
Che ne' scogli non trabe la sort infida.


TRANSILIT ET FATI LITORA MAGNUS AMOR. Ovid.

Alciat.
Arentem senio nudam quoque frondibus vlmum
Complexa est viridi vitis opaca coma.
Exemploque docet tales nos quaerere Amores,
Quos neque disiungat foedere summa dies.
Love after death.
The vine does still embrace the elm by age ore-past,
Which did in former time those feeble stalks uphold,
And constantly remaynes with it now being old,
Love is not killed by death, that after death does last.
Ne per morte muore.
s' Auiticchia la vite, e l'olmo abbraccia,
Anchor che il tempo secchi le sue piante;
Dopo morte l'Amor tiensi constante.
Non teme morte Amore, anzi la scaccia.


SERO PROBATVR AMOR, QVI MORTE PROBATVR.
Fidus al extremum vitae tibi, vita, remansi,
Nunc mea cum vita flamma sepulta iacet.
Iam satis, and plusquam satis est, satis vsque probatum est,
Nam mea mors very testis Amoris erit.
Trial made to late.
Too late the proof is made to make true meaning seen,
When by noght else but death it only must be known,
It Is too extreme a proof where such effect is shown,
Enough but not toomuch, alas enough had been.
Tarda proua.
De la feed d'Amor tarda e la proua,
Che sol per via di morte si conosce,
l'Estrema proua apporta troppo angosce,
Pus che troppo e l'assai, che nulla gioua.


CENSVRA.
Emblemata haet, Othonis VaenI industria and aere tabulis expressa, quo
hotiesti Amoris virtutem, and naturam reprasentent, and ad priscum ritum
graphice accommodent: quodque ab eorumdeminter pretatione castae mentes merito
non debeant abborrere (quamquam, vt habet Seneca, in eodem prato bos herbam
quaerat, leporem canis, ciconia lacertam) poterunt ad mulcorum honestam
recreationem praelo committi. Act. Antuerp. 3. Kal. December. 1607.

Laur. Beyerlinck, S. Theol. Licent. Eccl. Cathed. Ant. Canon. and Censor.

CA'utum est priuilegijs, Pontificio, Caesareo, Regum Hispaniae, and Galliae,
ac Principum Belgij, nequis haec Emblemata, aut alia Authoris opera, vebiam
edita, vel in posterum edenda, imitetur. Qui secus faxit, confiscationem
exemplarium, and multam quingentorum ducatorum ipso facto incurret.

Typis Henrici Swingenij.


