A TREATISE CONCERNING general councilles, the Bishops of Rome, and the
Clergy.

1534



The preface.
THE AVCTORItie and power of general counsayles, ne the time when they began,
in the time of the new testament, ne yet the manner how they should be
gathered, or by whom, can not plainly be set forth to the reder, unless
the powers of kings and pryncis be first known and understand: I shall
therefore in the beginning of this little treatise, recyte certain textes of
scripture, concerning the power of kings and princes, how they have their
power immedyately of god: and then I shall somewhat touch, what mynystrations
the^ clergy have by the law of god, and* what by the law of man: and that yet
many of the lay people have beleuid, that the clergy has had power to use them
by the law of god. And then I wol touch some powers and auctoryties, that the
clergy has taken upon them, which they had neither power to have done by the
law of god, ne by the law of man: ne yet that any custom or prescription can
confirm them, or make them lauful: but that the longer they continue, the
greater is the offense. And then after those things I intend somewhat to
touch, by what auctorytie catholic general counsels first began and what
power they have: and then I shall speak of such counsayles, as have benne
gathered in time pass, by the power of the bishops of Rome, which have been
called general counsayles: and specially of the general counsel that the
bishop of Rome has now of late sommoned. And then I shall some what touch
ferther, under what manner, such general catholyke councilles, as be appointed
by scripture, ought to be gathered: and then I woll recyte some laws and
decrees made by bishops of Rome, and the clergy in time past, which be
against scripture: and so I will make an end of this tretise.

Of the power of kings and princes. The first Chapter.

GOD tourneth not his Job. 36.
yen from a ryghtewyse man, and kings he settith in their seats for ever.

And now, O ye kings, Psalm. 2.
understand ye, be ye learned that judge the world.

By me kings reygne, and makers roue. 8.
of laws dyscerne ryghtewyse things.

Here ye therefore ye kings and understand, learn ye that be judges api. 6.
of all parties of the world, leye to your ears ye that rule the multitude
and order the people: for power is given to you of god, and virtue fro the holy
ghost.

A wise king is the stablenes of his people. api. 6.


The king commands the hole Ecclesiases. 1.
country, as his subject.

Kings of the people have power over them. Luce. 22.


Warn them, that they be subjects Ad Titu^. 3
to princis and powers, to obey their commandments, to every good work to
be ready.

Be ye subject to every creature for god, either to the king as precellynge,
1. Pet. 2.
or to Dukes, as men sent by him to the correction of evil doers, and laud of
good doers.

Samuel said to king Saul, 1. Regu^
when thou were little in thyn own sight, were thou not made heed in the trybes
of Israel? and our lord anointed the king upon Israel. etc

All the people of Israel said to 1. Par. 1
David? thy lord god said to the: Thou shalt feed my people of Israel.

Be every soul subject to the high Romans 13
powers, forsothe there is no power but of god: verily all things that be, be
ordained of god, and he that resysteth power, resysteth the ordinance of god:
forsooth they that resyste, get dampnation to them self, for princes be not to
the dredde of a good work, but of an evil. will thou not dread power? do
good, and thou shalt have laud thereof. he is forsothe the mynyster of god to
the into goodness. If thou do evil, dread. forsothely he bears not a
sword without cause: he is the minyster of god, revenger in to wrath to him
that does evil, and therefore be ye subject to necessytie, not only for wrath
but for conscience.

King David said to all the people, Par. 28
Our lord god of Israel chase me before all the house of my father, that I
should be king upon Israel for ever.

Solomon according to the constitution Par. 8.
of David his father, instituted thoffyces of pryestes in their ministrations,
and leuytes in their order, that they should laud and minystre before the
pryestes, after the customs of every day, and porters in their deuysio^s by
gate and gate. So commanded David the man of god, and they break nothing of
the commandementes of the kyngneyther the priests nor the levites, in all
things that the king commanded. And the said constitution of David appears.
1. Par. 15. and 16.

King Iosaphat ordained iuges 2. Par. 5
in all the cities of Judah, and in Jerusalem he ordained levites and pristes,
and princes of familyes, that they should judge the judgment and cause of our
lord to all the dwellers thereof. And ferther he added thereto, saying: Amary,
your priest and bishop, shall be chief in such things as perteyne to god.

In the. xviii. year of Josias king 4. Re. 2
of Judah, the king sent Saphan the scrybe of the temple to Elchias the
hygheprieste, that all the money that was gatherid of the people for the temple,
should be molten and delivered to smithes to be bestowed upon the temple: and
Elchias did as the king commanded, and also sent him by Saphan, a book of
the law that he had found in the house of god. And when Saphan had read it
to the king, he cut his clothes, and commanded Elchias the high priest,
that he should counsel our lord upon the words of that book, for he said,
the wrath of god was kendellyd against them. and Elchias did as the king
commanded him. And so it appears, that the king commanded the high pryste,
concerning the reparation of the temple, and also concerning the said book,
and he obeyed.

Also the king Josias commanded 4. Re. 23
Elchias the bishop, and the pristes of the second order, and the porters,
that they should cast out of the house of god all vessels that were made to
Baal, and they obeyed. And these textes prove, that kings have their power
immediately of god. And that they judge the world: that all that be within
their dominions are their subjects, and owe to obey them, and neither bishop
or priste is not excepted in any of these textes.

Of diverse powers that the clergy has by the law of god The. ii. chapit.

THE power of preaching is by the law of god: where it is said: Preche ye the
gospel to every Mar vl(...)
creature. And that might every priste have done in the beginning of the
church, as soon as he was pryste, and noone might have prohibit him thereof:
but after by laws of the bishops of Rome ordinaries might make prohibitions
in such cases, and that hindered true preaching very much. Also matrimony
was ordained by god. And over that, the power that the clergy has, to
consecrate the body of our lord, to assoile, to make deacons, prystes, and
bysshoppes, is by the law of god. And they may also baptize without ceremonies
or exorcysmes, by the law of god, and so may every lay man: but none may use
the ceremonies or exorcysmes but prystes: and that is by laws of the bishops
of Rome. and so like wise the ceremonies in other ministrations be by laws of
bishops of Rome, or by custom. Also the mynistration of extreme unction none
may exercise but only priests. and as for the puttyng away of sin, no prist
may do it, neither by the law of god, ne by the law of man, for god only
of his mercy, through contricion, which is the very true penance, puts
away sin, and none but he. And every man that has offended, must use this
mynystration of penance and of contrytion in him self, and in his own heart,
if he will have forgyuenes: And none other but he may use this mynistration for
him.

Of diverse mynystrations, which the clergy has used by custom and by laws
of man, and yet many of the lay people have thought, that they have used them
by the law of god. The third chapter.

MATRIMONY was ordained by god: as is said before and it has. ii. great
prerogatyues before any other mynistration, that is to say, by reason of the
place and of the time: of the place, for it was instituted by god in paradise:
of the time, for it was first ordained before all other mynystrations. And
troth it is, that prestes by custom have had always the ministration and the
solempnysyng thereof, and none but they, as to the ceremonies, and so it is
right convenient that they have still: but yet it is expedient, that it be
known, by what authorite they have it: and that it may with a cause be taken
fro them by the high powers, as it may in deed. Also confyrmation is by the
law of man, and was ordained by the bishops of Rome and the clergy,
through the example of thappostles in the prymitiue church, which by
touching of their hands, gave the holy gooste in a vysyble sign, but that
gift went not to their successoures: how be it their successors have
ordained, that they shall like wise confirm them that be baptized, by tow
chynge of their hands, and if they that do it be in grace, it may do good,
and else it will do little good. Also auriculer confession is by the law of
man, and it may sometime do good, and be occasyon to bring in contrition.
Never the less many of the clergy affirm, and all the people in manner believe,
that it is by the law of god. Also satisfactyon, if it be taken as a part of
penance, given by iniunction of the confessor, in such manner as has benne
used in time past after confessions, is by the law of man: And if it be taken
as good deeds of prayour, fasting, and alms deed, done of devotion, then it
is commanded to every man by the law of god. but yet which way so ever it be
taken, it never puts away sin, but it may through grace, and through the
free gift of god, whether it be freely done, or by way of iniunction and
penance, increase his merit and reward in heaven. Also benedictions and
hallowynges, as they be commonly used, be by the law of man: and if the
minister be in state of grace, his benedyctyons and halowynges may do good: but
if he be out of grace, then as of them self, they do rather hurt then good.
And nevertheless many of the people think, that the evil life of the
mynyster, hurts not such hallowynges or benedyctions, no more than it does
hurt their consecrations and absolutions, or such other mynystrations as they
have by the law of god. And surely that is a right great error. Also
bishops have power to examyne encumbentes, that be presented to benefyces, but
that is in this realm only by custom, and by the favor and sufferaunce of
the king and his laws, and not by the law of god. for it can not be proved by
the law of god, that one prist has that power over an other priste, ne none
should be made pristes, but such as were able to take a cure. Also all
holydays, except the seventh day, and also the precyse fasting days,
matyns, euensonge, the ceremomies at mass, and other like, be by the law of
man: and so is the power of jurisdiction, that the clergy has used in time
paste, as to keep courts and councilles, to do corrections, and such other:
And yet many think, that such things have been by the law of god. Truth it
is, that many of the prayours that be said at mass, matyns, euensonge, and
diriges be taken out of scripture, and be scripture in deed: but to this
intent that they shall be said in one place of the service, rather then in an
other, or in this time of the year, more than in this, or to this intent one
time, and to this an other: they are but ceremonies, for they be ordained to be
said in that order by the only law of man. And therefore it were right
expediente, that it were openly declared and known, what things be used by
the law of god, and what by custom and by the law of man. And undoubtedly
there is no law of god, that commands setting up of images, but whether
the setting up of them be prohybited by the law of god, that is to say by the
xx. Chapyter of exodie or not, is a great doubt to many men: and as it seems,
if the said text were indyfferently looked upon, it would appear, that the
setting up of them is thereby clearly prohibit: how be it, if the clergy be
judges in that matter, it is very like, that many of them will mainteyne, that
their predecessors began. Also all the inferior orders under deacon, and also
these names, Pope, patriarch, Cardinal, and diverse other, have been invented
and brought up by the power of the bysshoppes of Rome and the clergy, and
not by the law of god.

Of diverse things that the bishops of Rome and other bishops and prystes have
claimed under the color of the law of god, which it gives them not, ne that
their protence therein can not be affyrmed by custom, ne yet by assente of the
people. The fourth Chapyter.

FIRST bysshoppes of Rome have pretcded to be supreme head of the buyuersall
church of Christ, and they have pretended also, thae they have both powers
spitytuall and temporal: how be it they agree, that they have given the
execution of the temporal power to kings and pryncis, but the power of tight
they have pretcded to have holly in them self: and therefore they have said,
that they have power to depose kings and pryncis, and that some of their
predecessors have done so in deed. And ferthermore they have pretended, that
by their said supremitie, they have power to somon a general council, and to
command kings and princis to assiste them therein. And that bishops
pristes and other of the clergy, aughte to have the voices in such
councilles, and none but they. Also that they have power to make bishops, and
none but they: to give all benefices and spiritual dignities through all
christendom: to be the universal bishop through al dyocises, and to bisite
in all places seculer and reguler when they will: to have first fruits of all
bysshoprickes, and of all other spirytuall dygnities. Also that they and the
clergy make the church, and that such a church as may not err: and that
they have authority to expound and declare the doubts of scripture: and that
all men are bound to stand to that declaration. And that they have authority
by the law of god to make excommunications: and they except therein neither
treasons, murders, ne felonyes, ne yet king ne prince. They pretend also,
that they may make laws: and that all temporal laws must give place to
them: also they have pretended, that they may grant full pardone a pena and
culpa, and archeby shoppes and cardinals have pretended, yt they might grant
an. C. days of pardone: and every bishop. xl. days, And al bishops have
pretended, that they may make absolutions in many cases, where other prystes
may not. And al priests have made pretense, that they may put away sin:
and that they may determyne by power of the keys, who is worthy to be admytted
into the kingdom of heaven and who not. And all these pretenses, and many mo
here omitted, which the people have been instructed in time paste to be true,
be not only untrue, but also many of them be heresye, and be directly
against scripture, and none of them can be affermed ne made perfect by custom
prescription use ne by acceptance of the people: for they be untrue doctrines:
and an untrue doctrine can not be reformed, till it be clearly broken and put
away, wherefore the len ger they continue, the greatter is the offense in them
that maynteyne them. And amongst other things the greatest hynderaunce of the
true doctrine of the gospel, and of the perfection of all christen religion,
and the increasynge of heresies and untrue doctrines, have grown by reason of
these pretenses following: That is to say, that the bishop of Rome should be
heed of the universal church: and that he should have power to sommon general
councilles: and that bishops and pristes should only have the voices in them:
and have power to expound the doutes of scripture. And I entend now bryfely as
I can, to touch some thing of general councylles: and first I will speak
of such catholyke general counsayles as be appointed to be kept by the law
of god: and then of such councylles as have been kept in time paste, by the
power of the bishops of Rome.

By what auctorite the catholyke general councilles first began, and what
power they have. The fyfthe chapter.

WHEN a man makes a testament, he has a desire to have it performed, and he
will therefore in the best manner that he can, deuyse such ways, as may most
help to the perfourmance thereof: whervppon it follows, that sithe our master
Chrysle, which was and is of most high wisdom, power, and goodness, made
a testament, which he would should continue to the end of the world: that he
would provide how that testamente should be performed: and because it was
expediente, that there should be always certain powers in his church, that
should se the execution thereof, he assygned certain powers thereto, in such
manner as I shall touch herafter: and those powers he appointed according to the
times then to come in his church, to the end of the world: whereof the first
was the time that followed immediately after his passion, when the church was
in the beginning, and in manner as in her infancye, to the time that kings and
princes were converted: which by thauctoritie that they had received of god
over his people, might take rule and governance thereof: The other time was
from the said time that kings and princes were converted, to the end of the
world. And for the good order and direction of his testamente in the first of
the said times, he gave power to his apostles and disciples, by this text.
When he said atth. 16.
to Peter in the name of all the appostles, and of all the hole church, till
kings and pryncis should be converted to the say the. What so every bind
upon the earth, shall be bounde^ in heuens: for there were none other then,
that could and would take the governance upon them, but only they: and
therefore the appostles and dyscyples only without assystaunce of kings and
princes, or any other of the people, by authority of the said text, in the
name of the hole church, for the time appointed Mathie in the place of Judas:
And they also for thencreasynge Acto.
of the more love and honor in the hearts of ye people to the name of Jesus,
altered the form of baptime, instituted by Christ, and commanded that all men
should be baptized in the name of Jesus. And they Acto.
also chase the. vii. deacons, to mynistre to the tables: that they them self
might attend to prayour and preching. And they appointed also, Acto.
that the goods of them that were converted in the beginning of the church,
if the owners had devotion so to do, should be brought and leyed at the
appostles fete to the common use of the multitude of the Christen people then
newly converted. And those directions they made in their own names, because
there were then no other men converted, that might conveniently be joined with
them in councilles: but after, when other were converted, that might be
conveniently joined with them in Councilles, then they took the seniours of the
people with them in councylles, in the name of the hole church, as appears
Acto. xv. atcto. 25. 21.
and. xxi. and that they did also by authority of the said text. Mat. xvi.
atth. 16.
for there were no kings then converted, that might take that power upon
them, as is said before. And all this time the Apostels were the high rulers
in all the said concylles, tils, but when kings and pryncis were converted to
the faith, then the power, to see the said testament of Christ to be duly
executed, was deuolute to kings and princis, as heedes and rulers over the
people, and that was by the text, What so ever ye bind upon earth, shall be
Matthew. (...)
bounden in heaven: for tho words Christ speak to the disciples, and to all the
people there being present in the name of the universal church and that text
is the very ground and warrante of the keeping of all catholyke general
councilles, that have been or shall be to the end of the world. And here it is to
be notid, that when Kings and princes were infidels, they had their power of
god over the people: and when they became chrystened, they lost none of that
power, but had it, and to this day have it in much more gratyous and
excellent manner, than they had before. And under this manner began the
authority of the catholic general councilles in the church of god: and then
to speak somewhat of the power of the catholyke general councils, that I have
spoken of before, I think verily, that the power of them stands most
principally to declare the true catholyke faith, according to the rules and
grounds of scripture: and to declare also, what is to be iuged to be against
scripture, and what not: and to expound the doubts thereof: and also to
determine, what books are to be obeide and taken as books of scripture, and
what not. For all christen people must agree in one faith and in one god.
How be it the correction of them that would break or dysobey the said
declaration of the general councille, belongs by the law of god to kings
and pryncis. For it is said Eccle. v. Ecclesiates. 5.
the king commands the hoole country, as his subiette: and therefore, if
any man should punysshe in the realm of an other prince, any of his subjects,
without his commandment, it should be against the foresaid text. Wherefore
the said text, Math. xviii. which was spoken to the universal church, as is
said before, is to be understand (...)
thus, what so ever ye bind upon earth, not offendynge scripture, ne the
power that is given to kings by the law of god, shall be bounden in heaven. For
certain it is, that the intent of Christ was, never to speak any thing
against scripture, neither of the old testamente, ne of the new. For he said,
I com not to break the law, but to fulfill it. And also it is to be noted,
that to declare the faith, or to do any of the things, that I have said
before, do pertayn to the general councille: is not against scripture, ne
against the power of kings and princes. For they never had those powers, but
to correct offenders, and to appoynte thorder of correction, in what degree of
offense so ever it be, without their assent, is against the power of kings and
princis; To. xiii. where it om. 13.
is said, that princis be punyshers of every thing that is euyllc. And over
that, if a christen king lived against scripture, to the hurt of his own
soul, and to the yuell example also of all his subjects, the general council
might declare, that he lived against scripture, and against the law of god:
but correction they might none do, ne his subjects might nothing do therein:
but only pray to almightye god for his amendment. Also if the general
councille decreed, that the youngest son should enherite in this realm: or
that all entayles made of lands, should be void: Or that the clergy should
have a jurisdiction, and make process of excommunication against every man,
that break any of their decrees, all were in vain: for it were against the
prerogatyue of kingis and princis in every realm: and also against scripture,
whereby kings have their power, as is said before. Wherefore the general
council has therein no authority. Like wise, if any law be used against
scripture, the general council may declare, that it is so: but the correction
and refourmation in that behalf, they must commytte to kings in every
countreye, and to their laws. And though the apostels and seniours, Act. xv.
by authority of the said text, Matthew. xvi, Quodcunque ligaueris. etc.
decreed, that the people should abstain, a suffocatis and sanguine, which
pertayned not meerelye to the faith, for the meat was laufulle: and
nevertheless the christen people were than bounden to obey the decree: Yet if
the kings, under whom the christen people were tha^ subjects, upon a
reasonable cause had commanded them to have eaten such meat, they ought in
conscience to have obeyed his commandment. For the eatinge should not have been
against the faith, and that decree was not made, but only for a friendly
communyon and companienge together of the gentyles and jews in the beginning
of the church. For the Jews greatly abhorred such meats. But for as much
as the cause of that law is now determined, the law also is determined: so
that no man at this day is bounden to it.

Farthermore, by that I have said before, appears, that the generalle
councille, laufully gathered according to scripture, may declare, what is
heresy, and whatte not. And I think also, that by these words, Dic ecclesi.
and si ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut ethnicus and publicanus, They may
put a man to answer before them upon the heresy: and so may not every
bishop, ne yet all the clergy together. How be it the general council may
not thereupon do correction. For all the correction per taineth to kings and
princis, as I have said before, ne they may not alter the words of scripture
in any article, as the apostels did in the form of baptysme, for the cause
why the appostels did it, is determined, that is to say, to cause the name of
Jesus to be had in the more love and honor among the people, as is said
before, which now, thanked be our lord, is universally fulfilled among al
christen people: and so the said example is determined. Farthermore by that
that I have said before, appears, that the ordering of all ceremonies, of
fasting days and holy days, except the. vii. day only, of sensynges* and
of all the ceremonies, apparel at mass, matyns, and even songs, and of al
other like: be under the power of kings and princes, according to their laws,
and not of the general councilles. For they be not commanded by scripture, ne
pertayne not merely to the faith: but have been brought up for the
beautifieng of the ministrations used among the people, and to stire them the
rather to devotion. wherefore diverse countries may use diverse ceremonies to
the said, intentes, in such manner as shall be thought most expedient for the
people in every country, without any offense to the law of god. but in one fay
the and in one hoole and full assente upon scripture, and upon the expositions
thereof, all christen people must of necessity agree, as I have said before:
and to that intent only it should seem that Christ ordained general
councilles.

Of such councils as have been kept in time past by the power of the bishops of
Rome, and of the clergy, and have been called general councils. The. vi. chap.

IF A MAN will say, and abydingly stand in it, that the bishop of Rome is
heed of the vniuersalle Church of Christ: it is not only untrue, but it is
also heresye, and is directely against scripture, Ecclesiastes. v. Where it is
said: Universe terr rex imperat seruienti, that is, The king commands the
hole country as his subject. Whereupon it follows, that the emperor, which
is king in Italye, may command the bishop of Rome as his subject. And if
the bishop of Rome should be heed of the universal church: then he should
be heed over the Emperor. For he undoubtedly is one of the church: and than he
might command him as a superior to him, and that is directly against the
said text ecclesiastes. v. and if the bishop of Rome came in to the realm
of any other king, he should for the time be subject to that king, and ought
to be obediente to his laws and commandments. And also it is said, Sa. vi.
Here ye kings and understand: learn ye that be judges of all parts of the
word. And if kings be Iuges of al parts of the world, what part of the
world is left to the judgment of the bishop of Rome? And if the bishop of
Rome were supreme heed of the universal church, then he might judge
universally in all realms: and that were directely against the said textes. It
is heresy therefore, to say that the bishop of Rome is heed of the
universal church. Also to say, that the bishop of Rome and the clergy may
make laws to bind kings and princis and their subjects, is also against
scripture, psalm. 11. where it is said, O kings understand ye, be ye learned
that judge the world. For if the bishop of Rome and the clergy should have
power to make laws, to bind kings and their people: then might not kings
judge the world: for they might not judge upon tho laws, ne reform tho
laws. For he that may make a law, has power to interpret and to reform
the law, and none but he: and so should kings be bounden by tho laws: and
might not of their own power judge the world, as the said text, Psalm. 11.
say the they do. Also seyncte Paul, To. xui. says of every prince thus: He is
the revenger in to wrath to him that does euylle. And sayncte Paul in the
said words excepteth no manner of euylle. And if princes have power to revenge
every evil. It is heresye to say, that the bishop of Rome may judge or revenge
any manner of evil, by his own power. And nevertheless not withstandyng the
said textes, and diverse other, which prove sufficientely, that the high power
of the world is in kings and princis, whereof I have recited part in the
first chapyter of this treatise: yet the bysshoppes of Rome have in time past,
as heedes of the universal church, taken upon them, to summon and appoint
general councils, as they have called them, and to command kings and princis
to obey that sommons, and to assiste them therein. but yet when kings and
princes have done so: they, ne any other by their appoyntemente, ne yet any
lay manne should have in the said councilles any voices, but bysshoppes,
priests, and religious, and other of the clergy only. For they have
pretended, that they make the universal church, and that such a church as
may not err. And surely to say, that bishops and pristes, make the universal
church, is a great error: for the universal church is the congregation of
all faithefull people, and not only of the bishops and priests. And of that
church saint Paul speak, Ephesians. v. when he said, that for his church
Christ gave him self: and no man will say, that Christ gave him self only
for the clergy. Also saint Paul spe king of the particular church of the
Corinthians says thus, Despondiuos 2. Cor. 1^
vni uiro uirginem castam exhibere Christo, That is, I have espoused you, to
give your self a chaste virgin to one manne, that is Christ. And by those
words, a chaste vyrgine, he understands the universal church of the
Corinthians, and not only of the clergy there. How be it the bishops of this
realm are clear fro that error: for they right well and catholikely have
confessed in their book, called the Institution of a christen man, in the title
of matrimony, that the congregation of al faithful people makes the
universal church. And by reasone of the said pretenses, that the bishops of
Rome should be supreme heedes of the universal church, and that they might
summon a general cou^cill, as they have callid it, to reform the church, as
they have pretended in capite and membris, in fide and moribus, that is to say
in heed and members, and in faith and manners, understanding by that word heed,
the bishop of Rome: and by that word members kings and princes, and their
people: they have brought in many great perilous errors and abusions, as well
to the hurt of their own souls, as of all the people. And over that, for
mayntenance of their own honor, power, riches, liberty, and such other, have
made laws directely against scripture, against the power of kings and princes
and their laws, and also against all truth and charity, and whereof they
had no power to make any laws and canons, but only that they took upon
them to do it by the usurped powers before rehearsed.

And now let every manne in his own conscience judge, whether it be an
indifferent way of Justice, that the bishop of Rome and the clergy should
be in these mattiers judges, to redress the said abusions, heresies, and
untrue doctrynes, brought in by them self, and by their predecessoures, and
whyther they would be dilygente to abbate their accustomed usurped honor,
power, riches, liberty, and such other, as in this world be things right
delectable and pleasant, specially if the council be kept, where they have
worldly power: I doubt not, but that there be some of the clergy, that would
put thereto right greatte diligence: but to find many of them, I think it would
be very hard. And yet the bishop of Rome has now of late summoned a councyll
to be holden after the old fashion: And it he should show him self out wardly to
do it for a reformation, and in wardly intend to maynteyne forth the old
abusyons, it should be in him to great a fault and enormitie to be suffered.
And therefore it is to think, that he knowith many of the clergy, that will
help forth his good purpose therein. How be it though his intent be never
so good in this matter, yet if ignorance do not excuse, I think verily, that
he, and all that have moved him to su^mon it, have fallen thereby into a right
great heresy, for the causes before rehearsed. And it will be very hard to
prove, that ignorance of the law of god should excuse any manne, specially
them that are most bound to have knowledge of it. wherefore I will say thus
far, concerning the said council, that as many kings and princis, as know
the said text, Ecclesiastes. v. and other textes like, whereby it appears
euidentely, that the high power, and the high commandment of the world,
restith in kings and princes, and that none has authority under god to
command them: and never the less will appear at the said council, that they
agree, that the bishop of Rome is head of the vnyuersalle Church, and so
assente to the said herysye, and be maynteyners and partteakers of it: and
that they also renounce and forsake thereby the power, that they have received
of god over his people, and that they disable them self thereby to reform the
abusions, errors, and heresies, which through the crafts and sleightes of the
fend, have been brought into the world, against the true doctrine of Christ
and of his gosspel, and also against then samples of holy faders in the
primitive church, and whereof there is no trust of refourmation, oncles kings
and princis shortly put to their hands.

Of the gatheryng of catholic general councils. The, vii. chapter.

THERE was no authority given by Christ to oone apostle above an other,
though peradventure some reasons might be made to prove, that Peter ought to
have some certain preemynence before the other apostelles: but I entende not
at this time, to speak of that preemynence. For what so ever it were, it can
not be proved by Scripture, ne by any other sufficient auctorite, whereby any
man should be bounden to believe it, who was his successoure, ne whoo is now
his successor: so that none may claim any preemynence by him over any other.
Ne it is not read in Scripture, that when the power of general councils in
the beginning of the church stood in the appostelles and seniours, as I have
said before, that any of the apostels commanded an other to come to any
council. Wherefore it is very like, when any doubt rose, that nedid to have
council, that the apostels, and seniours, and other of the church, whose
presence was necessary, of their charity came to it, without any commandment:
but happily by a charitable and a loving monition and desire of one to an
another: ne there is not any mention made in scripture, that there was any
excommunication or interdiction made against them that came not: for all the
mention that is made, Act. xv. for the gatherynge of the council at Jerusalem,
when the question rose, whether circuncisy on should be necessary in the new
law, is, that the Apostelles, and seniours gathered them self to gether, to
here the matter. And in the latter end of the same chapter it appears, that
the apostles and seniours, by assente of the hole church, wrote a letter to
the brethern of the gentylles converted at Antioch, Sirie, and Cilyce, in
which countries the said question first sprang. And among other things, they
wrote thus unto them: For as much as we have hard, that some of us have come
to you, and troubled you with words tournynge your minds, to whom we gave no
commandment so to do: It has pleased us, gathered to gether in one, to chose
then, and to send to you with our most dear beloved Barnabe and Paul,
which shall show you, what we think. etc. And it appears not, that any
commandment was given for that gatherynge to gether: but that charity was
the very commandment therein to every man, and none other but that. Also Act.
xxi. when the jews murmured against saint Paul, by cause that as they said,
he taught the Jews in the beginning of the church, that they should not
circumcise their children: The brethren at Jerusalem said unto him, that
vopin that matter it behooved to gather the multitude, and so it was. But it
appears not, that any commandment was given for the gatherynge. And I have
not hard of any other scripture, that warranteth any such commandment. And
yet sith the feyned power of Rome began, it is pretended, that such things
as at to be done in the Church of God, must be done by the commandment of
the by shop of Rome: and that he must command all men, as well kings and
pryncis, as other, none except, spiritual ne temporal, and that they must
obey his commandment, and that upon no less pain then of excommunication
or interdiction. And that it is he also, that is set to judge al men, and
that upon his wealth under god, the health of all the people does depend, as
it is said Distinc. xl. Si papa. And surely these things can not be deryuied
out of the meekness of Christ, which, as he witness the him self, was
meke and mylde in heart. And I think therefore, that if it should happen
hereafter, any infydels to be converted to the feithe of Christ, that they
should be meruailously astonished, when they heryng of Christis mekenes, should
see such pride in his mynysters, which nevertheless pretend the highest
perfection in Christis Church. I suppose therefore, that it were even now a
thing most pleasant to god, and the most ready way to encourage infidels to be
converted, and mekely to receive the faith of Christ, that every king and
prince in their realms and dominions before any other thing, reform that
pride.

And as for the gatheringe of such a free catholyque general council, to be
gathered by kings and princis, as I have said before, it is not to be douted,
but that every christen prince by the general bond of charity, to the honor
of god, and to the health as well of his own soul as of the souls of all his
subjects, whereof he has taken most special cure and charge before any other:
and for the mayntenance also of the unity of faith in Christis church: will
fro time to time, as need shall require, charitably agree, that such catholyke
generalle councilles, as be before rehearsed, should be gathered, and to see
that such persons have the voices therein, as shall be thought most
indifferente. And if there were a general council thus gathered, by
authority of kings and princis, I think it would do more good at one
syttyng, then many of the general councylles that have been kept in time paste
by authority of bishops of Rome, and of the clergy, have done in many years.
For the more pity is, they under the color of reformation, have maynteyned
right great abusions, and untrue doctrines, which of lykelyhode they of them
self will never reform: but our lord of his goodness may reform them, when
it pleases him.

Of diverse laws and decrees made by the bishops of Rome, and the clergy,
which be not only untrue, but be also against scripture. The. viii. chap.

IT IS said among other things, Distin. xl. Si papa, that the pope is set
to judge al men, and that no mortal man may reprove him: for whose perpetual
estate (as he says) all faythefull people so much the more instantly
prays, as they perceive, that of his welthe next unto god their health does
depend. And these sayings be not only untrue, but also against all the
textes of scripture, that speak of the power of kings and princes, and also
against the text of fraternal correction, Matthew. xviii, for he says in the
fayde distinction, that no man may correct him.

Also Distinc. xcvi. Si imperator, among other things, hit is said thus: God
would, that such things should be disposed by priests, as perteyne to the
church: and not by seculer powers, and that christen Emperors ought to submyt
their executions to ecclesiastical bishops, and not prefer them. And in
the same distinction, ca. Nunquam de episcopis, it is said, princis be wont to
submyt their heddes to bishops: and not to judge upon their hedes. And how
far these sayings be against the truth, and how directely against the
power of kings and princes, to them given by scripture, It will appear to
them that will read the textes recyted in the first chapter of this
treatise.

Also. xxiii. q. viii. Omni timore, heavenly reward is promised without doubt
to all them that dye for the truth of the faith, for salvation of the
country, and for defense of christen people: and yet it is no doubt, but that
a man may dye in deedly sin without repentance in all those cases: and if he
do so, he shall not be saved. And that saying also is dyrectly against diverse
scriptures, that speak of penance, and of tournynge of our hearts to god: for
the very true penance is contricion of heart, with a full purpose never after
to offend, and none but that.

Also Distinct. xix. Enim uero, the bishop of Rome says thus: For as much as
the church of Rome, in the which Christ will we have the rule, is set as a
glass and an example to other: every thing that it commands, is always
without denieng, of every man to be observed. And so it apperethe, that as
Christ byddeth precisely, that his commandments be kept, that so likewise
the bishop of Rome say the as precysely without exception, that the
commandments of the church of Rome are to be observed. And undoubtedly
that saying is untrue, and was grounded upon a great presumption: for the
bishops of Rome have made many laws that may not be observed, as before
appears. And there is a law of like effect in the same xix. distinction,
Nulli fas est, as to the reder will appear.

Also Distinc. lxxxvi. Quando necessitas, the bishop of Rome say the to all
prelates thus: when the necessity of discipline in good manners co^pelleth you
to speak sore words, so that ye think ye have exceded: yet it is not asked of
you, that ye shall ask forgyuenes of your subject, lest happily the authority
of governance, by she wynge over much mekenes, might be broken in them, that
should be subjects: but yet he agrees, that in such case, forgiveness must
be asked of god: And it is to be meruayled, what governance prelates should
have, that should be broken with mekenes. For Christ had no governance, but
that it agreed well and stood hole with mekenes: and therefore he said, I am
meke and mylde in heart. ^^tth. 11.


Finally this distinction is directely against the gospel, where our master
Christ commands a reconsiliation ^^tth. 5.
to our brother, before we make our offering. for this distinction excepteth
prelates thereof, when they excede in words: and yet they be not excepted in
the said gospel.

Also. xxvi. q. i. Sunt quidam: the bishop of Rome says among diverse other
things, that such things as the Evangelists and prophets speak not of, he
may make new laws: and he neither excepteth life, lands, nor goods, and
that pretense is so untrue, that I think verelye, there is not one of the
clergy at this day, that will pretend, that the clergy may make laws of
such things: though peradventure sum would think, that they may make
laws of such things, as they call spiritualle. But the truth is, that they
may not make any laws of the one ne of the other. And if they did, they
should do directely against diverse textes of scripture, which give power in
that behalf to kings and princis, whereof part be recited before. And over
that, if all the laws made by bysshoppes of Rome, and other bishops and the
clergy in time paste, were thoroughly serched, there would appear, beside the
laws before remembered, right many decrees and canons against scripture, and
against the power of kings and princis: and that also give more occasion to
pride than to meekness, and that be like wise right hard and grievous, as
well to many of the clergy, as to the hole multitude of the people.

And yet it is to be doubted, that if these matters, and other like, should be
committed to the bishop of Rome, and to the clergy, to be reformed in such
councils as have been used in time paste, and wherein bishops and pristes have
only had the voices, that right small refourmation should follow thereupon.
Wherefore kings and princis now in this dangerous time are bounden in
conscience, to look the more diligently upon such matters.

And this treatise intends not, that all ministrations and ceremonies, which
have been used in time paste by custom and by the law of man, should be
avoided and clearly set aside, ne yet that defaute should be found in the
bishop of Rome and in the clergy, and to rest there and go no ferther, but
rather that such abusyons and superstitions, as have risen by occasion of some
of the said ministrations and ceremonies, and of the bishops of Rome and the
clergy, should be reformed, and brought to the true trade of Christ's doctrine.
And that it should also be openly showed and declared to the world, by what
auctorytie the mynystrations and ceremonies now used among the people, and
also the power of the bishops of Rome and of the clergy first began. For if
true and plain declaration were made in that behalf, it would undoubtedly
appear, that the bishops of Rome and the clergy, have under the color of the
law of god, claymed many mo thin ges, then it gives unto them: and which
has venne in them a right greatte offense, and has been also one of the
greattest occasyons, whereby the charity, peace, and quietness among the people
have been broken, and the purity of Christ's doctrine, in manner brought into a
hole ceremonial fashion of living, after the deuyce and doctrine of the
clergy. And if such things were reformed, it is very like, that troth
which is God him self, and his true doctrines would shortly after appiere in
the world, and boldelye show their faces through all christen realms.

FINIS.
Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti regii impressoris excus. ANNO. M. D.
XXXVIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


