IAPHETS FIRST PVBLIQVE PERSUASION into Sems tents: OR PETER'S SERMON, WHICH WAS
THE FIRST General calling of the Gentiles, preached before Cornelius.

Expounded in Cambridge by THOMAS TAILOR, and now published for the further use
of the Church of God.

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1612.

And are to be sold by RAPH MAB at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JAMES ALTHAM, KNIGHT, one of the Barons of his
Majesty's court of Exchequor: AND SIR CHARLES MORRISON KNIGHT BARONET, TWO
worthy Justices and Magistrates of the town of Watford in Hartfordshire:
Grace, peace, and abundance of all blessings accompanying salvation.
LEt it stand with your pleasures, whom one profession of religion toward
God, and execution of justice toward man, whom one near neighborhood, and
one near affection combine, to be conjoined also in this dedication: wherein,
as my desire is to manifest my dutiful respect of you both, so also to
entreat your favorable construction and acceptance of this my presumption:
whereof I want not just reasons, whether I look upon you jointly, or
severally. Your joint government under which we the inhabitants of this town
of Watford enjoy our public peace, binds all of us wherein we may, to
testify our thankefulnes for so great and public a good. God might govern
the world (if he pleased) by himself immediately, yet he commits it to
Magistrates and Rulers, both supreme, and delegates; whom he honors with an
high style, Zach. 4.
calling them assistants to him that rules the whole earth: yea the sheilds of
the earth, to bear off wrongs and evils from men. Psalm. 47.9.
The boughs of this fair tree of magistracy (as in that sacred emblem) are
shelter for all, Dan. 4.7.17.
and the fruit meat for all. And the welding of so stately an ordinance, is not
to be committed, but to fit and qualified persons, as they are described by
Iethro to Moses by four most worthy properties. Exodus 18.21.


First; they must be men of courage, stout to undergo godly in the land, Romans
13.3.
who are to be encouraged and praised in well doing by their Rulers: which will
never be, if a man be afraid to be seen, or be timorous, as Nicodemus was, who
would feign be with Christ, but cast himself into the night, as though that
had bin a work of darkness. Moses for his courage was called Pharaohs God,
he told Pharaoh to his face, he would not leave an hoof behind him, that
Pharaoh himself stood in awe of him. 2. The wicked, who are stout in their
wickedness; and sin is with them as bold as an harlot, as Solomon speaks.
Now the Magistrate with Job, must bestirre himself, and cloth himself with
zeal and courage, that the young men may hide themselves, and the old rise up
at his presence: Job. 29.8.
whereas an irreligious mildness and remissness, strengthens the hands of the
ungodly. 3. The wicked one, even Satan himself, who emboldneth offenders
against the chiefest ordinances of God; I mean Magistracy, and Ministry, to
bring them into contempt* and so bring in all confusion into the earth.

Secondly, they must be men fearing God, and they are upon to kiss the Son
of God. For, Psalm. 2
1. Gods fear is the beginning of wisdom: and who should be wise, if not
Magistrates, to judge and discern of the most difficult cases amongst men? 2.
If he fear not God, he will fear the face of man, and so accept of persons
condemned, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 3. He must herein assist the Lord himself in planting
the fear of God in all his government. Cyrus must perform not his own, but
all the Lords desire: he must say to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to
the Temple, Isa. 44.18.
thy foundations shall be surely laid. Every Christian Magistrate must be a
nursing Father to the Church: and here begin his government, as Moses with
celebrating the passover, Joshua with renewing circumcision, Gideon, with
destroying Baal, Exodus 12. Joshua, 5.7. Judge 6.
David with establishing the Arc, Solomon with building Gods house, Asa with
renewing the Lords Altar. And whereas many inferior Magistrates look on,
whilst this care slippeth into other men's hands; yet must they all know, that
they are Gods vicegerents; and the judgment is Gods, that is, from God, and
for God: and therefore they must not only cut off thefts, murders, adulteries,
and such barbarous outrages, and riots against public peace and humane
society; but blasphemies, heresies, swearing, sabbaoth-breaking; and such
sins as more directly oppose God and his worship: and these will the fear of
God where it is especially hunt out. This was the grace that made Nehemiah
seek the wealth of Israel, by making the Princes swear to Gods covenant: this
made him almost forget himself in zealous revenge against the
Sabbath Breakers: all Jerusalem could not maintain this one sin against that
one godly magistrate.

Thirdly, magistrates must be men dealing truly. 1. affecting sincerity,
truth, and justice, which are the very sinews of humane society. 2.
effecting it by taking true pains, that the truth of every cause may be sifted
out; and receive a true sentence, Exodus 23.6. Deuteronomy. 16.20
that the poor may not be borne down with power and greatness, nor go away
in a good cause disappointed. 3. opposing with all their strength, whatsoever
is opposite unto truth: not suffering the truth to be clouded and veiled by
flourishing pleas, Opti^a respub. quae maxim leges minime rhetores audiat.
or shows of truth: but resembling God, whose judgment seat is said to be a
throne of white yvorie, for the purity and innocence both of the Judge and
judgment, before which every secret shall one day be set in a clear light.

Fourthly, they must be men hating covetousness. For, thousands, and over
hundreths; over fifties, and over tens. To this serve those ancient ceremonies
used among Gods own people, in the installing of their governors: example
whereof we have in Ioash, whom when Iehoiadah had set into the right of his
kingdom, 2. King. 11* 12
they did three things crowned him with a crown of pure gold, set with pearls
and precious stones: and these signified both the integrity of his person, and
the incorruption him the book of the testimony: the book showed that
wisdom is meet for a Ruler: and that it was the book of the testimony,
shows, that 1. the most necessary wisdom for a Magistrate, is the wisdom
of God: 2. that he must judge by Gods book and directions, and therefore must
be learned in Gods laws, and skillful in the cases of Gods statute book: and
3. the book was given him, that he might keep and preserve it, and see the
contents of it observed in others: for he is a keeper of both the Tables. 3.
They anointed him, to signify the power and gifts of courage, magnanimity,
and other

Now more severally, your gravity (Reverend Judge your humanity, your equity
in the lust and impartial carriage of causes, your zeal against vice and
vicious persons, who gladly decline your censure, your diligent frequenting the
house of God; your care of promoting the pure worship of God, which you
witness by your new erection dedicated thereunto* have got you a worthy and
due regard through all our country, wherein though I be but a stranger, yet
must he be more strange that meets not with the report of your virtues. And
you noble Knight (whom I have known of longer time) will give me leave to
conceal a great part of that I conceive of your worth. You do well to imitate
your worthy parents, one of whom has left you with a fair inheritance, a
pattern (as I have heard) of many virtues, from which you may not depart: the
other, God has yet left unto you, to follow you with motherly advise and
counsel, to set before you still the best patterns: but above all, the glass
of Gods word; the reverent observation whereof, if you add to the other
excellent indowements of your mind, person, and estate, you shall give a
number of your years and rank leave to come behind you, and follow you a
far off, whilst your country shall be reaping the increase, and your self
the comfort of those hopeful seeds which every one that know you, acknowledge
with gladness in you.

Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, I commend this book to your
worships acceptance, which for the whole argument (containing a plain
unfolding of the most grounds and maine pillars of our religion) is worthy your
respect; and your selves, with your virtuous Ladies, and hopeful children,
together with all your studies and endeauours for the Church or Commonwealth,
to the rich blessing of God: who fill your hearts with heavenly wisdom, and
preserve you both blameles till his appearing, Amen. Watford, July 20.

Your Worcester. to be commanded, THOMAS TAILOR.

The short view and Method of Peter's Sermon followed in this Exposition.
The Sermon of Peter has 3. parts. 1. A preface or entrance: v. 34, 35. in it,
1. he addresseth himself to speak, Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, 2.
gets attention: 1. remoouing imputation of leuitie from himself, Of a
truth, I perceive th^^ God is no accepter of persons. 2. implying that
Cornelius and his company were religious persons, described by the 1. bond of
it, 1. in respect of God, But in every nation, he th^^ fears God, 2. in
respect of man, and works righteousness,
2. privilege of it, is accepted of him.


2. The narration, verse. 36. 1. propounded, that Christ is Lord of all. 2.
freed from novelty, seeing peace by Jesus Christ was long before preached to
the Israelites.
3. The confirmation, v. 37. to the end: by 1. common fame, ye know the word:
described 1. by the place where it arose, beginning in Galilie. 2. by the time
when it most prevailed, after the baptism which John preached.
2. his facts proouing him to be Mediator, wherein, 1. his calling to that
office: where 1. who was called, Jesus of Nazaret. 2. who called him, how God
anointed. 3. the manifestatio^, of it anointed him with the holy Ghost, and
with power.

2. his execution of it, who went about doing good: curing men's souls by holy
doctrine. bodies by powerful miracles. proved, by one of greatest power,
healed all that were oppressed by the devil. the ground of it, for God was
with him.


3. Testimony of Apostles witnessing 1. in general, all things which he did
in the land of Judea and Jerusalem. 2. more specially, 1. of his humility and
abasement, wherein 1. person put to death, whom. 2. persons who put him to
death, they slew. ^. of Jerusalem. Judea.
3. the kind of death, most accursed, hanging him on a tree.
2. of his glory and advancement, by 1. his resurrection, wherein 1. the
assertion: in it 1. the person raised, Him. 2. the person raising* God. 3. the
action of raising, raised up. 4. the time when, the third day.
2. the manifestation, wherein 1. the persons to whom negatiuely, not to all
the people. affirmatively, but to us.
2. the reasons why to these, 1. who were chosen of God. 2. fitted to their
witness, by eating and drinking with him.


2. sending out his Disciples with commandment to preach unto the people. 3.
returning to judgment, which they must testify also: here 1. the person
giving him this power, he is ordained of God. 2. persons on whom it shall be
executed* a Judge of quick and dead.



Prophets, where 1. their general consent, to him give all the Prophets
witness* 2. the end of all this testimony, that whosoever believes in his
name should receive remission of sins: which co^prehendeth, 1. righteousness.
2. life everlasting.






Acts, 10.34. THen Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth, I perceive
that God is no accepter of persons.

35. But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him.

36. Ye know the word which God has sent to the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord of all:

37. Even the word which came through all Iudaea, beginning in Galilie, after
the baptism which John preached,

38. To wit, How God anointed Jesus of Nazaret with the holy Ghost, and with
power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
devil: for God was with him.

39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the
Jews, and in Jerusalem: whom they slew, hanging him on a tree.

40. Him God raised up the third day, and caused that he was showed openly:

41. Not to all the people, but unto the witnesses chosen before of God, even
to us which did eat and drink with him, after he arose from the dead.

42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that he is
ordained of God a judge of quick and dead.

43. To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all
that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.


THe occasion of this worthy sermon (breathed not only by an Apostolic
spirit; but from such an instrument also as was worthily accounted a pillar of
the Church) is laid down in the former verse, Gal. 2.9.
which contains an abridgement of the most of the Chapter going before;
included in these three points. 1. Cornelius his obedience, in sending for
Peter: Then, that is, having so good a ground even a commandment from God by
the ministry of an Angel: verse. 5.
I sent for thee to Ioppa (which was somewhat above 30. miles from Caesaria):
Immediately, as soon as ever I had received the commandment, without delay,
yea or deliberation, which being dangerous, divine things admit not of. Cyprian.
Secondly, his kind entertainment of Peter to encourage him, and thou have
well done to come. Thirdly, his preparation and readiness of himself and his,
to hear whatsoever God by Peter's ministry shall enjoin them: Now therefore
we all; he would have that holy doctrine communicated to his family, friends,
and kinsfolks: here present before God, the place of Gods pure worship is the
place of his presence: to hear, with attention, understanding, affection, and
obedience; for all these go to the hearing ear: all things, for that is sound
obedience which is universal to one commandment as well as an other; every
one being of like authority and necessity: that are commanded thee of God;
for Peter himself must be confined within his commission, and speak only what
God commands; neither are hearers bound to receive any thing else.

The Apostle Peter by this speech, perceiving both the occasion and scope of
their meeting, as also the readiness and attention of his hearers, addresseth
himself to speech; Then Peter opened his mouth and said.

The phrase of opening the mouth some think to be but a more full kind of
speech, Pleonasmus.
as we say I heard it with mine ears; or I saw it with mine eyes. But we must
conceive it rather to be fetched from the Hebrews, who in this form of speech
signify not the uttering of any triuiall or vulgar matter; or in a slight or
careless manner: but the relation of some excellent matter of great moment,
and that in grave and serious manner; and not without premeditation and
preparation such as is fit to at^e^d things of worth and weight. Thus is it it
used, Psalm. 78.2. I will open my mouth in a parable, I will declare sentences
of old: Job. 33.1. Behold I have opened my mouth; my tongue has spoken in my
mouth: my words are in the uprightness of my heart, and my lips shall speak
pure knowledge. Yea our Lord Jesus himself, when he begun his most heavenly
sermon on the mount, Matthew. 5.2.
is said to open his mouth, and say.

both of what, how, and to whom they spoke, how much more should ordinary
Ministers use all diligence in fitting themselves to speak from God, and for
God, and even as God himself would speak to his people. 4. Every Christian
may hence also take up his duty; namely, that he just man, Psalm. 37.30.
that his mouth speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment: he
judges of his speeches before he let them pass the door of his lips: and
of the virtuous woman is said, She opens her mouth with wisdom, Prou. 31.26.
and the law of grace is in her tongue.

Now the sermon following consists of three parts. The parts of the sermon, 3.
The first is an entrance or preface in the two first verses, 34.35. 2. The
proposition or narration; that Jesus Christ was the Messiah now exhibited in
the flesh, and Lord of all, verse. 36. 3. A confirmation of that narration,
partly from the Apostles; and partly from the Prophets witness. 1. For the
Apostles they witnessed of such facts of Christ as argued him, First a Prophet,
verse. 37.38. Who went about doing good, and healing, etc. for these miracles
served to confirm his heavenly doctrine. Secondly a Priest, verse. 39. Whom
they slew, and hanged on a tree: which notes his sacrifice. Thirdly a King,
proved by three arguments: 1. By his rising from death, verse. 40.41. 2. By
sending out his Apostles to preach, verse. 42. 3. By his coming to judge all
flesh, verse. 42.

2. The same truth is confirmed by the witness of all the Prophets: verse. 43.
In the preface Peter makes way unto his doctrine three ways. 1. doubting
nothing, verse. 20. Peter therefore most ingeniously in the first place
acknowledges an error that had stuck by him: namely, in accounting now after
Christ's death and resurrection (whereby he brake down all partition walls)
such as were uncircumcised, an unclean company, and like dogs and swine to
whom holy things might not be cast and offered. 2. That the Lord what a good
conceit he had of Cornelius and his company; that he had not now to deal with
profane, and lewd persons; but such as the Lord had sanctified to himself,
according to the vision and voice. What or whom the Lord has sanctified,
account not thou profane, verse. 15.

Whence, Observe. 1.
1. we have in this holy man a map of humane frailty, A map of humane
frailty in the Apostle.
in which we may see how heavy the best are to their duties: for was it not
long before given Peter in charge to teach the Gentiles; was not his commission
large enough, when among other disciples he was dismissed by Christ himself,
to teach, not only the nations, but all nations. Had not he heard often from
the mouth of Christ; and read in the writings of the Prophets, that the
Gentiles must be called in, that the tents of the Church must be enlarged, her
courteins stretched ou^, and that their own sound must go over all the world?
yet Peter had forgotten all this; and as though Christ had not been come, or
as if himself had never conuersed with him, he would still uphold the
difference of peoples which his Mr. had destroyed, confine salvation to the
Jews only, as if Christ had not been a common Savior of Jews and Gentiles;
he must have new visions, and voices to lift him up to his duty, or else he
cannot be brought so much as to acknowledge it. Let us look upon this example
to condemn our own corruption by it, yea to watch over it; least following
(as we are too prone) the stream of it, we be carried away from the most
essential duties, which by our calling, either general, or particular, are by
God enjoined upon us. Let the Popish guids also look upon this example, and
tell us whether Peter erred not, 1. in judgment. 2. after Christ's promise. 3.
in a weighty matter; forgetting his commission, and calling, yea, and the
calling and salvation of the whole body of the Gentiles; all which he failed
in. And then whether it be a sound ground upon Peter's person, or any promise
made to him, to build their Popes immunitie and freedom from error in matter
of faith, so long as he sits in Peter's pretended chair.

Secondly, In that the Apostle Peter secretly implies A pattern of special
grace in the (...) Apostle.
namely upon better grounds to lay aside any error in judgment, or practice,
although never so long held, or stiffly maintained of us before; and not be
ashamed to profess that we so do: which virtue is a sound fruit of
humility, and argues a good heart, which is in love with the truth for it
self; and esteems it above his own estimation: the observing whereof would
cut off infinite controversies which could never be carried and continued with
such burning heat in the Church of God; if the contention were not many times
more for victory, then for truth; and rather least error should be
acknowledged, then that truth should triumph over it.

Thirdly, in this preface every Minister is taught, wisely to cut off and
remove such lets, as might hinder his doctrine among his hearers; and
contrarily to win by all good means such credit to his person, as that he
may preserve a reverent estimation of himself in the hearts of his people. So
did the Apostle here, and not without cause; seeing the acceptance of the
person of a Minister, is a great furtherance for the entertainment of his
doctrine, not that the faith of God ought to be had in respect of persons; but
because man's weakness carries him beyond his duty herein. And again, Satan
and his instruments seek exceptions against their persons, whose doctrine is
without exception: well knowing that where the person is not first received,
hardly will any doctrine from him be embraced, Matthew. 10.14. he that receives
not you, nor your words. Whence the Apostle Paul was constrained to be much and
often in the justifying of his person, calling, and conversation; because to
hinder his doctrine, the false Apostles by all these labored to bring him into
contempt. Nay our Lord Jesus himself was forced often to aver his person to
be divine, his calling to be heavenly, and his conversation holy and without
sin: because the Jews were ever hence disgracing his doctrine, because of
the means of his appearance. Now whosoever would retain reverence and
authority among his people, must show forth, 1. conscience of his duty. 2.
love to his peoples souls, and bodies. 3. a wise and unblameable carriage and
conversation* these things if he do not, he has more disgraced himself, then
his people can.

Of a truth, I perceive that God accepts not of persons. By person, is not
here meant the substance of man, or the man himself: but the outward quality,
appearance, or condition, which being offered to the eye, may make a man more
or less respected; such as are wealth, honor, learning, parentage, beauty,
or such like, here called the face of a man: for which God accepts not, nor
rejects any man, Job. 34.19.
he accepts not the persons of Princes (says Elihu) nor regards the rich
more then the poor, they being all the work of his hands. And applied to the
Apostles purpose, is as if he had said, I now indeed clearly perceive, that
the Lord has no respect of any dignity, or privilege in any people, above an
other, that he should power his grace upon one more then an other, upon the Jew
above the Gentile; upon the circumcision above the uncircumcision; upon the
seed of Abraham according to the flesh, above the rest of the nations and
kinreds throughout the world. Now I see that the righteous judge of all the
earth, Why God accepts not of persons, reas.
can be no accepter of persons. For, 1. this were to esteem men by adjuncts
and qualities, and not by their should the rich man have been preferred before
Lazarus; and the proud Pharisie before the penitent Publican. 2. this were to
judge by inconstant figure of the world it self does; whereas the judgment of
God is most unchangeable, and therefore grounded on things unchangeable. 3. it
were a most unequal valuatio^ to compare, and much look not on his
countenance, nor on the height of his stature: and adds this as a reason: for
God sees not as man sees; man loooketh on the outward appearance, but the
Lord beholds the heart.

Object. But when the Lord passed by all the rest of the nations, and chose
Abraham and his ^eede, did he not accept persons? Answ. That Abraham and the
Israelites were chosen, the Ismalites and heathen rejected, was no accepting of
persons: the Lord himself declares that there was no cause at all in the
people which furthered his choice of them, just cause there was in them why he
should have passed by them, as well as the rest: for as they were the fewest of
all people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. so they were the worst, and most stiffenecked of all:
Deuteronomy. 9.6.
Yea consider Abraham himself their father, and the father of all the
faithful; what cause was in him that God should set his love upon himself or
his posterity, or call him out of Vr of the Chaldeans, where he lived in as
heathenish Idolatry, as any of the rest: in so much as God by his Prophet puts
them in mind of the pit whence they were hewne, and tells them, their father
was an Amorite, Ezeck. 16.3.
and their mother an Hittite. If it be still asked, what cause then was there
why this people should above all other be chosen to partake in the covenant of
life, the Lord himself directly answers, that there was no cause without
himself that moved him hereunto, it was only his free love, and mere good
will, The Lord loved you because he loved you, Deuteronomy. 7.8.

Object. But when God electeth one to salvation, and rejects another, he
seems to accept of persons, for all lie alike in the same condition. Answ.
The objection answeareth it self: for in that all lie alike in the same mass,
and all are corrupted: it is plain that election and reprobation depend not
upon any thing outward: for seeing matter enough to condemn all, all being
sold under sin; and no more matter of love in those whom he choseth, then in
those whom he refuses; we must neeeds conclude with the Apostle, that he
chooses freely whom he will, and whom he will he justly reprobateth and
refuses. Romans 9.18.
If it be here alleged that it seems hard that those that are all equal in
Adam should be so unequally dealt with. I answer, may not the Lord do with his
own what he will? who art thou that dare dispute with God, or prescribe
laws to thy Creator? who is it that binds him, or spoyleth him of his
sovereignty over his creatures, that he may not deal with one thus, and with
an other, another way?

Object. But when God judges men according to their works, does he not accept
of men by ^utward things, and did not the Lord accept persons when he respected
Abel and his sacrifice; but to Caine and his sacrifice had no respect.

Answer. God judges men according to works, but not as they are outward
actions, but as they are fruits of faith purifying the heart, and working by
love, thus only he looks on them with acceptance: whereas be they never so
many, and glorious, without faith he rejects them: so as still he judges by
that which is within, and not by things without, further then they testify of
the former. As for Abel, his face and person was no more respected then Caines,
it was the faith of his heart, the fear of God, and working of righteousness
that was accepted, and which is witnessed, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a
greater sacrifice then Cain, by the which he obtained witness that he was
righteous. So as notwithstanding all that can be said to the contrary, it
remains an undeniable conclusion: That God is no accepter of persons.

Use. 1. If God accept not, nor reject men for outward respects no more must
those who would be like unto him. Whosoever would be like God must not accept
of persons.
And hence sundry sorts of men are to be instructed in their duty. As 1.
Magistrates Yea shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear
the small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man; for the
judgment is Gods. This corruption yielded unto, makes a man say to the wicked,
thou art righteous, and lays him open not only to the curse of God, Prou.
24.24.
but even to the curse of the people. Nay more he makes God so far as lies
in him a patron of iniquity, a iustifier of the wicked, a taker of the ungodly
by the hand, a condemner and punisher of the innocent: for he pronounces
sentence from God, and fastneth that upon the Lord, which the Lord abhorres.

Christ taught the way of God truly, because he respected not the face of man,
Mark. 12.14. What a strait charge gives the Apostle Paul to Timothy, that he
should prefer no man in his ministry, 1. Tim. 5.21.
and do nothing with partiality. It was a worthy commendation of Levi, that
the law of truth was in his mouth, iniquity was not found in his lips, he
walked with God in peace and equity, Mal. 2.6.
and so turned many from iniquity. Whereas on the contrary what a wicked thing
it is to preach for hire, reward, favor, and yet lean upon the Lord: See in
Micah. 3.11.

3. Ordinary professors may not accept persons. civil things. For when
elections, offices, and common benefits, are passed and bestowed partially for
friendship, money, kindred, favor, or entreatie: this is the ruin of all
societies, and a bringer in of all corruption: especially, when men have taken
oaths to a corporation to the contrary, the sin is like an infolded disease
more incurable and dangerous. 2. In matters of religion much less,
notwithstanding this sin be many ways committed. As 1. to have Iam. 2.2.
be he never so wicked, is magnified and advanced above another who is not so
outwardly gawdie; but inwardly arraied with the white garments of Christ's
righteousness; and adorned with the Jewels of faith, love, holiness, and
sincerity, 1. Cor. 3.4.
Who is Paul, who is Apollos, who is Cephas, are not they all Ministers by
whom ye believe? Ahab will not hear Micah, 1. Kin 22.37.
because he hates his person, but he shall justly fall for it at Ramoth
Gilead. 3. To reject the profession of religion because as that nothing can
they do or speak, but it passes much unjust censure: nay things by them
exceeding well and holily performed, are so far from being drawn into
example, as that thereby they can be traduced. Wherein yet they are conformed
unto the Son of God, the head of their profession, whose powerful doctrine,
and mighty works were carped at, and depraved, because they knew his father,
his mother, him self at the best but a carpenters son, nor brought up at
study and learning. For example, how was that great work of healing a man
miraculously, so far from affecting the Jews, as that they fell very foul,
and were angry with him: and the reason is rendered by our Savior Christ;
Because they judged according to the outward appeareance, Ioh. 7 23.24.
and not with righteous judgment concerning him. 5. For professors themselves
to look too big upon some meaner ones as they conceive, preached to the
poor as well as the rich, Isa. 65.1.
has spoken to their hearts as well as their own; and has equalled them, or
perhaps made them superior in graces to the other. Now should not those that
profess God herein resemble him, who though he be high and excellent,
inhabiting eternity, and dwell in the high and holy place; yet he looks to the
humble and lowly, yea and dwells also with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit. Isa. 57.15.
To think too basely of him whom God chooses, is to err from Gods righteous
judgment: and what can the blind world do more disgraceful to the
profession, then to pass by the graces of God as not knowing what they mean?
6. Not male nor femall are rejected: Gal. 3.23.
and that God chooses even weak and foolish things to confound the wise and
mighty; 1. Cor. 1.26.
and the pore ones of the world to be rich in faith.

Use 2. If God accept not persons for outward respects, If outward things could
bring us into acceptance with God we might set our hearts on them.
why should any outward thing gain our hearts, our affections, our studies;
seeing if we could gain them all, we are never the further in Gods books. Many
are ready to say, oh, God loves them; and judge themselves highly in favor,
because he suffers his light to shine upon their habitations; their hands find
out wealth, they are increased in possessions, and prospered in their labors,
peaceable in their houses without fear: therefore does pride compass them as
a chain. But with one word does the wise man shatter down all the pillars of
this foolish erection, Eccles. 9.2. No man knows love or hatred, of all that
is before them. And if outward things could commend a man to God: Antiochus,
Nebuchadnezzar, Nero and such wicked tyrants had been highest in favor with
him; whose feathers he plucked, whose pride he brought low, making them
spectacles of his vengeance to all the world, who for their outward greatness
had been the terrors of the world. And yet much less should these things
swell the hearts of men with pride above others, who perhaps have a better
part in heaven then themselves. The pronenes unto which sin the Lord
perceiving; he has expressly charged, that the rich man should not glory in
his riches, nor the strong man in his strength; but if any man glory, Ier.
9.24.
let him glory in this, that he understands and knows me. All other
rejoicing is not good: that is, is hurtful and perilous: besides the vanity
of such vain boasting; common experience showing, that the higher scoale is
always lightest.

Use. 3. We must stand naked in Gods judgment seeing no outward thing can
commend us to him.
If God accept no man for outward things, then when we enter into Gods
judgment we shall appear naked, stripped of all outward respects, as birth,
riches, learning, crowns, and kingdoms; these in men's courts are good
advocates, but before Gods tribunal may not plead, and cannot help. No
condition of life, no degree, no outward quality, no calling, no not the
outward calling of a Christian (if thou have no more) shall stand by thee;
stripped stark naked shall thou be; fig leaves can hide thy shame no longer:
only the wedding garment can now cover thee from the consuming wrath of God. A
garment not laid with gold, silver, pearls, but straked with blood, yea dyed
read in the blood of the Lamb. The high Priest upon pain of death might
never enter into the Sanctuary, but he must first be sprinkled with the blood
of bullocks, figuring the blood of Christ. Never dare thou to appear in the
Sanctuary of Gods holiness, without this garment of thy elder brother, Genesis
27.26.
in which alone thou gettest the blessing, as Iacob-gate the blessing in Esaus
garments: from this alone the Lord savoreth a savor of rest.

Lastly, from this consideration that God is no respecter of persons; the
Apostle admonishes superiors to moderation and equal dealing with their
inferiors, Ephesians. 6.9. and inferiors to silence, and contentation under the
rough dealing of their superiors, Colos. 3.25.

35. verse. But in every nation he that fears him, and works righteousn^s,
is accepted of him. By a fearer of God, and worker of righteousness, is
signified an upright and truly religious man, in whom these two things must
necessarily concur as the cause and effect, the fountain and stream, the
root and fruit of pure and undefiled religion: for under the fear of God are
contained all the duties of the first table concerning God, and his worship;
such as are knowledge, love, faith, hope, and such like; whence Solomon often
calls it, the beginning of wisdom, that is, of true worship or piety. And
under working of righteousness, is comprehended the observation of the duties
of the second table: whereby the former being most of them inward, are
outwardly manifested and justified: so as under both is comprised the whole
duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this
is the whole man: all those ten words wherein the Lord has included an
admirable perfection of wisdom and holiness; are here contracted into two,
1. the fear of God. 2. the keeping of his commandments: and therefore when the
holy Ghost in the Scriptures would grace this or that holy man with full
commendation, as it were with his whole style, he commonly joins these two
together, unto which nothing more can be added. Job was a just man, fearing
God, and abstaining from evil: Job. 1.8.
Zachary and Elizabeth were just before God, Luke 1.6.
and walked in all the ordinances of God without reproof.

Here two points are to be considered. 1. Who is a religious man: he that
fears God, works righteousness. 2. What is his privilege; he is accepted
of God.

Religion is a binder, and thence has his name, for it both binds man unto
God, as the former of the points will show: as also God unto man, as the
latter declares. The former band knitting man unto God, is the fear of God,
Fear of God.
which is a peculiar gift of the spirit of God, whereby the regenerate fear
God for himself, not so much that they be not offended and punished by him, as
that they do not offend him. An excellent grace both in regard of the
excellent object, and of the excellent use of it through the whole life.

The right object of our fear, is God himself, Matthew. 10.28.
fear him. 2. omnipresent, he is all an eye, beholding our thoughts, words,
and deeds, of which he is both a witness and a judge. 3. full of majesty,
which even in a mortal man strikes us with reverence. 4. full of grace and
bounty, we stand in need of his favor and bounty every moment, who can
turn us out of all at his pleasure. In all which respects we ought to make him
our dread. Isa 8.1^.
But above all in that he has been so good and gracious a father unto us
through his Christ, we ought to fear to offend him, and so turn his love into
displeasure against us.

use of this grace is manifold. As, 1. to beat down pride and high-mindednes,
against be not high minded, but fear: Prou. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own
eyes, but fear God: this grace makes a man come low before the Lord, as
Jacob fea^ing Esau, Genesis 33.3.
came and bowed seven times before him. 2. ^rou. 14.13.
and therefore the fear of God and departing from evil, are often joined
together. Joseph could not commit the sin with his Mistress, because he feared
God: the midwiues feared God and killed not the Hebrews children: ^ehem. 5.15.
Nehemiah did not exact upon the oppress the people, as the former governors
that were before him, because he feared God: and whereas the wicked man's
seruill fear keeps him often from open sins, but not from secret; from
gross sins, but not from smaller; and this of pain not of conscience: this
grace makes a man hate pride, arrogancy, and every evil way, never so
small, Prou. 8.13.
and never so secret.

3. To destroy false and fleshly fears which foil every good duty, and lay
open to many Quod sup^a homines est time, and homines te non terrebunt. August.
it is a property of a wicked man to fear where no fear is; and not fearing
God he fears every thing but God; the face of man, the arm of man, the
tongue of man, whence many a man dare scarce profess religion, or if they do,
dare show no power of it for fear of reproach and nicknames; and so come to be
ranked in the formest band of those which march to hell, called the fearful:
Reu. 21.8. Prou. 10.24.
and that which they fear shall come upon them, even disgrace of God, of men,
and Angels. Jeroboam feared least the people should return to their own
Master if they should persist in the true worship of the true God; and so for
the establishing of his posterity, he established Idolatry; but in the very
next generation his whole race was extinct. The Jews were afraid least the
Romans should come and take their nation; and therefore Christ must die: but
the Romans not long after came with a powder, and took their nation, and so
dispeopled and dispersed them, as they could never be gathered into a nation
till this day. Pilatus multis divexatus Calamitatibus sibiipsi manum intulit
Euse. lib. 2. cap. 7. Entrop lib. 7. hist. eccles. c. 7.
Pilat feared not God but Caesar; but he was not long after cast out of Caesar's
favor, and slew himself. Now this grace of God fenceth a man from such
fleshly fears which draw on such fearful falls and mischeefes: and
preserves him that neither hope of promotion, nor gain, nor ease, nor favor
of man, who is but a worm, shall make him forget the Lord that spread the
heavens: this fear, which is loves keeper, holds the heart in the love of
God himself, of his worship, of his word, of his children, and whatsoever
carries his image; all which without it either lie, or quickly grow as refuse
wares out of request.

4. To drive away security, awak slothfulnes, provoke a wellspring of life to
escape the snares of death.

By all this that has been spoken, every man that would seem religious,
ought to labor above all things for this worthy grace, which God specially
bestows upon his children, with whom he makes his new covenant, I will put
my fear in their hearts never to depart from me, says the Lord. Which has
all promises belonging unto it, Ier. 32.
for a man's self, for his children, for this life present, for a better, for
supplies of every good, for withholding and remoouing of every evil: so as
whosoever fears the Lord, wants not a good and rich treasury, such as all
the Indian mines cannot afford; yea such as both possesses himself, and
enteyleth unto his posterity, the rich blessing of the Almighty. Blessed
(says the Psalm) is the man that fears the Lord: Psalm. 128.2.3.
himself shall be mighty on earth, his children shall be blessed after him,
Psalm. 112.3.
his wife shall be as a fruitful vine: riches and treasure shall be in his
house, he shall want nothing that is good; and let his troubles be never so
great, the Lord will deliver him out of them all. Here is a Jewel worth hiding
and laying up in the safest closet of the soul, even in the midst of the
heart, for there God lays it, and calls for the heart to make room for it:
Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such a heart in them to fear me. Isa. 8.13.
Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and let him be your dread.

Another bond whereby man is knit unto God, is the working of righteousness,
an immediate fruit of the fear of God. Where must be considered, 1. what this
righteousness is, and then 2. what is the working of it. For the former: This
Righteousness is a grace of God, To work righteousness what it is.
whereby the believer is inclined unto honest actions according to the
prescript of Gods law. When I say a grace of God, I understand that
righteousness whereof a man in the state of grace is by grace made partaker;
and exclude all that original righteousness which was set in the nature of
man by his creation, whereby he was wholly conformable to the image and
righteousness of God: further, saying that the believer is hereby inclined to
honest actions: three things are implied. 1. That this righteousness is not
that imputed righteousness of Christ, which is a most exact conformity of the
humane nature of Christ with all his actions and sufferings, performed of him in
our stead, with the whole law of God; whereby we are wholly covered as with a
garment in the sight of God: but rather a fruit of that, namely that infused
and inherent righteousness wrought in the heart of every believer, by the
singer of the spirit, whereby the image of God is daily renewed and repaired in
him, and so himself inclined to works of righteousness, Ephesians. 4 24.
to which he is now created. 2. That subject of this righteousness is the
Believer; for all the works of unbelievers (whose mind and conscience are
defiled. Tit. 1.15.) inward or outward, cannot be other then sin and
unrighteousness. 3. That the next efficient cause of it is lively faith,
being the instrument of the holy Ghost, by which he begets this
righteousness, wheresoever it is: now faith produces this righteousness in
us, not as it is an excellent gift of God, nor as an excellent qualetie in us;
but only as it is an hand or instrument apprehending and laying hold upon
Christ, who justifying us by his own righteousness imputed, and by his spirit
regenerating and sanctifying our natures, is the very proper cause of this
infused and inherent righteousness. The last words in the description, [
according to the prescript of Gods law] show, Ius^e agere est age re ex
praescripto (...).
that then a work is righteous, when it is framed according to the right rule
of the law of God, it being the only perfect rule of all righteousness: Men's
laws are rules also, but imperfect, and no further, yet so far bind as they
are agreeable unto Gods.

The second point is the working of righteousness: head and beginning of
wisdom: that look as all sense sloweth from the head; Prou. 1.7.
so all heavenly sense and motion from the fear of the Lord. Which shows,
that many men begin at the wrong end in the matter of their obedience: some
think they do God high service, if they come to Church, say some prayers,
hear a sermon; things not to be dissalowed; but know not how f^rre they are
from pleasing God herein, because they bring not hearts renewed with faith and
repent^nce, nor souls possessed with hope, love, and the true knowledge of
God; without which, the Lord accounts their sacrifices but maimed, and
professes his hatred against them: others place all their holiness and
obedience in the works and duties of the second table; If they be liberal to
the poor, just in their dealing, sober and civil in their conversation,
though they live in gross ignorance of God and his word; utterly careless of
the ways and worship of God, yet conceive themselves in as good case as any
other man; which is all one as to account that man a living man who has no
head, the fear of God being to true religion, even as the head to the body of
a man: besides that, they thrust the second table into the place of the first,
inverting the order of God; yea they pull and break a sunder the two tables,
which the Lord has so nerely conjoined.

Now for the right manner of working righteousness, The right manner of
working righteousness in 4. things.
to fulfill all righteousness: for seeing all the commandments of God are
truth and righteousness, they are all without exception to be observed. And
this, although it be necessarily implied in the text, yet is it elsewhere
expressed, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were in them such an heart as to fear me
and keep all my commandments. A second thing required is diligence, which
must needs attend fear. How diligent not sleep all night: and in Abraham,
who having a most difficult commandment to slay his son, yet rose early, and
went three days journey, without reasoning the matter. But what moved him
hereto? surely the Lord himself shows the true cause, Genesis 22.12. Now I know
that thou fear God, seeing thou have not spared thine only son. 3. Delight
in the works of righteousness, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he
delights greatly in his commandments, both to think of them, to speak of
them, and to do them. Whereas the worldlings heart, speech, and affection, is
taken up with his gain, commodity, rents and income. For as the fear of God
it self is not a servile and slavish fear for punishment; no more is that
obedience which proceeds from it forced or wrung out: but as it is such a
fear as delights greatly in Gods commandments; so the obedience is such as
is offered from a willing people, like a free will offering, which they must only
offer whose heart encourages them, and whose spirit makes them willing. 4.
Continuance in working: for this is another property of the true fear of God,
that it respects not only all the commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.19.
but always; and seeing Gods fear is to keep the heart continually, and that
man is blessed that fears always; Prou. 23.17.
this inseparable fruit of it, Prou. 28.24.
working of righteousness, must never wither or fail in the godly, 1. Pet.
1.17.
who are exhorted to pass the whole time of their dwelling here in fear: to
walk with God as Henoch did; Philip. 3.20.
and to have their conversation in heaven, that is, their whole practice and
course, and not a part of it only.

Hence therefore is affoarded an other ground of exhortation, Motives to the
practice of righteousness.
namely, that howsoever this is not such a righteousness as wherein we can
stand before Gods judgment seat, not being every way answerable to the laws
perfection; yet we want not good reason to take up the practice of it in the
manner prescribed: Seeing, 1. it is commanded by God, Psalm. 4.6. offer to God
the sacrifice of righteousness. righteous as he is righteous. 4. it is he that
does not righteousness is not of 5. much blessing is upon the head of the
righteous (says Solomon.) The blessing of God comes down upon him, and
discends to his posterity, God has blessed him, and he shall be blessed in
his person, in his estate, in his name, in his goods, in this life, and in the
life to come. The blessing of men also comes upon him, the loins of the poor
bless him; the Church of God blesses him; yea, turn him what way he will,
the blessing of goodness meets him every way: God gives him according to
the work of his hands often even here in this life; and if that should fail,
he being marked for a member of the Church militant, he shall be in due time
removed into the holy mountain of heaven; where he shall dwell who works
righteousness, Psalm. 15.2. Thus much of the description of a religious person:
now of his privilege.

Secondly, the privilege of a religious man is, that a believer of any nation
under heaven, of any calling, sex, or condition of life, is accepted of God.
Where it may be asked, whether God, whose grace is most free, be bound by any
thing which any man can do, to accept of him? I answer, a man is to be
considered two ways. 1. as in the state of clean thing can be brought out of
such filthiness; all this while can be no acceptance of the person or of the
work; How the person and work of a believer ca^ be accepted of God.
no sight of any present object in such a party, nor any foresight of any
future faith or work whereby the Lord can be moved to accept him: for then
the freedom fearing God, and his working of righteousness, is accepted of God.

Use. 1. To comfort the godly poor, who find but strange entertainment in the
world where they are strangers; who hence learn, that as the world loves her
own, Comfort the godly in that God is the God of the abject.
so God loves and accepts his own, in what country, or condition soever
they be: the which comfort if they had not to sustain their hearts withal,
they could not but think themselves the most miserable of all men: so many
sins they see which God may see in them, so many temptations with which they
are daily toyled, so many discouragements without them to cast them down, or
back at the least: against all which, this one consideration shall be able to
bear them up, that the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him: and by
these eyes he sees their wants to supply them, their injuries to relieve them,
their sorrows to mitigate them, their hearts to approve them, and their works
to accept them.

2. Those that fear God, must also be accepted, and respected of us, as they
be of God: We must accept the^ that fear God, because God himself. does.
Psalm. 16.3.
and it cannot be that those who love God, should not love his image in his
children: David's delight was wholly in the Saints, and such as excelled in
virtue: so must we frame our judgment and practice, to the Saints of God
before us, who have made but small account of great men, if wicked, and
preferred very mean ones, fearing God, before them. Thus that worthy Prophet
Elisha, who contemned not the poor Shunamite fearing God, told wicked Iehoram
king of Israel, that if he had not regarded the presence of good Iehosaphat, he
would not so much as have looked toward him or seen him. 2. King. 3.14.
Nay, even the Lord himself has gone before us herein for example, who for
most part respects poor and mean ones to call them to partake of his grace,
passing by the great, noble, and every way more likely of respect, if we
should judge according to the outward appearance: David, the least of his
brethren, was chosen king: Gideon, the least in all his fathers house,
appointed by God the deliverer of his people: Judge. 3.15.
and indeed the meanest Christian, being descended of the blood of Christ,
and so nobly borne, deserves most respective entertainment in the best room
of our hearts.

3. This doctrine teaches all sorts of men, to turn their course from such
earnest seeking after honors, profits, preferments, and such things, which
make men accepted amongst men, and as eagerly to pursue the things which would
bring them to be accepted of God: such as are faith, fear of God, love of
righteousness, good conscience, and the like: which things bring not only
into favor with God, but often get the approbation of men, at least so far
as God sees good for his children, Romans 14.17, 18. The kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, that is, has not such need of such indifferent things as
these are, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; those are the
essential things to be respected of all such as are the subjects of that
kingdom of grace. And to urge the godly hereunto, mark the Apostles reason in
the next verse; for whosoever in these things serves Christ, is ACCEPTABLE
unto God, and approved of men: such a man's ways please the Lord, and then he
makes his enemies become his friends.

Verse. 36. The which word he declared or sent to the children of Israel,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord of all. Of all other readings I
follow this, not only as the plainest, but because it most aptly knitteth this
verse with the former, as a clear proof of it. For having said, that now he
knew that whosoever, whether Jew or Gentile, did now purely worship God,
according to the prescript of his word, the same is accepted of him: he
proves this to be a truth, because it is the self same thing which God
himself had of old published to the Israelites, when he declared unto them,
that peace and reconciliation was made between God and man by the means of
Jesus Christ, who is Lord, not of any one people or nation, but Lord of all.
For the Apostle does not secretly oppose the ministry of Moses and of Christ:
Moses was a minister of the law to the Jews only, but Christ himself, and
the Gospel, is the power of God to salvation to every believer, first to the
Jew, and then to the Grecian: and now God is not the God of the Jew only,
but even of the Gentiles also, according to that heavenly song of the Angels,
when Christ appeared to throw down that particion wall which stood between
the Jew and Gentile; wherein they ascribed not only all the glory unto God,
but proclaimed peace to all the earth. In one word, that Jesus Christ is our
peace, and Lord of all, is the scope of this whole sermon, and of all the
Prophets, as after remains to be showed in verse. 43.

The former part of this verse has two general points to be explaned: the
former, touching the peace here spoken of: the latter, concerning the preaching
or declaring of it. In the former must be considered, 1. what this peace is: 2.
how it is by Jesus Christ. First, by peace, among the Hebrews and Greeks, By
peace what is meant.
is meant all prosperity and happiness; for both of them in their salutations
(though with some difference) prayed for peace to the parties saluted, that is,
all good success from God the fountain of mercy. And includes in it, 1.
peace with God: 2. peace with man, both with a man's self, and others: 3. peace
with all the creatures of God, so far forth as that none of them shall be
able to hurt him further then God thinks good for his exercise; and in this
peace stands true happiness.

2. It must be considered how this peace is by Jesus Christ, namely, according
to the former branches of it. 1. Peace with God by three things.
First he wrought our peace with God, from whom our sin had sundered and
separated us three ways. 1. by interposing himself between come near him.
2. by satisfying in our stead all Secondly, he wrought peace between man and
man, 2. Peace with men. 1. others.
1. by demolishing and casting down the wall of separation, whereby Jew and
Gentile might not accord or two he might make one people, one body, yea one
new man unto himself. Ephesians. 2.13.14^
2. By changing the feirce and cruel disposition Lions, and Cockatrises, they
become as meek and tractable as lambs, and little children: having peace so
far as is possible with all men: with the godly for Gods image sake, and that
they are members of the same body with them: and with the wicked for Gods
commandments sake, and because they may become members of Christ as well as
they: they seek peace even with the worst, and shall obtain it so far as
God sees good: who when a man's ways please him, does so ouerrule his enemies
hearts, as they shall become friendly unto him.

3. By setting every Christian at peace with himself who before had no peace;
2. With a man's self.
but now has obtained, 1. peace of conscience; when his conscience will and
affections, which by grace, Christian in that grace gets daily victory,
corruption receives daily foyles and consumption, and so the heart every day
more quiet then other from the power, and molestation of it. Thirdly, whereas
so long as God himself is our enemy, all his creatures are armed against us,
3 Peace with the creatures.
to take his part, and revenge their Creators wrong upon us; by Christ even
this curse is also removed; and it is an express branch of the new covenant,
that the Lord will work our peace with the creatures: Hose. 2.18. And in that
day will I make a covenant, for them with the wild beasts, and with the fowls
of the heaven, and with that which creeps upon the earth: For God being in
league with us, even the stones in the field, and the beasts in the field shall
be at league with us also. Job. 5.23.
And the reason is, because as then the creatures rebelled against man, when he
became a rebel against God; so when men by Christ are reconciled unto God, and
become his sons by adoption and grace, then is their ancient right and rule
over the creatures (lost by the fall) restored in part, so as his children
never receive hurt from them, but such as the Lord sanctifies, both for the
furtherance of his own glory, and their salvation, which are the maine ends
which God respects in all his ways with his elect. Thus we see what is this
peace, and how Jesus Christ procures it us: whence we may observe sundry
profitable points of doctrine.

1. That there is no sound peace without Christ; he is the Prince of peace,
Observe. 1.
his doctrine is the message of peace, and himself the messenger of the great
covenant of peace. There can be no peace with God by Moses, nor by the works
of the law, (whatsoever dotages Popish teachers hold to the contrary) only the
obedience and merit of Christ, is the matter of it: which made the Apostles
always pray not for peace from merit, but for mercy and peace, or grace and
peace: because it only flows from the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, it is as clear as the former, that there peace to the wicked man,
Isa. 57.21.
because he is out of Christ. 1. No inward peace in his conscience, the which
howsoever it may slumber for a while, or become feared, benumbed, and past
feeling; yet like a wild beast will it hastily waken and pursue him, and make
him restles, as Caine, and fly when none pursues him. 2. No true outward
peace, for although their houses may seem peaceable and without fear, and all
things pass according to their hearts desire, yet this is but a truce for a
time, or rather a respite of a condemned person, who, where ever he goes,
carries his sentence of death with him: and woe must needs be the end of
that peace, that makes men most quiet, when their sins cry the lowdest for
vengeance in the ears of God.

Thirdly, this point affoardeth some maine differences Difference between true
and false peace.
by which every man may be helped in the examination of his estate. For, 1.
sound Christian peace is always 2. Cor. 5.12.
the latter is a rejoicing in the face, not in the heart; in the midst of such
laughter, the heart is heavy, or may well be so; it being not unlike the
laughter of the thief upon the gallows. 4. As none can take it away; it has
no end, because he that is the Prince of it, is also father of eternity: Isa.
^.
neither can it be but lasting, having such soundnes in it self, but
especially in respect of that infallible promise, my peace shall none take from
you. Whereas the latter, though never so fair for the time, is as vnlasting as
unsound. Job. 20.5.
Job compares it to a dream; Eccles. 6.7.
Solomon to the crackling of thorns under a pot. God snatcheth it suddenly
from them, and as Baltazar was taken at his banquet, so God makes their sun
fall even at noone day, Amos. 8.9.
and darken them in the clear day. And, which adds to the misery of the
wicked, their earthly happiness not only ends, but the end of it is fullness
of woe, and heaviness it self: Prou. 14.13.
the issues of such pleasing ways are death, according to that of the wise
man, Pro. 9.17. Stolen waters are sweet, but they know not that the dead be
there. Whosoever then would not be deceived in his peace, let him not own any
out of Christ, let him look that his joy be helped out of sorrow, that it be
a fruit of righteousness, and rooted in the heart; for then is it lasting for
ever, and ever comfortable. But let thy peace be never so great, and the light
of God shine never so bright upon thy habitation, and yet thou have never been
troubled with the sight of thy sin (as many profess they never were) if it
can dwell with iniquity as many jolly fellows who make bold covenants with
hell and death, if it stablish not the heart with assured hope and comfort in
all well-doing; all this is but a brawne of heart, a laughing madness and
f^^nzie; and even in the crying of this peace comes destruction; 1 Thessalonians.
5.3.
and let all that fear to be at war with God, beware of this ungodly and
dishonorable peace, which is the most general peace in the world at this day:
the guise of which is, then to laugh and rejoice most, when Christ is departed,
as himself witnesses, Ioh. 16.20.

Fourthly, In the want of peace, we are by this The best way to come by peace
in the want of it.
namely, to make our peace first with God through Jesus Christ; and then, if
the conscience sting* or accuse, and terrify, look upon this brazen serpent,
and that wound shall be cured. Some being wounded in spirit, use means to
forget their grief; now the music, merry company, with sundry sports, must
be called i^; all which enlarge the wound, but are far from working any cu^e:
the only Physician in this case, is Jesus Christ: he calls, come to me all
that are heavy laden, and I will ease you* only in him can thou find
refreshing for thy weary soul. Do thou perceive God frowning against thy
sin? there is no way for thee but to get him to behold thee in the face of
his anointed: Psalm. 84.9.
no merits, no works, no good intentions, no gifts can clear his countenance,
to make it shine upon thee; only he is well pleased in his Christ, and with
such as he beholds in him, and no other. If men be at odds with thee, the
next way to be at one with them, is not by raging and storming against them, to
drive thy self further from God: but to draw near unto him in Christ, by whom
reconcile thy self unto him; and then as thine own mind shall be more
composed unto peace and love; so will he also make thine enemies thy friends,
if he see it good; at the least, restrain them, so as they shall not hurt
thee. For if he pitch a covenant for us with the bruit beasts of the field,
that* they shall not hurt us, much more will he shelter us from the malice of
men, be they never so brutish and unreasonable. So much of this peace by Jesus
Christ.

Now in the second place, we are to consider the preaching of it to the
children of Israel. Where two things are to be explaned: Christ was preached to
Israel two ways.
1. How Christ was preached unto the Israelites. 2. Why he was so preached unto
them. Concerning the former, Christ was preached to Israel two ways: 1. by the
word, or promise. 2. by deed, or type. For the first, the maine promise of all
concerning this truth, was The seed of the woman shall bruise, etc.) was so
often repeated to A^braham, Isaac, and Jacob, In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 12.3.
The same promise in substance Moses makes to the whole people of the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Also all the Prophets (says Peter) from Samuel, and thenceforth
so many as have spoken, have likewise foretold the same thing: and in this
regard the Jews are called, Act. 3.24.
the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made to the
Fathers; where the very same promise made to Abraham, is repeated, v. 25. And
the Apostle Paul is as express, Galat. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before the Gospel to
Abraham, saying, In thee, that is, in thy seed, shall all the Gentiles be
blessed.

Again, Christ was by deed or type, preached King, delivered his subjects
from all the former bondage of foreign power, and by his merit, and triumph,
wrought out their peace: As a Priest, sacrificed himself, and offered unto his
Father a sweet smelling sacrifice of peace for them: and as a Prophet, fully
delivered from his Father the whole doctrine of peace and reconciliation. Both
these ways was Christ preached to the Israelites; whereof for breuities sake
we will for the present forbear further discourse.

Christ first pr^ached to Israel, why.
The second thing to be explaned is, why was Christ preached our peace to the
children of Israel first; and why was that doctrine renewed to them from time
to time by the hand and ministry of the Prophets? Answ. For three reasons. 1.
Because they were that seed and certain family of whom the Messiah should
descend and arise: Oracles of God was committed unto them: He gave his laws
to Jacob, his covenants to Israel, Romans 3.2.
he dealt not so with every nation, Psalm. 147.20. The Apostle Paul when he had
reckoned a number of the Jews aduancements above the Gentiles, such as were
their adoption, covenant, promises, fathers, he shuts up all with the chief
of all, in these words, of whom concerning the flesh Christ came. Rom 9.5.
Now as that was the first, that he came of them, so this is the next, that he
came unto them alone first, in the promises and types, then in his person and
appearance, then in his doctrine and miracles performed in his own person;
add hereto, that he came to them in his life and death, and lastly, he came
first and alone to them in the Ministry and miracles of his holy Apostles, who
must not go into the way of the Gentiles, nor turn themselves to other
nations, till the Jews, by despising that grace offered, had made themselves
unworthy of life everlasting: the lost sheep of the house of Israel must first
be sought up, and therefore (as Paul said) it was necessary that the word of
God should first be spoken Act. 13.46.
3. That both Jew and Gentile might know that Christ came not by hap, or
chance, or on the sudden, so as his coming might not be observed; but that
he came for the time, and for the manner, according to the promises, and
predictions of old, of which our Apostle is willing in these words to imply the
accomplishment.

Whence we may note, 1. the divinity of Scripture, Observe. 1.
Divinity of Scripture proved.
which foretells beforehand things which are to come to pass many hundreths,
yea some thousands of years after. The thing that foretells things properly
to come, which have no existence in any cause, or sign, must needs be of God.
Satan indeed can guess at some events, but which have some grounds in nature,
or experience; or can foretell a thing to come which God has revealed to him,
or himself is made an executioner of, as in S^ul: but to foretell a thing, or
event merely to come, is proper to God. Whence it necessarily follows, that
the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles thorough faith,
Gal 3.8.
that is, a thing to come to pass almost 2000. years after, must needs be of
God. Again, it follows as necessarily, that the Prophets in preaching, and
the holy penmen of God spoke and writ as they were moved by the spirit of God,
and directed by the immediate assistance of God, and therefore could not err
in any thing: for they foretold directly such things, which both for matter,
and m^nner, came to pass many years after. Jacob in his will foretold, that
the Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came: this prophecy was
not accomplished till above 17. hundred years after the prediction: for not
much above twenty years before Christ's birth, Herod became king of Judea,
killed the whole college of the Jews, called the sanhedrim, wherein was the
heir apparent of the Kings blood. King Cyrus was named by the Prophet Isay an
100. years before he was borne, Isay. 44.28.
and of him prophesied, that he should build the Temple. The worthy King
Josiah, with his facts, 1. King. 13.2.
were declared 359. year before he was borne. The Apostle Paul prophesied of
the destruction of the Roman Empire, and thereby the rising of the Antichrist,
which was not accomplished till about the year 47^. after Christ. For whereas
the Roman Empire was divided into Eastern, and Western, the Western which
only hindered the revelation of Antichrist was in that year quite overthrown,
and Rome it self taken by the Goths, Ioh. (...)* in anno praedicto.
and after this, never had any Roman Emperor his seat of authority in Rome.
These and the like, neither ^han nor angel could ever of themselves foretell,
and therefore the author and director of them must needs be God.

Observe. 2.
Secondly, from hence also note the antiquity of the gospel, in that it was
preached by the Prophets to the ancient Israelites; and known for the
substance of it, not only to the Apostles, and ancient Christians, and
believers, but to the Patriarks and Prophets, yea even to Adam in Paradise, to
all whom Christ was preached the Lord of all, and that blessed seed in whom
all the nations of the earth were to be blessed. This doctrine, although it be
called a new Testament, Our religion is the oldest religion, and Popery but a
novelty.
is no new doctrine. Let the Papists make a vain brag of antiquity, and
charge us with a new religion, the truth is, whereas the body of their
doctrine was not known to the Prophets, nor Apostles, nor believers for many
hundred years after Christ: our doctrine is that which God sent to the
children of Israel, and therefore is most ancient and true. And to prove this
that I say, we will go no further then our text. That doctrine which preaches
peace by Jesus Christ, is the doctrine which was sent to Israel; which we
profess at this day: but so is not Popish doctrine, which preaches peace not
by Christ, but by our selves, our merits, and satisfactions, and peace by the
Popes pardons, bulls and absolutions, and indulgences; now these, with other
dependances thereon, being the main points and pillars of their doctrine, were
never preached to the children of Israel, by any Prophet, nor ever by any of
the Apostles to the Church of God; but have crept in one after another many
hundred years since Christ and his Apostles. Let their own rule stand in
force therefore with good will; if we cannot plead antiquity, we will lay no
claim to the truth.

Thirdly, hence we note, Obser. 3.
that there is but one way to salvation, But one way to salvation.
and this was declared to the children of Israel for substance as well as to
us, who went to heaven by the same way which we do. There is but one Christ,
one precious faith, one and the same Gospel common to all times, one common
salvation preached by the same Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever: Hebr. 13.^.
who is the Lamb slain from the beginning, not actually, but by the efficacy
of his sacrifice, the virtue of which to come they laid hold one to salvation,
as we do upon it past, and accomplished already. Thus Abel believed, and
received testimony that he was just before God, Heb. 11.4. Thus Noe was made
heir of the righteousness which is by faith. Heb. 11.7.
Every religion will not save the professors: there is but one way, and that a
strait one that leads to life. We come into this world one way, we depart
many ways, so there is but one way to find life everlasting, but many ways to
loose it: only Christ is the way, by his doctrine, by his merit, by his
example, even the new and living way; his blood is ever fresh, ever trickling
down, and ever living: it quickneth them that walk in it, and refreshes them
with new strength: never any rent the veil but he: never any but he made a
high way into the holy of holies in the highest heaven: never any came to the
Father but by him, neither was peace ever preached in any other name but his,
who is Lord over all, blessed for ever.

Which is Lord of all.] Christ may be said to be Lord of all two ways: owner
and possessor of all things, Bagnal. Adon.
and a susteyner and maintainer of all things, and that by his word, Heb. 1.3.
2. More specially he is Lord of all Christ Lord of his church. Reas.
Christ is called Lord of all in this place.

I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance: which being a prophecy
of the calling of the Gentiles, implies that the kingdom of grace, whereof
Christ is appointed King in Sion, consists of all countries and peoples, and
is not bounded or bordred but with the ends of the earth; and shows further
that all these his subjects are given him of God to become his servants: Ioh.
17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to all whom thou have given him. 2. They are so given unto him,
as he must win them before he can enjoy them. He conquest, partly by ransom:
he both conquereth and casts out the strong man that held them captive,
spoyleth him of his armor, and weakneth his arm for ever: as also he pays a
precious ransom for them to God his Father: so as being now redeemed, and
bought with a price, they are no longer their own, 1. Cor. 6.20.
but the Lords that bought them. 3. Because when he has thus dearly purchased
his Church, he contracteth I will marry thee for ever unto my self: yea, I
will marry thee unto me in righteousness, in judgment, in mercy, and in
compassion. Ephesians. 5.23. As the husband is the wives head, so is Christ of the
Church. So as if a man be a Lord of that which is given him; of that which he
has redeemed and ransomed; of her whom he has married into his bosom; in all
these regards by as good right is Jesus Christ the Lord of his Church, and
every member of it.

Object. But how can Christ be a Lord and a servant too: Isa. 42.1. Behold my
servant, I will lean upon him: and, he took upon him the form of a servant.
Phil. 2.7.
Answ. Christ considered as Mediator, is after a special manner both his
Fathers servant, and yet the Lord of his Church. In all the work of man's
redemption he served and obeyed his Father, being sent of his Father for this
end, he was subject to the death, he prayed unto him, gave him thanks, learned
obedience by the things he suffered, not as God equal to his Father, but as
our Mediator and surety: and yet by all these things he became our Lord, and
the King of his Church. And herein the Apostles travel as in their maine
scope, to prove that Jesus Christ, whom the Jews put to death, has showed
himself the Lord of glory, and the true Messiah, Act. 2.34. Let all the house
of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that Jesus, which they crucified,
Lord and Christ.

Object. But how can Christ be the Lord of all, seeing many, yea the most will
not obey him. Ans. Does a king cease to be the Lord of all his country, because
some which were his subjects are gone out in rebellion against him? besides,
howsoever it stands with his glory and grace, to suffer with patience the
vessels of wrath; yet at length he shows his power against them, in bringing
forth his whole displeasure upon them.

Use. Hence in that Christ is in general Lord of all, we learn that all
creatures are his, and therefore we must never use any of them without leave
from him, or without return of praise and thanks unto him: none of them are
sanctified to our use, without the word and prayer. And if we have leave from
him, we ought in sobriety to use them, 1. Cor 10.26. eat whatsoever is sold
in the shambles, making no question for conscience sake. Hence follows it
also, that he having an absolute power over all, he may do with his own what
he will: who shall hinder a potter to frame one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor; which I speak because many cannot endure to hear of a decree of
reprobation, who must frame their judgment to his will who cannot but be just
and good, and leave off to reason with God. Hence also he may make one rich,
another poor, at his pleasure: The rich and poor meet, this Lord makes them
both.

Secondly, in that Christ is in special, Lord of his Church, sundry things
are to be noted: as first, That none can have Christ to be a Jesus, that is,
Obser. 1.
a Savior, who have him not for their sovereign, and Lord: whosoever thou art
that challengest him for thy Savior, see thou acknowledge him thy Lord. Quest.
How may a man have Christ to be his Lord? Answ. By the practice of four
duties. A man has Christ his Lord by 4. things.
1. by preserving in the heart a fear and reverence toward his person, Malac.
1.5. If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Lordship requires subjection, he is thy
Lord, and reverence thou, or bow unto him. Now this fear must proceed from
love; for if any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed: and
wheresoever this love is, it must needs be attended with a fear to displease
him. 1. Pet. ^.13.
and take part with him in affliction: an unfaithful servant is he, that can
be dumb in his Masters dishonor, but especially if his Master be assalted,
and in danger, then to forsake him when he has most need of him. 3. Make
account to be counteable of all to this Lord of all.
and for all thy receites: the servant not being at his own hand must go
about no business but his Masters: whatsoever matter of trust he receives
from his Master, it is not his own, he is faithfully to discharge himself of
it by a true and just account. Thus therefore must thou reason the case with
thine own heart: what, am I now in my Masters work, had I commandment from
him? did his word or warrant set me about the business which is now in my hands?
Again, what gifts have I received of body, mind, wealth, authority, credit,
I am to be counteable for all: all the tallents I have are his: If I gain
nothing, I am unprofitable: If I gain, I must be profitable unto him. 4. By
absolute obedience unto his will revealed. Thus himself being to give I am
the Lord thy God, To this Lord only must be given absolute obedience.
thou shall do thus and thus: other Lords and Kings must be obeyed in him, yea
disobeyed for him, if they command contrary unto him; only he must ever by
Kings themselves be obeyed absolutely in all the parts of his will revealed.
Which may be considered in three heads. The will of Christ reduced to 3. heads.
1. It is his will that we believe in him, Ioh. 6.40. this is the will of him
that sent me, that every one that sees the son, and believes in him; not
only believing his word to be true, This is the will of God, even your
sanctification: Colos. 1.10. filled with the knowledge of his will, and walk
worthy of the Lord, etc. thou must not only speak for, but live to the credit
of thy Master; in thy speech, actions, attire, eating, drinking, and whatsoever
else, carry thy self like a Christian, else thou discredi^est thy Masters
house, and dishonourest himself. Were not he a notable traitor, that being
sworn of the Kings guard, and professing all service to the King, should
instead of the kings arms and coat wear the enemies: so the thing it self
speaks against him, who professes Christ his Lord, and yet never appears or
shows himself in the street or abroad but in Satan's livery: his swearing,
his covetousness, his filthiness, his lying, his whole life lead in all
intemperance, bewrays to whom he has given himself to obey. 3. It is his
will If he say, I have no delight in thee, let him do whatsoever seems ^^od
in his eyes: 1. Sam. 3.18. When the Lord had threatened heavy things against
Heli his whole house, he answered, It is the LORD let him do whatsoever
seems good in his eyes: I was dumb and opened not my mouth, says David,
because thou LORD did it, Psalm. 39.9. Thus must we obey Christ as a Lord,
giving up our bodies and souls unto him by living unto him, and dying unto
him: and this is the Apostles ground, Romans 14.7.
we are the Lords, and therefore none of us lives unto himself, and none of
us dies unto himself, but living and dying we are the Lords: otherwise what a
trifling and mockery were it only to yield him a title of Lord, or Master, and
deny him his service? Why call ye me Master, Master, and do not the things I
speak? Luke 6.46. All which if it be true, how few shall find Christ a
Savior? for how few make him their Lord? few there are that esteem this
well-beloved above other welbeloueds; not a few are ashamed of him and his
profession: many whitliuerd soldiers are danted with Peter at the speeches of
silly and simple persons: most men never look to the hands of this Lord, to
acknowledge either receipt of talents, or return of accounts, fewest of all
obey him in faith, who yet are ouercarried with presumption of his favor; or
in true sanctification, though they can pretend it; or in patience, if they
could get out of his hands, if it were by flying to the devil for help. Well,
if Christ have no more but a title of a Lord from thee, thou shall have but a
title of salvation from him, and not the thing it self: and if a name that
thou live content thee when thou art but dead, the time comes, that when
thou come to seek thy name among the number that are saved by him, thou
shall find thy name left out of that role, and set in the number of those that
shall die in their sins.

Secondly, if Christ be the Lord of all, then have we obtained much freedom by
him; Christ being our Lord no other Lord can lay claim unto us.
both from all spiritual bondage, and all that tyranny which those hard
Lords, sin, death, hell, Satan, exercised over us: our Lord has paid the
uttermost farthing, and wrought a glorious redemption for us; and he having
thus set us free, we are free indeed, both from the guilt, the punishment, and
service of sin. We are free also from all Papal bondage: for we have but
one Lord in heaven who can save and destroy, to whom simple obedience
belongs, and to whom the conscience is only subject. The man of sin
indeed would be Lord of all, and makes laws to bind conscience, where God
has left it free; but as the Scriptures acknowledge but one Lord, no more do
we; and say more, that we cannot serve two Masters commanding such contrary
things. We are also hence freed from the fear of all earthly Tyrants if we
belong to this Lord: for if he stand with us, who can be against us? Matthew.
10.28. Fear not them which can kill the body only; but him who can cast both
body and soul into hell. The true fear of him will eat out all those false
fears of men.

Observe. 3.
Thirdly, If Christ be Lord of all, then we and all believers are fellow
servants, Al believers are fellow servants to this Lord.
and therefore ought to live and love together, making no dissension or scisme
in our Masters house, which is the Apostles reason, Ephesians. 4.4. persuading the
Ephesians to keep the unity of faith, because there is one Lord. This shall
be done if all of us, who profess Christ, could learn to deny our selves, to
follow his will, not our own or other commanders, yea to follow his blessed
example, learning daily of him to be humble and meek, patient and tender
hearted one to another: forbearing and forgiving offenders: hard to exasperate,
and easy to be entreated. And these things should we rather strive in, that
(according to the Apostles precept) the same mind might be in us which was in
Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.5.

Verse. 37. Ye know the word which came through all Judea, beginning in Galily,
after the baptism which John preached. The holy Apostle here begins the
confirmation of that which he had formerly spoken; that Christ is the Messiah
and Lord of al; to prove which, he begins orderly with the History of his
life and death, of which even these Gentiles could not be ignorant, therefore
he says, ye know the word. Where if it be asked, how they should come to know
the doctrine of the Gospel, seeing the Apostles were not yet turned to the
Gentiles, and Peter was now sent extraordinarily to teach them concerning
Christ, which had bin in vain if they knew the word before: we must observe,
that by the word here, Nor (...), but (...).
is not meant the word preached, as in the former verse, but as the word is
different in the original, so also is the signification; and betokens rather
a thing done, then a word uttered; as Matthew. 18.16. By the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word or fact be confirmed. Luke 2.15. (...).
Let us go to Bethlem and see this word, that is, this thing which the Lord
has brought to pass. The plain sense then is this, Ye know the word, that is
the same of Christ which was quickly dispersed through all Iudaea in the
mouths of common men. Which fame that they should not mistake him or
themselves, he describes, 1. by the place, where it arose, beginning in
Galily. 2. by the time, when it most prevailed, after the baptism which John
preached, which some expound thus, after the baptism of Christ by John, which
he preached, that is, administered: but the natural sense is, after the
doctrine which John preached concerning him: for usually in the new Testament,
by John's Baptism, (especially which John preached) is meant all his doctrine,
and his whole Ministry, Matthew. 21.25. The baptism of John whence was it,
that is, the doctrine, as the words after imply; Why did ye not believe him,
and all men held John for a Prophet, Mark, 1.4. He preached the baptism of
repentance unto remission of sins, that is, the doctrine of repentance: for
1. else were it improperly said to preach baptism. 2. John's doctrine was this,
repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand, Act. 18.25. Apollos knew only the
baptism of John, that is, his doctrine: and therefore is it said in the next
verse, that Priscilla and Aquila took him home, and showed him the way of God
more clearly. And in Acts. 19.3.4. Into what were ye baptized? that is, into
what doctrine were ye initiated and instructed: they said, into John's baptism,
that is, into John's doctrine: the which interpretation notably freeth that hard
text from the false collection of Anabaptists, who thence would gather that
those were by Paul rebaptised, who were formerly baptized by John: but the
difficulty will be removed, if the words of Paul be wisely distinguished from
the words of the Evangelist, and writer of that history: John baptized (says
Paul) the baptism of repentance: that is, taught the doctrine of repentance,
saying that they should believe: which when they heard, namely, they which
heard by John's ministry, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus,
namly, by John, not by Paul. Then adds the Evangelist, verse. 6. And Paul put
his hands on them, and the holy Ghost came on them, The Ministry of John
called his Baptism. Why.
and furnished them with such gifts, as they by their own confession, ver. 2.
had not heard of before. And thus according to the plain sense of other
Scriptures, is that difficult place made very plain also. But why is the
ministry and preaching of John called his baptism. Answ. Because his
doctrine was first of all sealed with the seal of baptism, in which regard,
as his person is called the Baptist, so is his doctrine by the name of baptism.

Quest. But why is this circumstance of place noted, that this fame began in
Galilie? Answ. 1. To note the accomplishment of that prophecy in Isai. 9.1.
which also was observed by the Evangelist Matthew. 4.14. 2. To show that this
fame was no bare, or ungrounded rumor, but raised upon just cause: for Jesus
was baptized by John not far from the borders of Galily about Enon, Ioh.
3.23. And presently after he returned by virtue of the spirit, and came into
Galily preaching the gospel of the kingdom, Mark. 1.14. and made no end till
he had taught all their cities in all their synagogues, Luke 4.14. add to his
baptism and doctrine, that he wrought his first miracle of turning water into
wine at Cana a town of Galilie, and that he called his disciples in Galilie;
all which beginnings must needs raise a rumor and fame of him, which, as Luke
reports, went through all the adjacent region round about. 3. This
circumstance notably befitteth this argument, to prove him Lord of all, both
Jews and Gentiles, because he begun and was so famous in Galily of the
Gentiles.

Quest. But was not Christ sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? did
he not come to his own, how then did he begin his ministry in Galilie of
the Gentiles? Ans. Galilie of the Gentiles is so called, not because it was not
in Judea, but 1. to distinguish it from an other Galilie, which was also in
Judea, and called Galilaea inferior, in the tribe of Zabulon, where Nazaret was
situate. But this was called Galilaea superior, or Gentium, in the tribe of
Nephtali, not far from Capernaum. 2. Because there were twenty cities in
Galilie given by Solomon to Hyram a Gentile, 1. kin. 9.11. 3. because being in
the extremity of Palestina, near the sea, and not far from Tyrus and Sidon,
they were ever mixed with many Gentiles that were forreyners; besides that, they
were so seated within that country in Salomons time, as they could never after
be removed. 4. M. Iunius thinks it to be so called, not only because of the
abundance of Gentiles there; Galilaea gentium vel populoru^.
but also because it was a most populous country, full of inhabitants above
the rest of Palestina.

Quest. But why should Christ begin his Ministry here, rather then at
Jerusalem, was it for any singular disposition or good which he found in them
above other? I answer: No, for they were in regard of the Gentiles, who were
mingled among them, Why Christ begun his ministry in Galilie. Reas 3.
of all other most ignorant, most superstitious, most rude and indocible: for
so they are noted, Matthew. 4.15. A people sitting in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, saw a great light. But hereby the Lord Jesus showed himself.
1. a most merciful Savior, ready Permix^um a Iudaeis and Gentibus inhabitata
fuit. Chem. Har. 3^. c.
3. Not obscurely hence would he be noted the Lord of all; both Jews and
Gentiles, in that he begins his Ministry in this country, whose
inhabitants were mixed of Jews and Gentiles. Object. But this seems to
cross sundry places of the Scripture, which affirm that the preaching of
Christ must begin at Jerusalem, not in Galily, Luke 24.47. And that
repentance and remission of sins, should be preached among all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem. Answ. That place is meant of the preaching of Christ's
Apostles, and not of his own as this is. 2. That of their preaching of him
after his death and resurrection; this of his own in his life time. 3. That
was a ministerial publishing of Christ; this place speaks only of a voice,
fame, and good report in the mouths of the common people, such as followed
extraordinary Prophets: and therefore such places cannot cross this.

Now for the other circumstance of time, when this fame went of Christ, namely,
after the baptism which John preached, it is not without weighty cause added
by the Apostle. 1. to note the truth and accomplishment of those prophecies
which concerned John himself: as Mala. 3.1. Behold I send my messenger, and he
shall prepare before me, which prophecy Christ himself applies to John,
Matthew. 11.10. that by this consideration they might be one step nearer the
acknowledging of the true Messiah, seeing that his harbenger Eliah was come
already. 2. To note that Christ appeared in his due season, not before John
had preached the baptism of repentance, and amendment of life, and so had
prepared the way to Christ: neither before the people were fitted to receive
him; for John had spoken many things concerning him, had pointed at him as the
only Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: had affirmed that
he saw the holy Ghost descending upon him, and sitting on his head like a
dove: had professed him far worthyer then himself: had promised that he
should baptize them with the holy Ghost and fire. Now were the people desirous
to see him of whom they had heard so much: and now therefore was the due time
of Christ's coming after the baptism which John preached.

Whence we may shortly note, how the Lord finds us when he first sets his
love upon us, as far from meriting his love as these Galilaeans who were a
most wretched people: so as he respects only his own grace in his
respecting of us: which consideration he would often fasten upon his own
ancient people the Jews; professing to their face, that he made no covenant
with them for any worthynesse he saw in them above other, for they were the
worst of all people, and much less can he find any worthiness to entitle a
man to the heavenly Canaan: Deuteronomy. 9.4.
the freedom of this grace does therefore shine out more clearly; and
deserves that we should with much thankfulness, both acknowledge it, and
also walk worthy of it.

Secondly, hence is to be noted, that then men seasonably hear of Christ, when
they are prepared by John in the doctrine of repentance: when the law has
killed, cast us down, and made us guilty of the sentence of death; then the
Gospel does seasonably propound the grace and mercy of God in Christ. Hence
for pacifying the troubled conscience, Ephesians. 6 15.
it is called the Gospel of peace: for chearing up the heavy heart, Heb. 6.5.
it is called a good word: and for healing and bringing the sick soul to
health and soundness, Tit. 2.8.
it is called a sound word: and therefore ministers in dispensing the promises,
must see that men be fitted for them; because if the ground be not plowed up,
all the seed is cast and lost among thorns: and hearers must be as wary of
false application; least in time they as heavily loose, as they have hastily
snatched, such things as never belonged unto them.

Verse. 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazaret with the holy Ghost, and with
power: Who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
devil, for God was with him. The Apostle having proved by the common voice
and fame, that Christ is Lord of all, he now descends to prove it by his
facts, all which, because they were performed by virtue of his heavenly
commission and calling; therefore (as good order requires) he begins there,
and in this verse propounds two things: 1. Christ's calling to his office of
Mediatorship, How God anointed, etc. 2. the execution of that office according
to his calling, who went about* etc. In the former are three points to be
considered, 1. who was called, Jesus of Nazaret. 2. who called him, how God
anointed. 3. the manifestation of this calling, anointed him with the holy
Ghost, and with power.

The person called was Jesus of Nazaret, for so he was commonly called among
the Jews, Christ called Jesus of Nazaret although he was not borne there, ^hy.
not Bethlem in Iudaea, Matthew. 2.5. according to the prophecy, Micah, 5.2. but
because, 1. he was brought up there, for Joseph his father fearing Archelaus
Herod's son, he sought him out, Matthew. ^.22.
(or rather directed Nazarit, as was prophesied of him before, Zach. 6.12.
Behold the man whose name is BRANCH, and he shall grow up out of his place, no
ser.
and shall build the Temple; so Isa. 60.21. These are the places which the
Evangelist Matthew aymeth at, when he said that Christ dwelt in the city of
Nazaret, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the PROPHETS, he shall
be called a NAZARIT: for seeing so much is not elsewhere spoken in clear and
proper speech; necessarily it must be spoken figuratively at least, and more
obscurely, as in those places: Iun. paral. l. 1. par. 8* and analis. in nu^b.
6.1.
which M. Iunius does manifestly clear to appertain to this very purpose; in
whom the learned may read much more concerning this argument, which willingly
I forbear. 3. that they might under this title acknowledge him according to
the Scripture to be the rod of the stock of Iesse, and a plant going out of
his roots, which by the same word is signified, not ser.
Isai. 11.1. 4. That they and we might hence

Whence note, how the providence of God in ouerruling every particular
circumstance is manifestly cleared. The very particular places assigned for
this and that purpose, are accuratly set down, to show how those seven bright
eyes of Gods providence, Zach. 4.10.
which go over all the world, have been ever waking and watchful over both
predictions, and accomplishments, to bring them just together in the just point
and period foreappointed. Christ must not be borne neither in Egypt, nor in
Nazaret, nor in his fathers house; but in a journey, and in an Inn at Bethlem,
because it was so foretold* that Bethlem the least of all the cities of Judea,
should be made the highest in this privilege. Again, Christ though the son
of David, must not be brought up in Bethlem, the city of David, nor yet
(being of the Kings seed) in Jerusalem, the city and seat of the Kings; but
in Nazaret, that he might be called a Nazarite. Whatsoever therefore God has
promised in the Scriptures, wait in faith for the accomplishment, this
providence will not suffer it unaccomplished; but make not have, he has a due
season for it, which thou must patiently expect, and the patient abiding of the
just shall not miscarie.

2. Note hence, that Christ was the only true Messiah, and could not have been
so, if he had not been of Nazaret, and such a Nazarite as the Prophets
foretold. The Jews took offense hereat, as too base a place for the Messiah
whom they expected to rise out of: even Nathaniel himself could ask if any
good could come out of Nazaret: Ioh. 1.47.
and this was in scorn added as a part of his style and title written in three
tongues upon the cross, Jesus of Nazaret King of the Jews: and as they dealt
with the head, so also with the members; for presently after the death of
Christ, the Christians were in scorn also called Nazarits, that is, silly
fools that did believe in such a Messiah as came from Nazaret. But we must
know, that the wisdom of God would have him hereby generally proclaimed the
Messiah and Savior of the world, both to Jews and Gentiles: as also confirm
our faith and affiance in him made known to us to be such a one, as in whom we
also become Nazarites, that is, sanctified and consecrated unto God.

3. Note hence, that the Messiah must needs be come already, because he must
be a Nazarite by education, as of Bethlem by birth, which places have been
long since destroyed, and hopeless of ever being builded up again, or that
in them the Jews should ever recover any authority. And is it not a
wonderful blindness, that the Jews should still look for their Messiah out
of a town which has been destroyed a thousand and five hundredth years ago,
the very place of which cannot be assigned? Our request to God must be for
them, that he would remove that thick veil which to this day is drawn over
the hearts of his own ancient people.

Secondly, By whom was Christ called to this office? By God who anointed him:
for that which is said of one part of it, namely his preisthood, is true of the
whole; Heb. 5.5.
No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God: so
neither Christ took this honor to himself, but expected that voice, Thou art
my Son. How often did Christ witness of himself, that he came not of
himself, but was sent by his Father, Ioh. 5.37. My Father that sent me
witnesses of me: and in that chapter because the Jews objected that he came
of himself, he tells them six times that his Father sent him: yea has
sealed him his commission as he says, Ioh. 6.27. Him has God the Father
sealed, that is, made his commission authentical, as men do their deeds by
their seal, and set upon him an impression or character; anointing him with
oil of grace above all his fellows; yea himself being an express image of
his Fathers substance, in him he has laid up all treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, that from his fullness we might receive grace for grace.

Whence, 1. we learn, that no man ought to thrust himself into any office or
function, Christ expected his Fathers calling and therefore must his ministers
much more.
nor run before he be sent, but wait till God give him a calling thereunto.
For shall Christ, who had the spirit of God without all measure* wait his
Fathers leisure, and expect his fathers voice; and shall we, who have received
the spirit scarce in any measure, run and ride, and shooue, and thrust in
before we have any commission drawn or sealed by God? who ever carried such
post-hast happily? How miserably perished proud Absolon, who though it not
enough to be the Kings son, unless he thrust his Father out of his kingdom?
Corah and his accomplices would have been Rulers, but that the earth would not
suffer them above it. What shall I speak of Vzza, Vzziah, and the rest, who
found the Lord as good as his word against such which go on any arrand and he
send them not; they found the Lord coming many ways against them, as he often
threatens in Ier. 23.30.31. etc.

2. If God have called Christ to this office, we must carry our selves
dutifully and reverently unto him, whom as the Father has called, so he will
defend and establish in his place, and revenge such as rebel against him. This
is that the Prophet teaches in Psalm. 2.2. that if the greatest Kings band
themselves together against the Lord, and against his Christ, the Lord out of
heaven will laugh them to scorn, he will speak to them in his anger, and vex
them in sore displeasure; and the ground of all this is laid down, verse. 6.
Even I have set my King upon Sion: as if he had said, shall I set up a King,
and dare ye rebelliously resist him, or seek to displace him? Let us take
heed it befall not us, as it did the Jews taxed in the parable of the King
letting out his vinyard, which sent his servants for his rent to the
husbandmen, and afterward his son; but they beat the one, slew the other,
acknowledged neither: surely no more grace remains for such; but the Lord of
the vinyard must needs destroy such husbandmen, and lay wast their city. In
like manner is he as ready to defend, and do good unto such as subject
themselves unto his son, depend upon him, or suffer any thing for his sake:
they shall not repent them of their service, seeing they serve so good a Lord.

The third thing in this calling of Christ to his office, is the manifestation
of it to himself, and others: in that he was anointed with the holy Ghost,
and power. There were three sorts of men that used to be anointed in the
entrance unto their office in the old Testament, 1. Kings, 2. Priests, 3.
Prophets. Anointing what it signified.
And this outward ceremony signified two things: First, their ordination or
calling unto that office: secondly, the promise of proportionable gifts for the
performance: God never calls any man to any place but he furnishes him wi^h
gifts fit f^r it.
so as they were hereby confirmed, both that God has chosen them to their
office, as also that he would furnish them unto it, and protect them in the
same. Christ is here said to be also anointed; but not by man, as they, but by
God: not with external oil, but with the holy Ghost, and with power: not
ceremonially, and typically, but really and spiritually: not to any one of
those offices, but to them all three: not receiving the sign, but the thing
signified; because he was a real and true King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church, of whom all they were but types and shadows. In this anointing of
Christ therefore both these things are signified and proved: 1. that he was
ordained of God to the performance of this office of Mediatorship, and
consecrated by God, to be the Messiah, that is, a spiritual King, Priest, and
Prophet: 2. that he had powered out upon him, the gifts of the holy Ghost*,
which gave him power, and furnished him for this office; signified here by the
holy Ghost, and power: he receiving of the holy Ghost power, whereby he
performed that greatest work that ever was undertaken.

And here is to be observed a plain difference, Difference between Christ's
anointing and all other men's.
between Christ's anointing and all men's besides. For whereas all other shadowed
anointings were imperfect, and some had more gifts bestowed and some less; but
none all, nor all in one degree; Christ was perfectly anointed, and even in his
humane nature was adorned with gifts without measure: Ioh. 3.34.
for God gave not him the spirit by measure: and not only with gifts, but all
gifts in the highest degree, Psalm. 45.
above all his fellows men or angels, in none of which ever dwelt the fullness
of the God as it did in him. Colos. 2.10.
2. Whereas all other received gifts only for themselves, and could not by
their gifts make others Kings as they were, or Priests, or Prophets; Christ was
so anointed with the holy Ghost and with power, that he could impart his gifts
to others in such manner, and measure as they might become like unto himself:
that look as the oil which was powered out upon Aarons head, run down by
his beard even to the skirts of his garment, and so sweetened his whole body;
even so such abundance of grace was powered (as out of a full horn) upon Christ
the head of his Church, as it distilleth from him to the sweetning and
perfuming of all his body, to make the same acceptable in the sight of God.
This the Evangelist expresses, Ioh. 1.16. Full of grace, of truth -- and, of
his fullness we receive grace for grace: Colos. 2.10. In him dwells the
fullness of the godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him.

Quest. But when was Christ thus anointed? Ans. The anointing of Christ is
twofold. 1. In respect of his gifts: and with these he was anointed by the
very union of his two natures into one person in the womb of the Virgin from
the first moment of his conception: for being admirably conceived by the holy
Ghost, his humane nature was anointed by the divine uniting it self thereunto.
2. In respect of his calling to the exercise of those gifts; and this was then
complete when in the thirteth year of his age at his baptism, he was solemnly
inaugurated by a voice from heaven, by the opening of the heaven, and the
descending of the spirit of God in a visible shape abiding upon him; not that
he wanted the spirit before, but that herein, as in the former respect also, a
maine difference might be put between his, and the anointing of all that went
before, who neither were anointed in the womb, nor by the union of the dietie,
nor by any other then material oil: whereas he was anointed with the holy
Ghost lighting upon him. And this was that which was prophesied before of him,
Isa. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me
that I should preach, etc. In the exposition of which place, when Christ
begun his Ministry in Galily, he said, This day is this Scripture fulfilled
in your ears, Luke 4.17.

Hence we learn, None can be capable of the office of a redeemer or Mediator
but Christ, because non was so anointed as he.
1. That Christ was and is an alsufficient Savior and redeemer: for being to
this purpose anointed with the holy Ghost and with power, he cannot but be able
fully to work and absolve the work of man's redemption. This is not a work to
be committed to any King, or Emperor, nor the greatest state and Potentate in
the earth, no nor to any Angel or Archangel in heaven: none of these are fit
for it, because none are capable of this anointing with the holy Ghost and with
power, but he alone: who therefore is able to subdue all the Devils of hell,
though they come rushing upon him all at once; to overthrow all the armies of
hell, sin, death, and damnation, assalting himself and members with all
their might and force: in a word, able to make his enemies (although
principalities, and powers, never so mighty, and never so cruel) his very
footstool. A greater King then Solomon is here, Priest also then Aaron is Heb.
8.6.
he is not anointed to offer the blood of bulls, or goats, but to offer
himself a sweet smelling sacrifice, and that not often, but once for all:
neither does he offer only this sacrifice, but by this spirit and power with
which he is anointed, he applies it to his Church: neither need he offer for
himself as they, because he was a holy, harmless, Heb. 7.26.
and undefiled high Priest: neither does he only pray for his Church, but
meriteth also to be heard, is never denied, neither ever dies, but lives for
ever to make intercession for them. 25.
A more famous Prophet then Moses is here anointed: he was speaks from
heaven: for if they escaped not which refused Moses that spoke on earth, Heb.
12.25.
much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven: And can we want reason? 1. In his anointing we are commanded by a voice
from heaven, hear him, Matthew. 17.5. 2. he delivers the whole will of his
Father, we shall therefore be perfectly taught if we hear him. 3. we may
safely rest in his doctrine, because with him are the treasures of wisdom. 4.
In a word, he has only the words of life everlasting, and whither should we
go? Ioh. 6.68.


Secondly, hence we learn, that seeing every believer is anointed with
Christ, and in Christ, Every Christian must partake of Christ his anointing.
we must all be careful to find this holy oil running down from the head
upon us the members: 1. Ioh. 2.27. The anointing which ye receive of him
dwells in you. And indeed our very name of Christians, puts us in mind
that we must have our measure of that oil of grace which was powered on Christ
without measure: so as if we carry the name and title of Christ, we must see
that the nature and gifts of Christians appear in our lives: Rev. 1.6. he has
made us Kings and Priests unto God. And it was long before prophesied of the
Church of the new testament, that the sons and daughters of it shall
prophecy: Joel. 2.28.
and all this by virtue of this anointing. Add hereunto, that Christ is not
perfectly anointed til his Church be: for Christ may be said to be anointed two
ways: either properly, in his own person, as considered in himself; or
figuratively, by the use of Scripture, as he is the head of his Church, which
joined unto him, Christus ^otus vel Christus mysticus.
makes up whole Christ, as the fathers call him, or mystical Christ. Thus
Paul calls Christ united with the Church, by the name of Christ, 1. Cor.
12.12. we must therefore help on the perfection of this latter, seeing he is
already perfect in the former.

Every Christian must be a King.
To this purpose every man must become a King (for so he is if he partake of
Christ's anointing) in being ever in the field in combat against sin, in
taking up arms against Satan's hellish power, in getting daily dominion over
his own rebellious flesh, and wicked lusts. For if thou be a Christian,
thou have ten thousand rebels to encounter, and as many strong temptations and
lusts against which thou must stand out to victory: and here faith must be thy
victory, which grace is attained by this anointing. But, Oh the misery of
infinite numbers every where mere bondmen, and captive caytifes to Satan's
suggestions, and held down under the power and tyranny of their own lusts, in
whom there is no resistance, no fight, never a stroke they strike against
their own sins: the strong man is gone away with all, very cowards against
the devil, nay courageous champions for him, and yet will be called
Christians: no, no, there is never a drop of Christian blood in such; this
anointing as yet never came near them; here is no spirit, no power, but such
as rules in the world.

Again, thou that wilt be a Christian, must be a Priest to offer up thy self,
soul and body, And a Priest, Romans 6.13.
an acceptable sacrifice of sweet smell unto the Lord: to offer up thy prayers
and praises, the calves of thy lips: these are the odours of the Saints; to
offer up thy sins to be sacrificed and slain by the knife and sword of the
spirit in the Ministry of the word: to offer the sacrifices of alms and
mercy, Reu. 5.8.
with which sacrifices God is well pleased: to offer the sacrifice of a broken
and contrite heart, which the Lord despises not: and lastly, to offer, if
need require, thy life, and dearest blood for Christ and his profession. But
how many titular Christians be there, who indeed are no better then Belzebubs
Priests; who offer their souls, their bodies, their senses, themselves, wholly
to the service of the devil, in sin and unrighteousness: for prayer and
praise, they curse, swear, and blaspheme most remorselesly; feirce and hard
hearted in themselves, and unto others; and so far from this anointing, as
many of the Heathens, who never heard of Christ, would be ashamed of them, and
wonder what kind of God that Christ should be, by whom they will be called.

And a Prophet.
Lastly, thou must be a Prophet: thou must have the knowledge of God in thy
self, thou must hold it out; and impart it unto others within thy family and
without: for to this thou art anointed, as also to hold out Christ in a
constant profession: which tyeth every man to know and acknowledge the truth of
God, that he may be able to propagate it to others; but especially Ministers,
Magistrates, Parents, and Masters, whose special calling, besides the
general, fastneth this duty upon them. These are the chief things (to which
others might be added) wherein every Christian ought to testify himself
anointed by Christ's anointing, that he communicates as well in his graces as
in his name, and that he has received some good measure of that oil of grace,
which was powered out upon him without measure: for as in the head, the Godhead
dwells bodily, (...)
so in every member, though not the Godhead it self, (...).
yet a divine natrue is apparent, 2. Pet. 1.4. Now this godly nature is nothing
else, but those excellent renewed qualities and precious gifts, which the holy
Ghost bestows upon the regenerate by means of this anointing, and is opposed
to natural lust and corruption in the same verse.

Who went about doing good,] Now we come to Christ's execution of his office,
according to his former calling and furnishing. For no sooner receives he
gifts and calling from his father, but he manifests and puts forth the
same in most painful preaching, and most powerful working of miracles; which
he did not for a brunt, or by starts, and fitts, but he went about doing good.
By which words is noted his diligence, in absoluing and finishing his course
within his vocation and calling: not seeking herein himself, nor the praise or
applause of men, nor the kingdoms of this world, but denying himself and
glory, spent his whole life in doing good unto others; suffering himself to
be subdued under a most shameful and cursed death; that he might bring others
to life, who were as yet his enemies, and lying in the shadow of death.
Wherein he propounded himself a worthy pattern and example of imitation, Note.
unto all such as have received gifts, and calling to any office in Church, or
common wealth: who are not to hide in a napkin those talents, but bring them
forth, and traficke with them: and that not for their private, as seeking
themselves; but for the common good: and not for a start or brunt, but thus to
finish their course, holding out in well doing unto the end.

Thus if we shall do, we shall be conformable unto Jesus Christ, acceptable to
God our Father, profitable to our brethren here on earth, and shall treasure to
our selves an excellent weight of glory in heaven. But how many be there, who
having received many talents, and charge to traffic with them, bury their
gifts, and forget their charge; against whom the fearful sentence is not only
passed, but half executed already; his talent is taken from the slothful
servant; there now remains nothing but the binding of him, and casting him
into hell. And would this were not too true, not in many Ministers only, but
even in numbers of private Christians; who have had both gifts and calling to
teach and pray in their families; but have wilfully lost them for want of the
careful use of them.

Now more specially, this going about of Christ doing good, stands in two
things. The former, in curing the deadly diseases of men's souls, by most holy
and saving doctrine, revealing his Fathers whole will, and teaching the things
of the kingdom, not coldly, as the Scribes, but in most powerful manner: so
as his very enemies were forced to say, never man spoke as this man does. The
latter, in curing the bodies of men also by most powerful miracles: one kind
whereof which was most eminent (namely the healing of Demoniaks) is put for all
the rest in the words following: by both which means he showed himself a
merciful Savior, and the chief Physician both of soul and body, and in one
word, the very healing God. Of both which points we are to speak something,
seeing the former is the principal and included in this latter; and these
latter were but servants unto the former. It is true that the Jews were more
affected with his miracles then with his doctrine, insomuch as they were often
wholly carried after him for the bread and belly sake. Which seems to be the
reason why the Apostle Peter speaks more plainly of these, as being better
observed, and more sparingly of his doctrine which was not so great a rayser of
his fame as these were: but it must not be so with us, who look for salvation
by his most holy doctrine, but cannot by his miracles.

And first for his Doctrine; the calling of our blessed Savior being to seek
and save that which was lost, Christ went about doing good in dispersing every
where most holy doctrine.
to reduce the lost sheep of the house of Israel unto the fold, to find the
lost goat, to call sinners unto repentance; how all his life was thus taken up,
were too long in every particular to manifest. To omit his private life which
was nothing but an increasing in wisdom and favor with God and man. After
his solemn and public inauguration, he showed himself a perfect mirror of
goodness, both in the more general parts of his prophetical office; as also
in the more special practices of it. For the former, how faithful was he in
all the house of his Father; not as Moses, who was but a servant, but as the
Son, who from the bosom of his Father brought and delivered a most perfect
word of truth; yea, who was not only the bearer of it, but the very author of
all truth. And therefore according to his power and commission, reformed the
law corrupted with false glosses of the Pharisees, and established it: preached
the Gospel, and dispersed it, by himself, his Apostles and other teachers
after them raised by himself and fitted with gifts thereunto for the gathering
of the Saints: Ephesians. 4.
instituted, and ministered the Sacraments of the new Testament after the
abolishing of the old: framed and prescribed a perfect form of prayer, unto
which all ours must be squared: delivered (as Moses) a pattern of the Temple
and all things therein; namely, an absolute form of external government for
the perpetual use of the Church, for the well ordering and cutting off
disorders in it. And for the latter, how careful was he to take all occasions
to instruct particular persons in the will of his Father; nay not only to take,
but even seek them, that so he might make offer of the greatest good, that
ever men in this world could meet withal. If his Disciples only speak of
bread, he tells them he has other bread that they know not of. If a poor
woman meet him while she goes to draw a bucket of water, he preaches unto
her of the water of the well of life. If he look upon the sun, he takes
occasion thence to instruct those who were about him, that he is the light of
the world, and that whosoever follow him, walk not in darkness. If he see
but a little child, he thence takes occasion to instruct his followers in the
doctrine of humility, innocence, and meekness. Matthew. 18.3.
If he do but hear of his mother and brethren, Matthew. 12*50.
he takes occasion to show his spiritual kindred, and acquaintance. And in
both these how meekly, gently, humbly, yea and compassionatly did he carry
himself toward those that were any way teacheable, howsoever in public, and
against gainsayers he taught with majesty and as one having authority.
Besides this, how boldly and diligently went he about, preaching the will of
his Father in the midst of dangers, discouragements, and reproaches which were
raised against him: not only when they lay in wait to catch him in his speech,
but even to attach his person to mischief him. How often did the Jews take up
stones to stone him? Ioh. 16. and 10. Luke 4.29.
how did the people assault him to throw him down headlong from the top of
an hill? how many other deadly dangers escaped he, and yet in the midst of
death could not be discouraged, nor overcome of their malice, but overcame
their evil with goodness.

Unto which most holy course of doctrine, if we add his most innocent life, in
which was no spot or error; it adds also grace and glory to his doctrine.
Never went any before him, or can do after him, doing good as he did: for he
never did otherwise; no word or deed ever proceeded from him, but was
answerable to the laws perfection: so as the Church may well sing out his
beavrie from top to toe which is every way matchless and incomparable. Cant
5 10.


Secondly, Christ went about doing good by many miraculous actions, all of them
directly tending to the good of man. Use of Christ's miracles threefold
The especial uses of them all were three. First, to confirm the truth of his
divine person, Ioh. 10.24. tell us plainly if; to which Jesus answered, The
works which I do, bear witness of me: and again, If I do not the works
of my Father, believe me not: and Ioh. 2.11. This beginning of miracles did
Jesus in Cana of Galilie, and showed forth his glory. Secondly, to Ioh. 3.2.
that no man could do such things unless God were with him: and Ioh. 6.14.
Then the men when they had seen the miracle, said, This is of a truth the
Prophet that should come into the world. Thirdly, to Lazarus is dead, and I am
glad that I was not there for your sakes, that ye may believe: and cap. 14.11.
Believe me at least for the works sake.

Object. But the Prophets and Apostles also wrought miracles, and therefore
they cannot argue him more extraordinary either for his person, or office, then
they were? Answ. Yes, because there was great difference between his miracles,
and those that were wrought by Prophets and Apostles. Difference between the
miracl^s of Christ, and of the Prophets and Apostles.
For howsoever all of them conspired in the maine end of them; which was to
confirm the same doctrine, together with the divine person, and office of
Jesus Christ: as also in the substance of them, all of them in both being such
works as transcend the power, reach, and law of all nature created, yet
differ they much, 1. in the manner of working: Christ wrought his miracles The
whole multitude sought to touch him, for virtue went out of him, and he healed
them all. But they wrought by Christ's power, and acknowledging themselves but
instruments, disclaim all power in themselves, that all the glory might be
Christ's, whose also the works done in and by them are: Act. 3.12. Why stand
ye gazing on us, as if we by our own power or godliness had made this man
go? The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, has glorified his son Jesus, --
and his name has made this man sound, verse. 16. Yea in the working they show
themselves instruments: As, Moses commands the sea, but he is bidden take his
staff: Elizeus divides Jordan, but he must use his cloak: 2. Kin. 12.13.
Josh. 3.13.
Ioshuah divides Jordan, but by means of the Arc: but when Christ comes to
still the sea, he does it by his very word, and command, which is so
powerful, as the very senseless creatures obey it. So also the Apostles in
working miracles, always change their style from Christ's: Act. 3.6. In the
name of Jesus Christ I say to thee, rise and walk: Act. 9.34. Peter to Aeneas,
Jesus Christ makes thee whole, arise. But Christ coming to a sick person,
says, Mar. 5.41. Maid, I say to thee arise: yea to a dead man, as to Lazarus,
I say to thee arise. So the Apostles in casting out devils, commanded them in
the name of Jesus Christ to come out, Act. 16.12. But Christ says, Come out of
the man thou unclean spirit, charging them in his own name.

2. The Prophets and Apostles had not that habitual

Quest. But was not the holy doctrine of Christ sufficient and powerful enough
of it self without miracles? Ans. His doctrine was such as ought to have been
received for it self, if there had been no addition of miracles, which only
serve to help our weakness, whose incredulity is such, as except we see
signs and wonders, Ioh. 4.48.
we will not believe: whereas we must strive to say with the Samaritans, that
we believe not now for the miracle, 42.
but because our selves have heard him. Object. But how can these miracles
infallibly confirm his doctrine or person, seeing it is granted to wicked men
also to work miracles: as Pharaohs inchanters, Simon Magus, the Man of sin;
yea one may remove mountains who wants love: and many shall say in the day
of judgment; Lord, we have cast out devils in thy name, and done many great
things; to whom he shall answer, depart from me, I never knew you. Answ. There
is maine difference (besides the former) between the true miracles of Christ
himself, and his Apostles; Difference of the miracles of the Apostles, and
wonders wrought by the help of Satan.
and all those wonders and strange things which God justly permits to be
effected by Satan, and his instruments. First, in their substance or being:
for in a true miracle, the thing is the same that it lying wonders: mere
sorceries, iuglings, sleights, 2. These. 2.
deluding the senses; in stead of Samuel himself, offering but a shape or
appearance of him to Saul. Thus Pharaohs inchanters by iugling, made no
serpent, nor blood, but the appearance of both: for the text says expressly,
it was done by sorcerie. Such lying wonders are the Popish miracles, Exodus 7.22.
and 8 7.
the sweating of their images, the bleeding of some of their hoasts, the
motions of their images, their speech, their weeping; most of them effected by
slight and knauerie; and many other by sorcery and iugling. Object. But was not
that a true and real effect of the devil, when he stirred up winds, and blewe
down Jobs house, and slew his children? Ans. Yes, but no true miracle, because
it was done mediately by the natural causes, for he knows well the matter of
winds, and the manner of generating them, and by Gods permission can gather
much matter together, and join himself with it, to make it far more
violent, raging, and fitting to his purpose then ordinary; but all this while
exceeds he not the compass of nature, which all true miracles do. The like
must be said of the fire which he brought down from heaven upon the cattle and
servants of Job, he created it not, for creation is the sole and proper action
of God; but added combustible matter together and brought fire to it, by his
power and agilitie. And thus also he infected the air, corrupted Jobs humors,
Vel lud^ficatio sensus vel occulta^am naturalium ca^sarum c^niunctio.
and smote him with sore boyles from top to toe. In one word, all the work of
Satan, and his instruments in such strange events, is nothing else, but either,
the deceiving of the senses, or conjunction of natural causes to deceive by.
And by the way, let the Roman Church consider what kind of miracle their
transubstantiation is; seeing in every true miracle, every thing is as it
appears to be; and there is no appearance but of bread.

Secondly, in the end and use: true miracles always let them bring in their
whole legend; we are to adiudge their miracle-mungers no better then Pharaohs
inchanters; nor the miracles themselves no other then the lying wonders of
Antechrist, which cause men to believe lies who have not received the love of
the truth.

Exodus 8.17.
that they assaied to do the like, but could not; so in admirable wisdom
has the Lord put forth his mighty power, in effecting such miracles for this
doctrine, as he never suffered to be wrought for any other. For this only has
he stayed and pulled back the course of sun in the heavens; let the fire
from burning, divided the sea and made it stand as a wall; raised not the sick
only to health, but the dead to life: strengthened decrepit persons to beget and
conceive; yea more, set a part a virgin to bear a Son. Let Popish imposters
leave to brag of straw-miracles such as was taken up at Garnets execution;
and their childish miracles, as their late London boy; and show us such as
these. Let us hear (but without imposture) of such as speak with new tongues;
drive away serpents, and drink deadly poison and hurt them not; but never was
any other doctrine thus confirmed: and whatsoever signs and wonders are
wrought to weaken any part of this truth, or establish any doctrine not
grounded therein, as we are commanded, so we hold them all accursed.

Use. 1. In that Christ went about doing good, we note that as his person was a
perfect mirror of all goodness; Christ's life was not monastical, but ^e
conversed with men to do good unto them
so his life was no monastical or cloystered life: but his delight was with
the sons of men, he eat with them, drunk with them, more familiarly
conuersed with them then John did, that he might still take occasion to do^
them good, and communicate unto them of his fullness of grace. Neither was his
life an idle, delicate or pompous life, neither swelled he with abundance and
wealth: but poor, mean, industrious, and painful: he continually went about
doing good. From whom how many Ministers are degenerate; who professing
themselves servants, would be loath to be as their Lord was; some setting up
themselves as it were a fatting in a course of ease and delicacie: feeding
themselves (not the flock) without fear; others climbing with restles desires
to honors and preferments: others incessantly thirsting (as if they had a
dropsy) after money and profits, serving their Master only to carry the bag:
others are doing perhaps, but little good they do in their places; their
doctrine is so cold, so indigested, or their lives so scandalous, so offensive;
or their hearts so corrupt and cankred, as they rather oppose themselves to the
doing or doers of good; amongst all whom, the Master is out of sight, and out
of mind.

2. Seeing Christ by this going about and doing good, showed himself to be
that Prophet, whom God would raise like Moses, mighty in word and deed: Deuteronomy.
18.25.
we are hence bound to believe him, and his holy doctrine so surely confirmed
by so many and mighty miracles; Read Ioh. 12.37.38.
that so we may avoid that fearful hardening so long before prophesied to
befall the Jews, Who though he had done many miracles before them, yet
believed not they on him: and attain also the blessedness of those that
believe, without desiring to see any more new miracles. The ancient doctrine of
the Church needs no new miracles to confirm it.
For is not the doctrine we profess sufficiently confirmed already? an
indenture once sealed, is confirmed for ever, and needs no new seals to be
set to it: men do not ever water their plants, but only till they be rooted:
even so the Lord out of his wisdom would water with miracles the tender plant
of his Church, till it was rooted in the world and brought on to some strength
and stature; but afterward thought all such labor needless. If men will
broach and bring into the Church new doctrines, and devises of their own (as
the Romish Church does at this day) it is no marvel if they seek after new
miracles to obtrude them withal: but if men will profess the ancient doctrine
of the Prophets, Apostles and Christ himself, to gape after new miracles, were
too lightly to esteem of the old; and account of these powerful works of
Christ himself and his servants no better then some nine days wonders.

3. As Christ went about doing good, so must we also imitate his worthy
example, taking, Christians must imit^t^ Christ in doing good.
yea seeking occasions to do good unto all, and that readily, seasonably,
cheerfully, to our power, yea and if need be, beyond it. And to spur us
hereunto, 2. Cor. 8.3.
besides this example of Jesus Christ, Reasons.
we have 1. the commandment of God, charging us not to forget Hebr. 13.
with which sacrifices he professes himself to be well pleased* whose children
if we would be, we must let the streams of our fountain also run to the
refreshing and releeuing of others; as he being the fountain of all good,
causes his sun to shine, and rain to fall upon the good and the bad.
Secondly, we are callings lives further leased and lengthned unto us, that in
them we should glorify God, precious time of liberty, peace, plenty, and
prosperity, that unless we bind our own hands, we cannot but be doing good
unto all, Gal. 6.
especially the household of faith. 4. fit objects of doing good are never poor
we have always with us, the ministers of Jesus Christ, and other his members
that stand in need of us; and many of Gods dear ones are oppressed and
distressed, that we might never be unmindful of the afflictions of Joseph. 2.
We have with us store of good men, who have most right to our goodness, the
sons of God, the members of Christ, the temples of the holy Ghost; to whom,
whatsoever we do, the Lord does accept and account of it as done to himself.
3. We have in the worst of all Gods image which is lovely, our own nature
which should draw us to respect, if not the man, yet manhood or humanity in
him: and for ought that we know to the contrary by the rule of charity, we
must hope that they may participate in the death of Christ, as well as our
selves. Lastly, we

And healed all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was with him. The
Apostle proceeds to prove that Christ was anointed with the holy Ghost, and
with power; because he was able to rescue out of the hands of the devil such
as he oppressed and played the tyrant over, God having in justice put them
under his power. Now although Christ did most powerfully spoil Satan of his
dominion which he had in the souls of men; this being the maine cause of his
appearing, that he might loose the works of the Devil there: yet the words
here used in the original, restrain the sense, to the curing of the bodies of
men, which, being possessed, were most miserably captiuated, tormented, and
vexed by the devil. (...)
The word ( healing) is first and properly applied to the body; and the word
translated oppressed, is never used elsewhere in the Scripture but once in Iam.
2.6. and there is taken for bodily oppression, and not spiritual: for such is
man's misery by the fall, that by Gods just permission, his body and soul,
which before were sweet habitations of Gods holy spirit, are both of them
become harbors, and roostes for devils and wicked spirits: and these sometimes
strike the mind with lunacie and frenzy: and sometimes abuse the body of man
to the hurt of it self and others. Hence is it that the Scripture gives us
example of some out of whom Christ cast out but one devil: as Mark. 1.23. and
the Cananitish woman's daughter, Matthew. 15.22. of others out of whom he cast
out more, as out of Marie Magdelen, seven, and out of the man that kept among
the graves, very many: for they said they were a legion, which though it be a
certain number put for an uncertain, yet must the number be very great: for
some account a legion to be twelve thousand and five hundredth. Varro.
And the least I read it accounted, is six thousand, six hundredth, sixty and
six. And this may cast down the pride of flesh, which is ready to puff up
it self; seeing that now the very body, by the forsaking of God, and his
just desertion of it, is, or may become the habitacle of a whole legion of
devils and wicked spirits. And again to uphold his hope in the midst of so
many enemies, it may be observed, that as God suffers many, even a legion of
Devils, to hurt one man; so he has many good Angels to pitch about a godly
man to help him against them. Neither does the Scripture speak of one
special Angel, assigned to every special man, but for our more full comfort,
that they are all set about us to keep us in our ways; and that all of them
are ministering spirits for the good of those that are heirs of salvation. When
God opened the eyes of Elisha his servant, Heb. 1.14.
he saw multitudes, even a mountain full of them, set as it were in battle
arraie for the defense of them being but two.

Now in these words, three points must be considered. First, that there were
many possessed with devils whom Christ healed. Secondly, that those who were so
possessed, were wonderfully oppressed, the devil exercising a woeful tyranny
over them. Thirdly, that the power of Christ was mightily manifested in their
deliverance.

For the first of these. We read of many that were in those days possessed
both in Judea, Many were bodily poss^ssed with Devils in Christ's time.
in Galily, and the coast of the Gadarens. Which occasioneth the moving and
resolving of two questions. 1. Why the Lord suffers the Devil to take up and
possess the bodies of men. For we must not conceive that Satan has any such
power further then it is granted him from God.

Hereunto I answer, that the Lord in great 1. wisdom, 2. justice, and 3.
mercy, does permit this unto Satan. Reasons why God suffers Satan to
possess (...) bodies, 4.
1. Many are of the sect of the Saduces in this behalf, and will not believe
that there are Angels, or Devils, or resurrection, till they see in such woeful
spectacles as these are, sencible demonstrations of it in effects above nature.
2. He justly permits it, pa^tly to punish the sins of the parties
themselves possessed, partly also the sins of others, as either such as they
belong unto, or others who often sustain great harm from such parties. 3. In
great mercy he propounds us such examples of his displeasure; partly that we
might be more watchful against sin, attended with such fearful events; and
partly to make us fly to Christ, the seed of the woman, and cleave fast unto
him, that by his power, Satan may be trodden under our feet. Romans 16.
4. Further such spectacles show, that the very Devils themselves are Gods
creatures, and part of that great host; all which serve under their Lord to
punish his enemies sin. Many wicked persons are hence given up by God unto
the Devil, as the condemned person is delivered into the hands of the hangman,
that he might execute the Lords most righteous sentence: thus is that wicked
spirit which haunted Saul, called the spirit of the Lord, 1. Sam. 1^.18.
because he was the minister of God to execute that judgment upon him. And
these are the Lords ends herein, which he would have carefully observed in all
ages; and that men should not look upon such examples without return of glory
to God, and reaping good to themselves. Satan, I grant, propounds unto
himself another end, which is to delight himself in the vexation, and torment
of such miserable men; but yet for the former causes, and to heap up the
damnation of the devils themselves, he suffers them by their own most wicked
wills to bring his most righteous will to pass.

The second Question is, why there were so many possessed in Christ's time above
all the times before him? Why we read of so many possessed in Christ's time
above all former times.
Answ. 1. Because the Devil knew his time was short, and that the Son of God
was even now appearing to destroy the works of the devil, and therefore he
more bestirred him then ever before. So likewise in these last times, he
applies his work, and shall do every day more busily then other, as his time
draws faster on. Rev. 12.12. The Devil has great wrath, knowing that his
time is but short. 2. That there might be just occasion offered to Christ to
manifest himself to be the true Son of God, and the promised seed who should
manifestly break the serpents head according to all the prophecies of him:
which one point had the Jews well observed, they had not been so grossly
mistaken in him as they were.

Secondly, Satan's tyranny against those he possesses discovers it self
five ways.
the tyranny of the devil over those whom he possessed is expressed, in that
the text says, they were oppressed by the devil. Now therefore how miserably
the devil tyrannizeth where God gives him leave, we shall see by the
Scriptures in sundry particulars. As, 1. In that his malice renting and
tearing the poor left for dead. 4. He is not content that himself play the
tyrant over them, but he makes them also tyrants against mankind; Matthew. 8.28.
loosing their chains, breaking their fetters, and making them so fierce and
cruel, as no man for fear of his life dares come near them. How the man
possessed ran upon the sons of Sceua, and

Why the Lord s^^fereth Satan not only to possess his creature, but thus to
tyrannize over it: Reas 4.
Quest. What reason is there why the Lord should not only suffer Satan to
possess his creature, but also thus tyrannically to abuse and torture it at
his pleasure? Ans. 1. Because the word teaching what a malicious enemy Satan
is, men will not believe it, and therefore it is just with or at least, that it
is inconceiueable. Look seriously upon such a pitiful spectacle as this is,
and thou shall not need any such messenger as the rich man would have sent to
his brethren, to signify his miserable estate in hell. Let mockers look upon
such an object, and then tell us, whether the de^uil be so black and furious
as he is said to be; or hell so hot as Preachers make it. 3. That the more
furious and violent the devil shows himself, What a thing is this, Man. 1.27
he commands the foul spirits with authority, and they come out: for what
other end did Christ ask the devils name, but to show his great power and
glory, who by one word cast out a whole legion of them. 4. That we might
conceive how mischieuously the devil

Now the use of this point shall be to give a further taste of Satan's tyranny
in the souls of wicked men: that they may hence see in part what a woeful
estate they are in; More fearful is the tyranny which Satan exercises over
the souls of men. 2. Tim. 2.26.
how they are in the snare of the devil, taken prisoners of him to do his
will: which is the most lamentable possession of all. For when men are given up
of God to Satan's power to be

2. Wicked men even when their bodies are flagitious course: nay rather they
glory herein, thinking themselves then highly commendable, when they swear,
rage, lie, drink, and compass their filthiness of any kind most remorslesly.
In which courses they are driven headlong by the Devil into a bottomless sea
of sin, as the swine were into the lake: out of which miserable destruction,
let Christ, or his Minister seek to deliver them; they rage and rail like the
devils that would not be tormented before their time. But let them offer to
bind them, and bring them into order, by the yoke of Gods judgments denounced
in the word; or by the rod of discipline that they may not hurt themselves and
others: they break out with more violence; such bonds are but like Sampsons
flax; they lightly cast off all such yokes from them.

3. As Satan forces possessed persons to wound and destroy themselves and
others, so is he not and severe) he stirs them up to kill and destroy
whomsoever they can meet withal: by drawing in companions and partners in
their wickedness, calling them to cast in their lot with them; that so they
may all perish together. What a woeful captivity then are many in that yet see
it not? How many possessed persons are in every corner, who yet will spit at
the mention of the Devil in defiance of him? why should supersticious and
sim-people be so afraid of bodily possession, as that when they neesed, or open
their mouths to take meat, they used to fence their mouths with the sign of
the cross, least the devil should get in at that door: and we never fear
spiritual possession to fence our selves against it? If we saw the devil
raging and tyrannising, striking a person dumb, and blind, racking his joints
and winding his body at his pleasure, we would commiserate his state, and we
could not be so profane but to send up prayers for his release, as esteeming
death it self a more desirable condition then so to live. But when we see lewd
wretches, no better then devils incarnate, wholly subdued under the power of
the devil; and ruled wholly at his will, and every way in an estate more
miserable; yet are we void of compassion toward them, and affection in our
selves. We rather turn their mad pranks into a jest, then turn to God in
prayer for their recovery: so little we see or savor of the things of God and
his kingdom. Those that are bodily possessed or mad, shall be kept bound,
cheyned, watched diligently from hurting themselves or others; but many of
these Beldems are at liberty in place and power to hurt and destroy many with
themselves, which is a manifest proof, that this woeful condition is little
beheld, and bewailed by the most, few or none complain of it, few or none
seek the cu^e of it, though every man need it, as being naturally thus
possessed even from his childhood.

But because men, if they be not openly and outragiously wicked with an high
hand, think themselves free enough from all spiritual possession, and out of
the reach of this doctrine: we will therefore go a little further to show
that numbers in the world, who make fairer show then the former, as though this
strong man were quite cast out by a stronger the^ he; are not yet got out of
his power, Numbers of men convinced to be spiritually possessed by sundry
instances.
but possessed and disposed by him, and ruled at his will and pleasure. For
first, who would think him possessed that can fall down on his knees, make a
solemn profession and confession of Jesus Christ, Son of God, and the most
high; and make loud prayers unto him, as acknowledging him to be the Lord of
glory: and yet all these are the speeches and behauiours of a man possessed,
Mark. 5.7. Luke 8.28.
not with one or two, but with a legion of devils. What, do the devils
honor Christ, who fear nothing more then that he should be honored, and hate
nothing so much as he? No, but all this confession and worship was by
constraint partly, because they knew him a Prince and a Judge, whose power they
could not resist: and partly, they flatter him, to obtain more gentle
entreatie at his hands then they deserved: so many a man professes Christ, but
you shall observe, at least he may himself, that many foul spirits breath in
him: for although he know Christ (as the devils did) yet he obeys him not;
he would feign resist him if he were strong enough to make his part good
against him: which because he cannot do, he will give him fair words, and
call him Lord and Master: he will pray to him in sickness or distress, but
it is but to get out of his hands, and keep his wonted hold still. If the
power of Christ's word come near him, he can begin to accuse Christ, and
Christian profession of vnpeaceablenesse, and tormenting him before the time
(for what time would please these that Christ should come unto them?) he can
ask Christ and his ministers what they have to do with him, and Christ shall
be blamed, because he cannot be at peace for him, if he would let him alone all
should be well and quiet, but the ministry and discipline are intolerable:
let Christ preach, and he will preach him too, so it be such a Gospel as
brings no repentance or ame^dment of life to himself, but he may remain
where he was, even in the graves, already lodged with death. When he cannot
do the greater mischief that he would, he will do the lesser if he can: if
he cannot hinder the ministry, he can deprave it: wherein (as in all the
rest) he shows himself at the command of that wicked spirit, who when he
could no longer torment the man, would drown the swine.

Secondly, although the devil might be forced through the power of Christ to
acknowledge These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation: Act. 16.17.
and this she did many days. Why did not the devil know that they were the
greatest enemies he had upon earth? yes, he did, but he must sometimes
transform himself into an angel of light, he must color all his lies with
some truth which is undeniable, he can lay all his falsehoods upon appearance of
truth; as his eldest son Mahomet enlarged the praises of Christ, and his
Disciples to overthrow Christian religion withal: he has his fetch to make
men believe there is an agreement between Christ, and his Apostles, and
himself, or that they needed his testimony; who therefore put him to silence,
and would receive no commendation from him, but for praises returned sharp
rebukes. Even so, many men can praise good men and ministers before their
faces, whom they know to be deadly enemies to their vices: not for love of
their virtues, but least they should use them: and can call them honest men to
try if by that they can hinder them from doing the duty of honest men, as the
devils called Paul and Silas the servants of God, least they should show
themselves so by dispossessing them. Besides, they would seem herein to be
better then they are, and therefore will honor the Gospel, and bringers with
their mouths, whereas in their hearts they cannot abide that the doctrine of
it should be in sincerity, either published or practiced: the name of
Christianity and of the Gospel pleases them well enough, so as the power and
fruit of it come not near them. But as the devil had no sooner praised the
servants of God, but presently he changed his coppie, and never left
persecuting them till he had cast them into prison, got them soundly beaten,
set fast in the stocks, and after sent out of the city: even so, many who now
commend the person and doctrine of the servants of God, presently (showing what
spirit guides them) can accuse them to be mutinous, and seditious, troublers
of their city and state, and raise up the whole city, and stir up the wrath
of the Magistrates against them, that so under pretense of the word, or law,
or peace, or order, the true Ministers of God shall be wrongfully condemned,
and cast out.

Thirdly, who would think that he could be haunted with a wicked spirit, that
can see his sin, 1. Sam. 24.17.18.
hardly, yet sometimes departs from them: and not always, but sometimes
casts them into the fire, Luke 9.
and sometimes into the water. So is it in spiritual possession, the Lord for
the common good bridleth often the rage of the devil in his instruments, that
they cannot always exercise it as they would; but they have their fits
sometimes, that is, some strong lusts which Satan watches and puts himself
into (as Judas his coue^ousnesse invited the devil to enter into him) and also
sometimes again they have their good moodes, and seem to be come to
themselves: but long stay they not here, but in a moment are changed and cast
into their sits again. Thus in a good mood, Saul could confess his
wickedness, and David's innocence, and lift up his voice and weep; and David
was now his good Son, and who but he? but presently the good spirit went,
and the evil spirit came upon him, and he became more tyrannous and furious
then ever before: even so some there are who seem to have remorse of
conscience for sin, they will confess their wickedness with tears, pray
for pardon, promise amendment, beg prayers of others (as Pharaoh) one would
think them very penitent, themselves think they are so also, but the moon
changes not so often as these spiritual lunatiks: who hence may know that
the evil spirit has taken possession of them, because they are never long in
a good mind. These few notes in stead of many I thought good to set down to
help men that are desirous to see how secretly Satan works in their souls;
and how he can cunningly most forceably keep possession, when he seems most
to disclaim it: that thus they coming to perceive the disease, may run out of
themselves to seek for remedy. Which what it is, we are now in the next point
to declare.

The third point in the words to be considered, is the mighty power of Jesus
Christ, who only could heal those that were thus oppressed and enthralled by
the devil: and here consider, 1. the ground, 2. the proof or manifestation of
it. The ground was because God was, with him. It will be objected, that God is
said to have been with many of his servants who yet had not this power: How
God was with his Son, and how with his servants.
as with Joseph, Ioshuah, Moses, and others. Answ. God was indeed with them
only by manifesting his presence in some powerful or loving effect which he
wrought in, by, or for them. But never was God present with any of his Saints
as he was with his Son, who had not the virtue only and power of the Godhead
effectually and energetically working with him (which was all they had) but the
godhead it self was after a sort bodily with him: yea, the fullness of the
godhead was not only with him, but in him bodily, Col. 2.9. as elsewhere God is
said, not only to be with Christ, but in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. So as he of himself performed the works which
proceeded from him (which they did not) and his actions as from himself were
divine. Quest. Why then does not the Apostle more shortly and plainly say that
Christ was God, as that God was with him? Answ. He might indeed have so said
as truly: but for the time, spares the weakness of his hearers, contenting
himself to deliver doctrine as they were able to receive it: in great wisdom
by little and little instilling into their minds the knowledge of Christ; and
by degrees laying such grounds and foundations, as whereby themselves might
more easily rise to that high point of divinity, which the Apostle calls a
great mystery, namely, God manifested in the flesh. 1. Tim. 3.26.


Secondly, for the proof or manifestation of this divine power of Christ,
Christ powerfully treads Satan under his feet.
in overthrowing the power of Satan and treading him under his feet, is evident
in the Scripture. The first promise that ever was made to man fallen, that this
seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head. According to which
prophecy, he, not only put Satan to flight in his own person, Matthew. 4. but
took also his strongest holds where he had strongly fortified himself in the
persons of others, as every where the History of the Gospel records. He
rebuked the unclean spirits, and made them cry for grief and anger. Mark.
9.25. Mark. 1.25.
He forced them to silence, and would not suffer them to confess him. By his
very word he cheyned and bound them whom no bolts could hold, nor any other
means subdue: such was his power and glory (though men saw little of it) that
the devils could neither fly from him, nor yet abide his presence. A whole
legion of them, ran to meet him a far off, Mark. 5 6.
and worshipped him, most submissly entreated him that he would not torment
them; and earnestly sued unto him, that seeing they could no longer inhabit the
man, they might have power over the swine. By all which examples and many more
that might be added, appears what command Jesus Christ has over the devils,
and that by his only word he healed all those that were oppressed by them.
Quest. It is true that Christ has this power and glory in himself, How the
power of Christ foyleth Satan for us.
because God is with him, but how comes this power to be so saving and
sovereign unto miserable creatures who are held under the power of the devil,
and that most justly. Answ. In healing all our diseases (among which this cure
is numbered, Mat 8.16, 17.
) we must knit and combine those two things which in Christ were inseparable,
namely, his glory and his grace, the latter of which makes the former
sovereign unto us; and appears in two actions: in remoouing from us the next
causes of all our diseases, namely our sins. For as the Physician in working
a cure, first remooueth the distempered humors of his patient which are the
matter of the disease: so does our heavenly Physician imply, that this is the
beginning of his cure, and therefore often his first word is, Thy sins are
forgiven thee, and his last word is, go and sin no more, least a worse thing
befall thee. 2. By taking our diseases upon himself, which no Phisician does
or can do: but this Lamb of God takes away the sins of the world, by taking
them upon himself: Col. 2.22.
for he bare our infirmities, and carried our sorrows and sins in the body
of his flesh, even to the cross, where they were fastened with him, buried them
in his grave, yea, cast them into hell, and there left them; by which most
glorious triumph of his, the snares and fetters wherewith we were chayned to
death and the Devil, are broken, and our souls (as a bird) are escaped.

Hence note, Christ only by his proper power casts out devils.
1. That no man can cast a devil out of a possessed party, or ever did as a
principal efficient cause, but as an instrument, and that only by this power
of the Lord Jesus, to whom all power in heaven and earth is given, and to whom
all the honor of this power must be ascribed: for what power can countermand
Satan's, but only Gods: I grant, Satan may give place to Beelzebub, and depart
his habitatio^ for his greater advantage, and forsake a body, to get faster
hold upon the soul, or to delude many beholders: but such hostile conquest
over satan, argues a mighty power of God, which all the devils in hell cannot
resist.

Secondly, that whosoever find themselves any way molested of Satan, must
hasten themselves to Jesus Christ, who only can batter down the holds of the
devil, and work their deliverance. Feel thou thy self held under any
spiritual captivity or bondage? In all thy spiritual captivity repair unto
Christ.
does the law of evil present with thee, toil thee with heaviness, and
vnchearefulnesse to any thing that is good? see thou in any measure Satan's
secret trains, working against thy salvation? oh come unto Christ, not
faintly, as the father of the possessed child, Mark. 9.22. Master; if thou
can do any thing help us: but with confidence, Matthew. 8.2.
as the leper, Master, if thou will thou can make me whole: or as the
Centurion, only speak the word: rebuke these dumb and deaf spirits within
me: and thou who only can make the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the
blind to see, and the lame to leap for joy, set me at liberty, work my
enlargement, chase away these spiritual enemies; and thou that art the son,
set me free, and I shall be free indeed. Again, art thou in any affliction of
body, or mind, or goods, or name; In cases of sorcerie and bodily oppressions
by Satan what to do.
yea be it in the case of sorcerie or witchcraft, against thy self, or any of
thine, or whatsoever belongs unto thee? look up unto Christ, he can command
fire, water, winds, seas, diseases, death, the devils themselves: and if he
see it good for thee, he can check all thy grieuances; he is of no less power
now in his glory at his Fathers right hand, then he was in his humility upon
earth: and yet when he was at lowest, he could command legions of devils, nay
legions of angels (as at his apprehension) much more can he now command and
rebuke the former, and pitch the latter round about them that fear him: so as
without his will, all the devils in hell cannot make one hair of thy head to
fall.

Thirdly, hence are overthrown sundry superstitious and wicked opinions and
practices very ri^e in the world: As, The superstitious sorcerie of such as
attempt by amulets and words to drive away devils and diseases.
1. such Popish minded persons as think that by certain words and amulets,
devils may be driven away, deseases healed, etc. And for this they allege
that in the new Testament, only by naming Jesus such cures were effected. To
which I answer, that it is too gross a conceit, to think that there can be
any virtue in words to drive away diseases, much less devils: or to conceive
that by the pronouncing of words, but by the virtue and power of Christ,
working by the Apostles, and miraculously put forth with those words, both
diseases and devils gave place, and so the parties were healed. 2. Such as
think that by the applying of consecrated things (as they call them) devils
are scared away: Popish charming.
as by holy water, salt, hallowed candles, relics of Saints, the sign of the
cross, images fashioned in such or such a place: All which howsoever very
ordinary in the Church of Rome, yet indeed are no better then sorcerie and
charming; and the very practices of those who while they will drive the devil
from others, plainly prove that themselves are spiritually possessed by him,
in that they will cast out devils by Beelzebub the Prince of devils. They
object for these relics, that a soldier that was to be buried, was revived
by touching the dead bones of Elishah, 2. Kin. 13.21. But this was a miracle
wrought by the finger of God, to confirm the truth preached by that worthy
Prophet, and is not to be ascribed to the touching of the bones, which in
themselves, nor at any other time, had any such virtue.

They allege also the example of the woman having the blooddie issue, who was
cured by the touching of Christ's garment: whereas that disease was cured, not
by the corporal touching of his skirt, but by the spiritual touching of
himself, which was by the hand of her faith: and therefore our Savior said,
be it unto thee, not according to thy feeling, but according to thy faith. They
allege also, Act. 19.12. That from Paul's body were brought to the sick,
napkins or handkercheifes, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil
spirits went out of them. Which things had no such power in them, but only that
it pleased God by such weak means to produce miracles, for the confirmation
of that holy doctrine preached by Paul. And therefore the text ascribes these
miracles, not to the garments of Paul, but to God himself; who by the hands of
Paul wrought them, verse. 11. Whence we may conclude, that whosoever use any
such means as these, show themselves, not only superstitious, and wicked; but
most foolish and ridiculous to think that any bodily substance whatsoever can
work upon or violence a substance which is not bodily, such as the devils is.
It will be alleged that experience shows that such means as these prevail
to these intents and purposes: which we grant to be true; but that is by Satan's
subtelty, who often dissembleth a flight, as though he were forced by an
exorcist to depart: or else indeed goes away, that men might be confirmed in
their impiety, and grow more mad upon such wicked and unlawful means.

3. Others who when Gods hand is any way upon them or theirs, Against such as
leave him with whom God is, and run to the witch with whom the devil is.
especially if they conceive it (as they are prone enough) a case of sorcerie
or witchcraft, leave the help of him with whom God is; and run to one with
whom the devil is, that is, the wizzard or witch, commonly called, the cunning
man, and woman; or the wise man and woman. Which because it is so common a
sin, and so bold as men and women do not so much as Saul, who changed his
garments that he might not be known, I will by some reasons prove this
conclusion, that although a man knew that a cunning man or woman so called, or
a wizzard could and would help him; yet ought he not to seek or admit of such
help, were his case never Deuteronomy. 18.10. Levit. 19.31. Levit. 20.6.
It is a departure from God to the devil; Isa. 8.19. should not a people
inquire at their God? from the living to the dead? 1. Kin. 1.16. Because thou
have sent messengers to inquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron, was it not
because there was no God in Israel: and indeed the seeking to such is a service
and homage to Satan; which he often and for most part (being very skillful in
natural things) recompenseth with cure of the disease. Augustine.
Hence did the ancient Fathers call this seeking unto them, a renouncing of
Object. But they use good means of Physic also. Answ. Seldom or never; but
if at any time they do, whence have they, being so simple and illiterate
persons, their skill, but from the devil, or diabolical tradition? and who
made the devil thy Physician? who if he should minister nothing but natural
things, thou might not accept them from him. 3. This remedy is worse and
more desperate then the disease, because Gods whoring after such, should be
stoned with stones: and if any turn after such, he will set his face against
them to cut them off, Leu. 20.6. And according to this threatening, he has
executed visible judgments against it, even against Kings themselves, (who
think themselves most free to do their pleasure) as 1. Chr. 10.13, 14. Saul
died for his transgression that he committed against the Lord, even against
the word of the Lord which he kept not, and in that he sought and asked
counsel of a familiar spirit: therefore the Lord slew him, and turned the
kingdom to David: Asa never came off his bed for this sin: 2. King. 1.16.
and more, not only Kings, but whole nations were cast out before his people for
this sin: and not only they, but even his own people were cast among the
nations when they followed these ways of theirs, Isa. 2.6. Better were it
therefore to die of a disease in the hand, then be recovered by the hand of the
devil. 4. Mark how the devil has circumvented such a party. 1. He has
robbed him of his faith in God, because he makes have. 2. of his fealty and
subjection to God, because he either denies Gods government, or the equity
of it. 3. He has got in him what he desired to win from Christ; but could
not, namely, to take up another means of safety then God had appointed. 4.
He having thus set up him^selfe for such a man's God, he makes him commit
execrable Idolatry, in ascribing to the devil himself that which is proper to
God and Jesus Christ. First, a power of healing, which the devil has not
further then God permits him to the just blinding of the sinner. Secondly, a
faith and persuasion in that power that it shall be available to him: which is
nothing else but a secret confederacy and league with the Devil without which
nothing can be done. This the Lord implies in the bounding of his laws, as
Leuit. 19.31. Ye shall not seek, etc. for I am your Lord: as if he had said,
you ought to depend upon me, and not upon the enemy of mankind; Levit. 20.6.
Ye shall not go a whoring -- but be holy: as if he had said, have nothing to
do with such an impure spirit, if you would be an holy people. Quest. But if
God would not have them to help, why does he give them such power of curing,
Why God permits a power of curing to them of whom we may not seek cure.
of foretelling things to come, and revealing hidden things? Answ. The power of
curing is from Satan, God justly permitting him to the further deluding of
unbelievers. 2. Neither does the wizard foretell things to come, but the Devil
by them Deuteronomy. 13.3.
The Lord thy God tempts thee whether thou will cleave unto him or no. Let
all such persons as have sought to them, consider betime how they have broken
covenant with God, betaken themselves to Satan's help, broken prison to their
greater punishment, and made stones bread: let these bewail the sin and
renounce it: never was Saul in so fearful a case as when he run unto the
witch; by his own confession God was departed from him. Let no man lessen this
sin, or dare to defend such limbs of the devil under titles of good, wise,
or cunning persons; seeing these cursed blessers draw towns and countries
after them into their own damnation. Let none think it a slight matter to
counsel others to this sin, and remember that by the law of God they ought
to die, that seek to thrust people from their God, and drive them to the
Devil: a far greater sin is this, then that which the Lord makes capital.

The comfort of the church is, that Christ is ^^^onger the^ all. Ioh. 10.
Fourthly, here we have also strong consolation, that Christ is stronger then
the devil, 1. Ioh. 4.4. stronger is he that is in us, then he that is in the
world: look how strong the Father is, so strong is the Son; and therefore
his strength is as far above Satan's, as the Creators is above the creatures.
Hence we are sure none can take us out of his hands: not the world; Be of good
comfort I have overcome the world: not the Devil; The Prince of this world is
cast out: not sin, not death; both which are cast into the lake: nor
temptation, not persecution: for by Christ, we are more then conquerers. All
these may molest us, but cannot hurt us: they may make war upon us, but we
may pluck up our hearts, seeing we fight against conquered enemies, and are
through his strength that has loved us, sure of victory before we strike a
blow. Let not us forget the consolation in that although our enemies may nible
at our heels, yet the seed of the woman has broken their heads for us.

Verse. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did in the land of
Iudaea, and in Jerusalem: whom they slew, hanging him on a tree. The Apostle
having witnessed of such facts of Christ as testified him the great Prophet of
his Church, affirms in these words of himself, and the rest of the Apostles,
that they were witnesses, not only of the things formerly uttered, but of all
things else, not only which Christ did in Judea and Jerusalem, but also which
he suffered among them; and so defends to lay down his Priestly office in
this verse, and his kingly office in the next. That the Apostles were such
witnesses of all things which Christ did, and suffered in Iudaea and Jerusalem,
will appear to him that considers, that it was one of Christ's first actions
in his office, after his baptism, to call his disciples, who presently left
all and followed him, to the end that they might be oculate witnesses, of his
mighty works, of his life, of his death and resurrection: and that they might
be ear-witnesses, of all the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth:
to which purpose, he took them after a sort into his family, that by their
domestical and familiar converse with him, all the while he lived in the
execution of his office, they might be furnished to this testimony: hence is
it that John says, We saw his glory, namely in his doctrine and works: and,
the things which we have heard and seen, declare we unto you. Many worthy
points concerning this witness of the Apostles, were here to be delivered, but
that I refer them all to the 41. and 42. verses, where we shall as fitly, and
more fully handle the same. And now proceed to the matter witnessed, namely,
the Priestly office of Christ in these words, whom they slew, hanging him upon
a tree: wherein are to be considered, 1. The person that was put to death,
whom. 2. the persons that put him to death, they slew; namely, of Judea and
Jerusalem. 3. the kind and manner of his death, slew, hanging him on a tree.
4. the use of Christ his crucifying.

First, the person that was put to death, was Jesus Christ, whom we have heard
to be Lord of all; anointed with the holy Ghost and power, to work most
powerful miracles; who went about doing good, and never harm^, with whom God
so was, as he never was with any creature before, nor ever shall be hereafter;
who subdued mightily the very devils themselves with one word; How the Lord of
life could be subdued under death.
for all this he was killed and slain. Quest. But how could the Lord of life
be subdued of death; yea he that did only good, and was with out all sin,
which is the mother of death? Ans. Christ the mediator must be considered in
his two natures, 1. the Godhead, ^. the manhood: and in that he died, it was
according to his manhood; so Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.18.
he died according unto his flesh, for his body was dead being separated from
his soul; and his soul suffered the sorrows of death. But yet we must
conceive, that he suffered not in such a manhood as was a naked and bare flesh,
such as ours, but such as was inseparably united and knit to the godhead; and
therefore the Apostle says, that God shed his blood, that is, not the Godhead,
but such a person as is both God and man. Secondly, although he had no
personal sin to bring him to death, yet had he sin imputed unto him, even
the sins of his whole Church, which he willingly took upon himself; so as
God reckoned with him, not for the sins of one man, but of all his Church,
and esteemed him as a captain sinner till the price was paid; and men reckoned
him among sinners, and esteemed him an arch-malefactor.

Quest. But does not this cross the power of Christ immediately before
mentioned, Why wicked men prevail against Christ who had vanquished the
d^^ils themselves
whereby he controlled the devils themselves, that wicked men should thus far
prevail against him? Answ. No, but it argues a voluntary laying down of his
power for the time of his suffering; for at his apprehension he could have
commanded twelve legions of angels, but that the Scriptures must be fulfilled:
yea, and this laying aside of his power was the most powerful work that ever he
wrought, by which he more foiled and broke the devils power and forces in men,
then ever by any; showing himself the true Sampson, who more mightily
preauailed against his enemies in his death, the^ in all his life.

Hence note, 1. how Christ's righteousness is witnessed; he went about doing
good, and ye^ he is slain; and teaches that Christ himself deserved not
death; but he endured it for some other that had deserved it: and indeed,
Christ died for us, and in our stead that we should not die. Object. But how
could he, being innocent, suffer for us sinners, or how stands it with
equity, that God should punish the innocent, How it stands with Gods justice
to punish the innocent, and let the guilty go free.
and let the guilty go free? Answ. We must consider Christ in his death, not
as a debtor, but as a surety or pledge between God and us, who has undertaken
our whole debt; and therefore he suffers not as guilty in himself, but in
the room of us that were guilty: now it stands with the course of justice,
to lay the debtors action upon the surety, being 1. willing, 2. able to pay
the debt, as Christ was. Secondly, we may gather hence the heinousness and
odiousness of our sins, it was no trifle, nor a matter of small desert, that
the Lord of glory, the only son of God, yea God himself must shed his
blood for: and yet what a small reckoning is made of foul and open sins?
Thirdly, take notice also of the love of God, who to free us, would lay the
chastisement of our peace upon his dear son, that so his justice might be
satisfied. Object. But how could his justice be satisfied, who was infinitely
offended, with such a finite and short death as Christ's was? The justice of God
does more appear in Christ his passion, then if all the world had been damned.
Answ. By reason of the dignity of the person who suffered, being God as well
as man: that suffering was in value eternal, though not in duration or
continuance.

Lastly, we have here the two natures of Christ lively set before us; the one
most powerful and glorious in mighty miracles, which forced legions of devils
to fly before it: the other beaten down with wrongs and injuries, even to the
death it self: and it was meet that the Apostle intending to prove Christ to
be the true Messiah, should mention both these natures, which are absolutely
necessary to the Mediator: the humanity, that it might suffer death, and so
satisfy in the same nature that had sinned; and the dietie, to overcome in
suffering, so to apply that satisfaction unto believers.

Secondly, the persons that put Christ to death, were the Jews, they of Iudaea
and Jerusalem. Object. How the Jews are said to put Christ to death, though
they had no power to do it.
But the Jews had no power to put him to death, the scepter was gone from
them; and if the Scribes and Pharisees had had the power in their hands, they
would never have suffered him alive so long. Besides, the Judge who was Pontius
Pilat, was the Roman Emperors deputy; the soldiers, his executioners, were
of the Roman band; the manner of death also, not Jewish, but Roman: why is it
then said, that the Jews slew him, and no mention made of the Romans, by
whose authority he was put to death. Answ. The Jews are justly charged with
it, because they were the chief causes and abettors in all that violence which
the Romans used against him. They made way to this sentence, and went as far
as they could; they apprehended him, they mocked him, they charged him with
blasphemy, they raised false witness against him, they beat him, spate in
his face, they hoodwinke him, and bad him prophecy who smote him: finally,
they delivered him to the Roman governor, accuse him with matter of death,
falsely witness it against him, moved the people to ask Barrabas, and cry,
crucify him: they are content that his blood be upon them and their children,
as it is at this day: and this is that which Pilate in his own defense said
unto Christ, Ioh* 18.35. Am I a Jew? Thy own countrymen and high Priests
delivered thee unto me: as if he had said, I bear thee no hatred or
displeasure, I am no Jew, who best know what thou have done being a Jew
also, but thine own nation deeply accuse thee unto me. Whence may be noted
sundry instructions.

First, that the lower degrees of murder, such as are envy, Lowest degrees of
murder condemned.
hatred, and uncharitable proceedings, are esteemed murder it self before
God: for the Jews slew Christ in that they delivered him of envy to the
Romans to be sl^ine: The law of God which condemns the least injury against
the person of our neighbor, does it in these words, Thou shall not kill: The
Apostle John speaks of a mental murder, 1. Ioh. 3.15.
He that hates his brother is a manslayer, he has secretly in his heart
slain him already. And yet how openly do men testify the malice of their
hearts, so far as they dare, by cursed, reuiling, and murdering speeches,
that they may show themselves murderers with witness: but alas, little know
they what they do; for if the least and lowest degrees of provoking and
rancorous speeches, as to call the brother fool, Matthew. 5.22
deserve to be punished with hell fire* what deserve those venomous and
spightfull speeches, which numbers without all conscience, accustom their
tongues unto? let such consider that the Apostle rangeth raylers in the rank
with adulterers, buggerers, and such beastly persons as shall never enter into
the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.^0. Others there are, even a generation of rough
Ismaels, men of a word and a blow, whose fists are against every man, who in
stead of seeking peace, and pursuing it, devise how to quarrel and contend
they care not with whom, and this is counted courage and manhood; but is
indeed, a satanicall practice, and an high degree of murder, which for the
most part ends in the highest to the destruction of others with themselves.

Secondly, As great a sin to sin by others as by our selves.
note that it is no less sin to sin by instruments, as by our own hands;
the Jews were as deep (if not deeper) in this sin as the Romans: Caiphas
the high priest was as far in it, as Pilat that red the sentence: the one
gave wicked counsel, the other followed it: the receiver pertaketh as deep in
the sin and punishment as the thief himself. Ahab murdered not Naboth, but
because he consented to Iesabel, gives her his ring, and concealeth her
wicked intent, therefore the Lord asks him, if he had killed, and gotten
possession? as for Iesabell, 1. King. 21.9.
there was another reconing for her behind. David slew not Vriah with his own
hands, but writing to Ioab to put him in the forlorn hope and recoyle back
from him that he might be smitten by the enemy and die, 2. Sam. 11.15. and
12.9.
therefore the Lord asked him, wherefore have thou killed Vriah with the sword?
This teaches us to take heed of setting sinners a work, Communi^a^ion in
(...) ways
or any way of casting in our lot with them, either by, 1. commanding, 2.
counselling, 3. countenancing, 4. provoking, 5. flattering, 6. silence, 7.
winking at, as Ely. 8. defending any sin or sinner; for accessories are
before God as principalls: which is the rather to be considered of, because men
willingly deceive themselves in this behalf. Many masters will not work
themselves upon the Saboath day, but their servants must for them; in whom they
sin as heinously as if they set their own hands to work: for they ought by
Gods law, to see that their servants, nay their beasts, rest on the Saboath as
well as themselves. Many parents may hence also see their great sin, who
themselves perhaps, will not swear, lie, drink to drunkenness; but all
these, and worse they do in their children, over whom they watch not, whom
they correct not, nor use good means to reclaim them. Many men will not
themselves revile or persecute Gods children, but can well enough hear it in
others, without much offense to themselves, or defense of the other, even when
they have a calling often to do it: Paul, so soon as he was converted,
accused himself for keeping the garments of those that stoned Steven. And the
truth of grace would make them listen to the counsel which Pilates wife gave
her husband, have nothing to do with that just man; have no hand, no tongue,
no ear, no foot to stir against Christ in his members, if thou do not
mean one day dearly to buy it.

Thirdly, note the extreme wickedness and unthankfulness of the Jews,
Horrible ingra^itude of the Jews noted.
whose sin is here aggrauated, in that they persecute to the death, a just,
and innocent man, one that was sent unto them by God, that came unto them as
unto his own, among whom he had performed all his great works, had given
sight to their blind, healed their sick, dispossessed their devils, raised
their dead, and all this most freely and cheerfully; and yet, such was their
ingratitude, that when he came to his own, his own received him not; this
chief corner stone was refused of the builders; this chief shepherd was
smitten, even in the house of his friends. Add hereunto, that they persecute
such a worthy, and the Lord of all, with such indignity and despite, as they,
not only reckoned him among sinners, but preferred a murderer before the just,
and holy one of God: and wherefore? what had the righteous man done? which of
them could accuse him of sin? or might not he have taken his enemies book
upon his shoulder, and have bound it as a crown unto him? yes verily: Ioh
31.35.
the Apostle has told us in the words before what Christ had done; he had
gone about, and spent all his life in doing good unto the Jews; but they
returned him evil for good to the grief of his soul: and therefore as David
lamenteth the death of Abner, how died Abner, his hands were not bound, 2. Sam.
^.35.
nor his feet cheyned; but as a man falls before wicked men, so did he
fall: that is, Abner was a valiant and worthy man, and so would have acquitted
himself, if he could have met his enemy face to face, and had not been
wickedly and trecherously slain by Ioab: even so, Christ continued a worthy
person, although (according to the counsel of God) he fell before wicked men
through malice and envy: and as David amplified both the sin and the
punishment of such a wretch as so cowardly slew Abner, when he said, know ye
not that this day a great Prince is fallen in Israel? even so the sin of the
Jews was hereby heightened, that a great Prince fell in Jerusalem, and the
severity of Gods judgment lies heavily upon them till this day, in that both
a mighty God, and innocent man, was withal extremity of rage and fury,
pursued even unto the death.

Fourthly, note in these Jews what an inbred malice there is in wicked men
against Christ, The malice of the wicked against Christ and his members, is
never without matter to work upon.
and his members; for it is never without matter to work upon; if it cannot
accuse justly of evil, it can unjustly condemn for doing good: this Christ
shows, Ioh. 10.32. Many good works have I done, for which of them do ye
stone me? They answer him no, but they stone him for blasphemy: so something
shall be pretended, as blasphemy, treason, mutiny, faction, or some such thing,
and a form of law shall be followed; nothing in the world is more easy then
to find out a law to put Christ to death by (for that is the conclusion of
all wicked laws, Christ and his members must die by them) but whatsoever be
pretended against them, it makes much for the glory of God, the patience of
his Saints, and the just overthrow of his enemies; that whatsoever the godly
suffer at the hands of the wicked, it is for most part, causles in themselves,
and consequently unjust in the other. Let such as profess the Lord Jesus, take
notice hereof, and content themselves, if they find return of evil for good;
it was their Lords case, and the servant can look for no better entertainment
then his Lord finds. Let us not be weary of well-doing, although it breed us
hatred of the world, as knowing, that the same spirit of malice is gone out
into the world, and does breath in numbers that follow the way of Caine, who
slew his brother because his works were good; as all those titles of reproach
cast upon Gods children lowdly convince, as that they are Church-gadders, holy
brethren, too nice and precise persons; the which and the like terms, if a
man sing but a Psalm in his family, he cannot avoid: well needs must
Christians suffer* let their care be to suffer only as Christians, and for
well-doing; for it is no shame to suffer as a Christian, and seeing it is the
will of God that they must suffer, 1. Pet 3.17. and 4.16.
it is better (says the Apostle) to suffer for weldoing then as evil doers:
many receiving indignities from men, will say, if I had deserved such and such
things, it would never have grieved me, but Christians must be in a contrary
note, it would grieve me if I had deserved such things as I suffer at the hands
of men, but I rejoice in that I have not deserved them.

The third point is the manner and kind of Christ's death, in these words, and
hanged him on a tree. Quest. Why was Christ rather to die on the cross, the^
by any other kind of death? Ans. Some say, that because mankind was foiled in
the first Adam, Why Christ was ^ather to die on the cross then by any other
death.
by means of a tree, it was meet it should be restored by the second Adam upon a
tree; which although it be but inconsequent, yet this the Scripture affirms,
that Christ on the cross, as upon a glorious chariot of triumph, Col. 2.14.
rescued his Church, foiled the devil, spoiled principalities and powers, and
made an absolute conquest against all the enemies of man's salvation: and that
it was meet he should thus do by this manner of death, we want not first,
This was the counsel of God, Acts. 2.23. for the Jews did nothing against him,
but by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God; which counsel of God,
oueruled the matter, and brought it to this pass strangely; for the high
Priests had accused Christ with blasphemy, had produced witnesses against him
in that cause, yea had his own confession, that he was the son of God, which
they took for blasphemy: yet for this could they not put him to this kind of
death, seeing the blasphemer by the law of God, must be stoned, not crucified,
and so had Christ been, if the power of death had been in the hands of the
Jews, as not long before it was: but the providence of God ouerruleth the
matter so, as he must be brought before the Roman governor, and a new action
of treasonable affecting the kingdom be laid against him, whence it was that
Pilate asked if he were the king of the Jews* and he answered yea, upon which
answer, he was condemned to the most cruel death that was in use among the
Romans: for of those three kinds of death, burning, heading, and crucifying,
Christ reputed an arch traitor in his life and death.
this last was the most severe and shameful, to which the chief malefactors
were sente^ced: and that Christ was executed as an arch-traytor, the
inscription on the cross, containing the crime for which he was condemned,
plainly shows, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews: that no man could look
upon or read that writing, but he should presently conceive Christ a malefactor
in the highest kind of treason and rebellion.

Secondly, this kind of death was aunciently prefigured, as also
foreprophesied: it was prefigured consumed by fire; by the lifting up of the
shoulder of the peace offering, Leuit. 7.20. by the shaking of the breast of
the same to and fro, which as some say, signifies the spreading of our
Saviors hands upon the cross: but especially by the lifting up of the brazen
serpent in the wilderness, which, (as Christ says,) shadowed his own lifting
up upon the cross, Ioh. 3.14. Again, this kind of death was also
foreprophesied, Psalm. 22.17. they peirced or dug my hands and feet: it was
foretold also by himself, Matthew. 20.19. They shall deliver him to the
Gentiles, and they shall mock him, and scourge him, and crucify him: and that
it was necessary that this word of Christ should be fulfilled, see John,
18.32.

Thirdly, this kind of death carried with it a more the substance of all
ceremonies, who on the cross was really and truly accursed, sustaining the
whole wrath of God, which is the curse of the law, and not only ceremonially
and typically as they were. This the Apostle Paul teaches, Gal. 3.13. that
Christ was not only dead, but made a curse for us: his reason is, because he
died on a tree; and therefore are we admonished, Phillp. 2.8. to consider, not
only that Christ was obedient unto the death, but to the death of the cross:
for any other death had not so much concerned us.

Fourthly, this death which so much concerned all the Church of Jews and
Gentiles must not be they slew him, and hanged him on a tree: which most
necessary ground of faith and religion, Satan has mightily by many heretics
sought to overthrow: the Turks at this day are held off from the faith in this
Messiah, by that diabolical suggestion, that not Christ himself, but Simon
the Cyrenian was miraculously crucified in his stead. And therefore because the
assurance of the death it self assures us more fully of all the fruits and
benefits of it, the Scripture is careful so pregnantly to confirm it, as that
it cannot be denied, not only that he was in the sight of a number of thousands
dead on the cross, but by his three days burial, by the peircing of his
side, out of which came water and blood, by which was manifest that the very
call of his heart was peirced, by the confession of his very enemies, who
would believe nothing but their own senses: and lastly, by the fact of the
soldiers, who, whereas they hastened the death of the thieves by breaking
their legs, they broke not his, because (the text says) they saw that he
was dead already.

The fourth point is the use of Christ's crucifying. First, in Christ on the
cross take a full veiw of the cursednesse and execration of sin, and
consequently of thine own wretchedness, both in regard of thy wicked nature,
and cursed practices; every sin being so loathsome and odious in the eyes of
God, as the least could never be put away but by such an ignominious death of
the Son of God himself. If thou look at sin in thy self, or in thy
sufferings, yea or in the sufferings of the damned in hell, it will seem but a
slight thing: but behold God coming down from heaven, and him that thought it
no robbery to be equal to his Father in glory, taking flesh, in that flesh
abasing himself to the death of the cross, on that cross susteining the
whole wrath of his Father and so becoming accursed for it, and thou shall see
it in the native face of it; and indeed, this one consideration sets a more
ugly face upon sin, then the law possibly can; The most ugly visage of sin
that can be.
for that shows our sins to be a knife to stabbe our selves withal, but
this to be the very spear that went to Christ's heart, which is the most odious
apprehension in the world: all the sin that ever was committed on the earth,
could not bring a man so low (suppose one man had committed them all) as the
least sin of the elect brought the Son of God; seeing he that falls
lowest, falls but from one degree in earth to another, but Christ falls
from the glory of heaven, into the very sorrows of hell: whosoever thou art
then that make light account of sin, and pleadest that God is merciful,
look a little in this glass, wherein behold Gods justice, and sins desert,
in the Fathers just indignation against his wel-beloued Son whom nothing but
the cursed death of his only Son, in whom he professed himself well
pleased, could appease.

Secondly, seeing all the knowledge of Christ profitable to salvation, is of
Christ crucified, let us desire to know nothing in comparison, but Christ and
him crucified; 1. Cor. 2.2.
seeing such a great Apostle as Paul was, desired to know nothing else. Now to
come to the distinct knowledge of it, we must consider these three points. 1.
The virtue and power of this death in it self. 2. The application of it unto
our selves. 3. The fruits, which must appear in us by such application.

For the first; Look upon this death of the More power in Christ's death then
in the lives of all men and Angels.
yea such a death as has life in it, quickening all the deaths of all that have
benefit by it. Here we have a mighty Sampson bearing away the gates of his
enemies; by death killing death; by suffering his Fathers wrath ouercomming it;
by entering into the grave, opening it for all believers; by his blood shedding
upon the cross, reconciling all things, Col. 1.20. never was their such an
active suffering of any man, which tormented and crucified the Devils
themselves, when the devils instruments were tormenting and crucifying him: it
is peerless and vnmatcheable, no Martyr ever thus suffered, though Popish
doctrine would match as Corriualls some of their Saints sufferings with it; the
most faithful Martyrs suffered but dissolution of soul and body; but Christ
besides, suffered the whole wrath of God due to man's sin: they suffered in way
of Christian duty and service; but he to make a sacrifice of expiation of
sin: they having their sins removed, and taken off from them; but he bare
all theirs, and all believers sins in his body upon the tree: 1. Pet. 2.24
Howsoever therefore humane wisdom stumbleth at this death of Christ, yet
must we, by the eye of faith, labor to epsy glory in ignominy, esteem of
the cross as an honorable chariot, and rejoice in a triumph made (as the
Jews scoff) by an hanged man; thus shall we see the foolishness of God,
wiser then man, and the weakness of God, stronger then man; thus also shall we
imitate the holy men of God, who looking back to the cross of Christ, could
see him thereon triumphing, spoiling principallities, breaking down partitions,
reconciling God and man; Coloss 2.14.
yea man and man, Ephesians. 2.1^.
both Jew and Gentile into one body upon his cross; s^aying hatred, and
procuring perfect peace.

Secondly, seeing it is clear in the text that Christ died not for his own
sins, it is clear that he died for the sins of his elect, unto whom this
virtue of his death must be applied; and this two ways, 1. to their
humiliation. 2. to their consolation. Both of them grounded hereupon, that
Christ was thus crucified for thee: without which application, the knowledge of
Christ crucified excels not that in the devils themselves. For the former,
if Christ died for thee, then wast thou the cause of his death; thou
crucifyedst him, thou art as faulty and blame worthy for his death, as ever
was Judas, Pilat, the Jews, or the Soldiers; thy sins were the nails, and
the spear, and thy self wast one of them that pierced him: which
consideration seriously thought of, will be forceable to cast down the proud
conceits of those for whom Christ must be thus humbled; Christ's humiliation
must humble Christians, and how it does so.
and cannot but bring bitterness of spirit to him that truly conceiueth that
himself deserved that death which Christ, not deserving, endured for him: yea,
and to have been held under the wrath of God for all eternity, if Christ had
not freed him: urge this point upon thy conscience to bring thy self to the
bewayling of thy sins: oh it was my pride that stripped Christ stark naked: it
was the sin of my soul that made his soul heavy unto the death: my
corruptions were the cords that bound him; my malice, my contempt of God, my
ignorance, my woeful courses were the thorns and nails that wounded him, he
all this while standing in my room and stead. Thus is it prophesied of
believers in the new Testament, that when the spirit of grace shall be powered
upon them, Zach. 12.10.
they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and lament for him: that is,
by faith they shall look to Christ whom by sin they have pierced, and this
shall be an effectual means to lead them further into the practice of
repentance: Thus Peter when he would bring down the stiffness of the Jews,
told them that they crucified the Lord of glory; which when they heard, Act.
^.37.
they were pricked in their hearts, and said, men and brethren, what shall we
do to be saved. Popish preachers so handle this matter, as to stir up
compassion toward Christ, hatred of the Jews, and Judas, and the soldiers;
but we must labor by it to come to the hatred of our own sins, or else we
shall come behind the Jews themselves.

For the latter, If Christ was thus crucified for thee, then also be thou of
good comfort, for many things were nailed on the cross with him, even all thy
indictment, all thy sin, original and actual, the curse, hell, and death it
self died with him; if thou be a believer, the some nails which were
driven into his hands and feet were driven into thy sins; so as thou may
look upon the cross as the Israelites did upon the brazen serpent, Christ his
abasement is the advancement of every Christian.
and thereby be cured of all the sting of sin, and deadly sicknesses of thy
soul: thou may behold his ignominy, as thy glorious roabe, his arrainment,
thy absolution, his binding, thy freedom, his abasement, thy advancement, his
nakedness, the cover of thy shame, his death, thy life, and his Fathers
forsaking of him, an assurance that thou shall never be forsaken. Only this
knowledge of Christ crucified in special for thee is it that can settle the
conscience in peace: when thou know and beleeuest that all thy personal and
particular sins were hung on the cross with Christ, and that he in thy
room suffered for them, that which in Gods acceptance was as much as if in
thine own person thou had borne the curse of the law for all eternity. The
most content themselves generally to know that Christ died for sinners, but
never care to know what this particular application means: The Popish
doctrine also is an open adversary to this most comfortable persuasion of
justifying faith: but it behooves him that would have the right use of this
doctrine, never to be at rest, till he can come to say with the holy Apostle,
who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 20.20. and with Thomas, after
he had seen the impressions of the wounds in his hands and side, my Lord, and
my God.

Thirdly, seeing that of the two maine things latter is a framing in us the
quality of his life; for therefore he died for us that we should live unto
him: both of these are required to the right know^ledge of Christ crucified;
joined Ephesians. 4.24. and enjoined him that would know Christ as the truth is in
Christ; called the casting off of the old man, and the putting on of the new.
What it is to be planted into the similitude of the death of Christ, the
Apostle shows; namely, when our old man is crucified with him: but when is
that done? ^om. 6.6.
the next words answer; when the body of sin is destroyed: that is, not when
sin is restrained, or some sins cut off; but when original sin, that is,
the old man is killed in all the parts and members of sin; when men have,
abhor, and groan under their corruptions; yea even their smallest and
sweetest sins: this is a fruit of Christ's death, and noted to be in all those
that are Christ's, when it is said that they crucify the affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24. Quest. But how are these lusts crucified by the death of Christ?
Answ. How Christ his crucify^ng crucifieth the lusts of Christians.
Not only by that deadly blow which Christ has given them by his death: but
also by setting often before thine eyes this death of his, especially in the
time of temptation. For example, being tempted to impatience in susteining
wrongs, look upon Christ on the cross, what sharp things he suffered, the
thorns, the nails, the spear, and all this while as a sheep dumb before his
shearer: in motions to pride, look to Christ on the cross thus far humbled
for thy sins: if to revenge, behold Christ on the cross praying, and dying
for his deadly enemies: if to oppress the poor and innocent, see Christ on
the cross suffering his blood to be sucked out for those whose blood thou
suckest: so in temptation to any other sin, deny it, and say, Oh no, I see
Christ on the cross made a curse for my sins already, I have done him wrong
enough already, I will not add this to the former, I see rather an infinite
debt due from me toward him; and I must rather think of the payment of that,
then offer to run in further. Thus we see both the duty and the means,
neither of them both are regarded by many: some would feign see Christ on the
cross, for the remitting of their sin, but not for the crucifying of it:
their lusts are as strong as ever before: pride, contention, hastiness,
voluptousnes, worldliness live and thrive in them, and yet they say, Christ
was crucified for them, whereas if Christ be crucified for thee, the world is
crucified unto thee, and thou unto the world. Others, because Christ is come
and dead for sinners, make a clean contrary argument: Christ died for
sinners, and therefore they will live in their sins; as though that were the
work of Christ upon the cross to maintain sin, and libertine courses, and
not rather to abolish the same: what a fearful thing is it that men dare make
the death of the Son of God as a common packhorse to lay all their sins
upon, while yet hereby they embolden themselves in the multiplication of them.
Others are so far from crucifying their lusts, Many will not endure to have
their lusts pricked in the ministry, and much less crucified.
as they will not endure to have them pricked or touched in the ministry: Oh
meddle not with mine eyes, I cannot endure it: or if they endure to crucify
many, yet some sweet sins shall be spared, they are sweet morsels, or fat
morsels, profitable or pleasurable sins, and they must not be let go: but
never a one of all these ever tasted in truth the least fruit of the death of
Christ. The second fruit that must appear in us, is the life of Christ, 2.
Cor. 5.15. He died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again: Romans
6.11.12. Likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to
God in Jesus Christ: 12. Let not therefore sin reign in your mortal body. In
which places, this life of Christ is opposed to the course of our lives framed
of our selves; and is nothing else but to depend upon Christ in all things, to
give up all our thoughts, words, and actions to be guided by his word, and
directed to his glory, and so to order our whole course, as his blessed spirit
may appear to breath, lead, and live in us. Now that this fruit should be
added to the former, is evident, 1. Pet. 2.24. he bare our sins upon the
tree, that we being dead to sin, should live in righteousness. Thus
therefore help thy self by this meditation, shall my Lord Jesus so willingly
forsake his glory for me; and shall not I forsake my sin and shame for him?
shall he contentedly die an accursed death for me, and shall not I as
contentedly die to an accursed life for him? shall he die to glorify me, and
shall not I live to glorify him? shall not he think his heart blood too dear
for me, and shall I love any thing better then him? Thus to behold Christ on
his cross, will help the forward in this fruit also. To which purposes the
Lord in wisdom has instituted the ministry of the word and Sacraments,
that we might have Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1.
continually as it were hanging before our eyes: which ordinance of preaching
Christ crucified, No marvel seeing the Papists shut out the preaching of
Christ crucified, that they must see him in crucifixes and such Idolotrous
representations.
were it in request in the Church of Rome, they should not need their manuarie
bables, crosses, pipes, crucifixes, their agnus dei, and the rest: neither
would they with religious adoration honor the wooden cross, to the dishonor
of him that died upon it: but accursed be all such dead and idolatrous
representations against the word; let it be our happiness with care and
reverence to frequent the word and Sacraments, which are blessed means
ordained of God, not only to set Christ on the cross before our eyes, but to
bring into possession those happy fruits formerly described.

Verse. 40. Him God raised up the third day, and caused that he was showed
openly. The Apostle having delivered the doctrine of Christ his death, he
orderly descends to instruct his hearers also of his resurrection, without
which his death had never been beneficial unto them. And the words in
general imply one point not to be omitted: For howsoever the Apostle
expresses nothing between Christ his hanging on a tree, and his raising
again; yet because it cannot be properly said, that he was raised from the
tree, or from the cross, which was a kind of exaltation and lifting up,
necessarily must be included a lower estate then that was; namely, that
condition of the dead under which he lay for a certain time, as it were cast
from the face of God his Father, and of men, yea from the face of the earth:
when death and sin seemed to triumph over him all the while of his burial,
when they had him in the grave, the house of death. Christ submitted to the
lowest estate of death, why.
This was the low estate from whence he rose, the which he willingly
submitted himself unto for a time. 1. That the faith of his Church might be
confirmed, in that he was truly and certainly under corruption, might put it
off, and so be suffer even any abasement with him, and for him, before we
look to reign with him.

The words of the verse contain two things. 1. The assertion of Christ his
resurrection, Him God raised up the third day. 2. The manifestation or evidence
of it, and caused that he was openly showed. The former part is laid down in
four distinct points. 1. the person raised, him. 2. the person raising him,
God. 3. the action it self, raised. 4. the time when, the third day.

Christ: where first it will be demanded how Christ can be said to be raised,
How Christ can be said to rise, seeing neither his diety nor the soul of his
humanity arose.
seeing he consisted of a divine and a humane nature, whereof the first could
neither fall nor rise: and for the second that also consisted of soul and
body; the former of which being the principal part died not, but was in
paradise. Seeing then neither the deity, nor the soul of his humanity, nor
his person did rise, but only his body; how can Christ be said to be raised.
Ans In sundry other places of Scripture besides this, we meet with such
synechdochicall phrases and forms of speech; wherein somewhat is attributed to
the whole, which is proper but to one part, and that ascribed to the whole
person, which belongs but to one nature: which comes to pass by reason of
that strait and personal union of the two natures in Christ. Thus we read that
God purchased his Church by his own blood: Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 2.8. Ioh. 3.18.
Ioh. 8.58.
and that the Lord of glory was crucified: of the sons being in heaven and
in earth at one time: of Christ's being before Abraham was: of his being
omnipotent, etc. All which are spoken of the whole person, but properly are to
be referred to the several natures to which they do agree. Thus the Apostles
sometimes expound them, and teach us so to do; 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ was
mortified according to the flesh, and quickened according to the spirit: 2. Cor.
13.4. He died according to the infirmity of his flesh, and was quickened
according to the power of God: and to help our conceit herein, serves that
school distinction, which says, that whole Christ is said to do this or
that, Totus Christus, non totum Christi.
which the whole of Christ did not: yea our own common form of speech says,
a man is dead whose soul lives, and a man is a sleep when his body only
sleeps.

2. We have hence to note that the same body was raised which had been laid
down in the grave, and no imaginary body, neither any other body for it;
for never was any other laid there before. Of all which himself against all
Heretics gives sufficient evidence, as in the manifestation following
remains to be cleared.

3. That this person raised was not a private person, but the same who had as a
public person been abused, accused, condemned, and executed; and now as a
public person also raised from the dead; in whom all his Church, and every
member of it rose again: for whosoever have interest in his death, have their
part also in this resurrection.

4. Here is a further thing in this person to be noted then ever was in any:
the first Adam was a root also and a public person; when he sinned, he
sinned for himself and us, and having sinned, and we in him, he died away,
and left us in that sin; and being dead we hear no more of him: and the
Scriptures though they record at large the histories of the holiest men that
have lived, yet when once they come to this, that such or such a man died, we
hear no more of him: but with Christ it is not so; who was not only as another
Sampson, who bewraied the greatest power in his death; but herein vnmatcheable
and pearlesse that he did greater things after his death, then ever he did in
all his life: Contra. ^aust. lib. 16.
insomuch as Augustine was wont to say, that the faith of Christians was
Christ's resurrection.

We must not then content our selves with common people, that Christ is dead
for all and no more; but fasten our eyes upon his resurrection so much the more
diligently, by how much it is easier to believe that he was dead, then that
he rose again. And what other thing can more fitly be collected from that
practice of all the Evangelists, who in other things while some of them omit
one history, some another; or else some of them briefly point at, and lightly
touch and pass over some other histories: all of them set themselves of
purpose to be copious and large in this of Christ's resurrection; that the faith
of believers might be firmly grounded herein, and the rather, because no
benefit of his resurrection, none of his death: and without the certain
apprehension hereof, all preaching, and hearing, and faith were in vain; and
we our selves were yet in our sins: To which Apostolical practice, this of
our Apostle is not unsuitable in this place in hand; 1. Cor. 15.17.18.
who while he almost in one word makes mention of the death of Christ, he at
large prosecuteth and proves the truth of his resurrection.

The second point, is to consider the person that raised Christ. Him God
raised, that is, God the Father, Act. 2.24. And have crucified and slain, whom
God has raised: and 3.15. Ye have killed the Lord of life, whom God has
raised from the dead. More plainly is this work attributed to the mighty
power of the Father of glory working in Christ, and raising him from the dead,
Ephesians. 1.17.20. and to him at whose right hand he sits: so Romans 4.24. We
believe in him which raised our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. Object. But
Christ raised himself, Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple and in three days I
will raise it again: and hereby was he mightily declared to be the Son of
God by raising himself from the dead, Romans 1.14. In like manner is this
resurrection of his ascribed to the holy Ghost, Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him
which raised up Christ, etc. therefore the Father raised him not. Answ. Here is
no contrariety, the Father raised him, and he raised himself. For 1. there
is but one deity of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which is the common
foundation of all their actions. 2. There is but one power common to them all
three, and this is the power that Christ challenges he has to lay down his
life and take it up again. 3. There is but one common act in them all three,
Opera ad extra com^^nia tribus personis.
for the putting out of this power unto any external action without
themselves; of which Christ speaking, Ioh. 5.19. says, whatsoever the Father
does, the same things does the Son also. In these respects holds the speech
of the Apostle, ^. Ioh. 5*7.
These three are one, that is, these three, 1. in the true and real
distinction of their persons: 2. in their inward proprieties, as to beget, to
be begotten, and proceed: and 3. in their several offices one to another, as
to send, and to be sent: these three are one in nature and essence, one in
power and will, and one in the act of producing all such actions, as without
themselves any of them is said to perform.

Secondly, although here is no contrariety, yet here is an order in the
working or administration by him, but from him: and so neither this, or any
other such place, where it is ascribed to the Father to raise his Son Jesus,
must be conceived, either as making Christ (as the Son) inferior in power to
his Father, or as excluding his own mighty power in raising himself; for
they show only the order of the persons, but make no inequality in essence,
or power, or will, or working.

Thirdly, where the Son is said to be raised of the Father, it must not be
understood of the person of the Son, but in respect of his nature assumed,
that is, his humanity. Whence observe, that as the former point showed that
Christ was a true man, because he was in the state of the dead, whence he was
raised; so this consideration shows him to be a true and glorious God, and
notably concludes that which the Apostle aims at, who would hence prove him
to be Lord of all, Romans 1.4. Vbi re^urrectio non passive sed active accipitur
cum sit (...) d^^tatis.
in that by his own power he raised himself from death; and so mightily
declared himself the Son of God, and Lord of all, blessed for ever. This is
it which makes him the fit object of our faith, and if he had not expressed
himself as well a true and perfect God, as a true and entire man, we ought not
to have believed in him: we believe not then (as the Jews scoffingly say) in a
crucified God; but in a God raising and exalting to glory, Christ's deity
cleared by his glorious resurrection.
by his own omnipotent power, an assumed humane nature, even then when it lay
under the curse of all the sins that ever have, or shall be committed by the
true members of the Church; the which thing no power of man or angel, nor any
created nature could ever turn hand unto, could ever have stood under, and
much less have swumme out with conquest and victory: neither indeed had he
himself, if there had remained the least sin of any of the elect to have
been accounted for: we need then no other sign to be given us to prove his
dietie, but this sign of Jonas: and when the Jews demanded a sign why he
took such authority upon him; he gave them no other, but sent them hi^her,
destroy this temple, and I will rear it in three days, Ioh. 2.18.19. etc.

The third point is the raising it self: wherein 3. points are to be opened:
1. the necessity of Christ's rising. 2. the manner. 3. the fruit or ends of it.
It was necessary that Christ should (...) again, rea^on^.
First, it was necessary that Christ should rise a^gaine in three respects. 1.
For the accomplishment of things foreappointed and foretold: it was Christ to
rise from the dead the third day, Luke 24.46. and it was impossible that he
should be held down of death, Act. 2.24. Again, the Scriptures must
necessarily be fulfilled, all which beat upon these two points, 1. his
sufferings, Luke 24.26. 1. Pet. 1.11.
2. the glory that should follow. And more specially all those predictions,
and types of his resurrection enforced this ne^essitie, Psalm. 16.10. Thou will
not leave my soul in grave: which our Apostle proves cannot be meant of
David, whose body saw corruption; but that David spoke concerning him: Isa.
53.10. when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, and prolong his days: Besides his own prediction of his resurrection,
must either be fulfilled, or he could not have been the only true Prophet of
his Church: for himself had said, that the Jews should slay him and crucify
him, but the third day shall he rise again, Matthew. 20.17. and this the high
Priests and Pharisees remembered well, when they came to Pilate and said, Sir,
we remember that this deceiuer while he was alive said, within three days I
will rise: command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, etc. Add
hereunto, that all the predictions of his ascension, of his triumph, and of the
last judgment depended hereupon. Further, the types which foreshadowed his
resurrection, must not be frustrate, but answered in the truth of them: as that
of Izaak bound upon the wood, but yet reserved alive, whom his father received
from the dead after a sort: of Sampson escaping the revenge and malice of his
enemies by carrying away the gates wherein he seemed fast shut: of the two
goats, one slain for sin, the other a escape goat, shadowing Christ both
slain for sin, Leuit* 16.5.
and yet escaping: of the two sparrowes, the one killed, the other let fly:
and the most express of all, that of Jonah, which Christ himself mentions,
Matthew. 12.39. and most properly applies to this very purpose.

Neither the person of Christ nor any of his offices could s^^fer him to abide
long under death.
or of his office. For his person, he was by nature the eternal Son of God,
the Lord of life and glory; and by no better means could he be discerned to
be this true and natural Son of God, or the resurrection and life, then by
raising himself from death to life by his most glorious power. Hence it was
that himself a little before his death, Ioh. 17.1.
prayed in these words: Father, glorify thy Son. As for his office, as he
was set out by his Father to be a perpetual Mediator between God and the
Church; so was he to be an everlasting King of glory; 1 Not his kingly. Luke
^.33.
of whose kingdom there must be no end: according to that prophecy of Daniel
7.27. The kingdom of the most high is an everlasting kingdom. And according
to the oath of the Lord recorded, Psalm. 89.36. I have sworn once by my
holiness that I will not fail David: his seed shall endure for ever; and his
throne as the sun before me, he shall be established for evermore as the
moon, and as a faithful witness in the heaven. Selah. 2. He must be also a
Priest for ever after the order, 2 Not his Priestly office.
not after the order of Leui or Aaron, but of Melchisedech, without beginning
or end of days: and this also the Lord had sworn unto his son, and could
not repent, that he should be a priest for ever: Psalm. 110.4.
wherein the preisthood of Christ is advanced above all the priests that ever
were, who having received their office in time, in time also ceased their
office with their life, but Christ his preisthood was not limited in any time,
but was every way eternal. They were many who succeeded one another, because
they were not suffered to endure by death: But this man because he endures for
ever, Heb. 7.23.
has (no successor, but) an everlasting preisthood. They were made Priests
after the law of the carnal commandment, ver. 16.
but he after the power of the endless life: that is, he was not made a
Priest by the law, namely ceremonial, which established for a time dying and
vanishing things, signified by the name of flesh: but he was made by the
efficacy of the word and oath of his Father, which gave him endless life, and
perpetual duration; so as neither death it self, nor the grave could hold any
dominion over him, when they seemed to have clasped him fast in their bands;
which yet were powerful enough to have held down any or all other men in the
world besides himself: and the Apostle to the Hebrews gives a double reason
why he must necessarily outliue death it self: the former, because he must
not only make a perpetual oblation that need no repetition; but also he must
live ever to make intercession, 7.25.
and that perpetually, without which the Apostle implies that he had not
perfectly saved his people. This is most clearly proved, Romans 8.34. It is
Christ who died, yea or rather which is risen again: who is also at the right
hand of God and makes requests for us: and Hebr. 9.24. Christ is entered into
the very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us: which appearance of
his in heaven with his merits, has the force of the most effectual prayer
that ever was. The latter is, that he may not only make one offering for sin
(as those Priests did many) but that he may always live to apply it (as they
did not) and see that his people have the benefit of it; By dying Christ
offers, and by rising he applies his sacrifice to the conscience of
believers.
not only before God for the appeasing of his wrath, but also for the purging
of their consciences from dead works to serve the living God: as the same
Apostle notes, Hebr. 9.14. and in the last place to bestow upon every believer
the spirit of faith, whereby they may apprehend, and apply his sacrifice to
their own salvation. Neither does it any whit impeach the eternity of Christ's
preisthood, because four thousand years almost of the world were passed
before he suffered: for howsoever the execution of it was not all those ages
after the beginning of the world, yet the virtue, efficacy and benefit of it,
reached to the first believer that ever was in the world Adam himself, whose
faith in this seed of the woman saved him. Abraham also saw his day and
reioysed: and the holy Ghost fears not to call him the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world: namely, 1. in Gods counsel and decree. Rev. 13.^.
2. in the virtue and efficacy of his sacrifice. 3. in regard of Gods
acceptance of it for believers. 4. in the types and shadows of it, whereof
the ceremonial law was full. And much less does that hinder it from being
eternal, in that after the day of judgment it shall cease, when we shall
stand no more in need of Priests or Saviors: for howsoever the execution of
this office shall then cease, yet the virtue and efficacy of it shall last for
ever and ever.

3. He must be also the perpetual Prophet of his Church, Nor his Prophetical.
the unchangeable Doctor of his Church, and the Apostle of our profession: who
must constantly send his spirit to lead us into all truth, raise up teachers,
and hold them in his right hand, for the gathering of the Saints, until we all
meet (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.
and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ: so as it is
cleared, that no part of his offices could admit that he should abide under
death, and therefore necessarily in this second respect must rise again.

Thirdly, It was necessary he should rise again, eternal life to his sheep,
Ioh. 10.28.
and by his death merit it, put, and hold them in possession of it for ever:
all signified in the phrases following, they shall never perish, neither shall
any take them out of my hands: which could never have been accomplished, if
himself had perished, and had been left in the hands and house of death. But
hence has he brought his Church strong consolation, in that being risen from
the dead, he has fully overcome death, satisfied for every sin of every
believer, and risen from under all that weight of sin and death which would
have oppressed us for ever; yea even himself, if he had left one of our
sins that believe in his name unsatisfied for.

Out of this that has been spoken, comes to be answered that objection,
that seeing Christ by his death paid the price of sin unto God, what need we
more of him, we can be but acquitted and discharged. Answ. The providing of the
most sovereign plaster is not enough to work a cure, but the applying of it
also. Neither was it sufficient for Christ to perform the former part of his
priesthood, namely satisfaction for sin, if he had not added the latter
thereto, which is the application of it. This latter makes the former ours,
and comfortable unto us. And both these the Apostle affirms of Christ, Romans
4.25. Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: where by justification is meant by a Metonimie, the application
of justice.

The second point propounded to be considered First, the soul of Christ which
on the cross was separated from the body,

Secondly, the self same body which was borne of the Virgin Mary, educated in
Egypt and Galilie; which was apprehended, condemned, crucified and laid in the
grave, came out of the grave a living body; God by the ministry of the
Angels remoouing all lets, loosing the bands and apparel of death from off his
blessed body; by the earthquake tumbled away the stone that held him down,
drove away the soldiers for fear, who would have assayed to have killed him
the second time if they had seen him rise: and so opened the grave, that all
might see the body was gone.

Thirdly, the whole humanity was raised glorified. For 1. his body put off
all such infirmities and passions as he pleased to make trial of for our
sakes, that he might be a more merciful high Priest: such as are hunger,
thirst, cold, weariness, pain, and death it self: and contrarily put on such
excellent qualities as are fit for a glorified body; such as are agilitie,
brightness, incorruption, immortality, Christus gloriam corpori suo dedit,
na^uram non abstulit.
and the like. But here two rules must be remembered; the former that none of
these qualities are divine properties: for although the deity personally
inhabiting this humane nature, does adorn it with all perfection of most
excellent qualities, yet must they still be conceived as finite and created
accidents, which destroy not the nature of a body: they beautify it, but
deifie it not; they make it not omnipresent nor yet invisible, for then should
it cease to be a body, and become a spirit to which only these can agree. The
latter rule is, that although Jesus Christ rose most glorified, yet did he
still while he was upon earth, veil his majesty, and showed not himself in
that perfect glory, the degrees of which he was now entered into; not only
because he would reserve the full manifestation of it until the last
judgment, but also in regard of his disciples and faithful ones, that they
might be able to discover the self same body, which they had formerly well
known: and that his surpassing glory should not hinder or affray them from
that further familiar converse with him, whereby they (being to be his
witnesses) might be confirmed and fitted to their testimony, by seeing,
hearing, yea and touching him. Hence was it that while he was on earth, after
his resurrection, he would carry the scars and prints of the spear and
nails, that they might put their fingers into them for their better discerning
of him. Hence also although he rose naked out of the grave, and left the
clothes behind him (for that was agreeable to the state of a glorified body,
which stands no more in need of clothing for necessity nor ornament, then
Adam did in the state of innocence) yet in respect of their infirmity to whom
he was to appear, he used clothes: and although he needed neither meat nor
drink, yet for their sakes and ours, he ate and drunk, as we shall after see.

Secondly, as for the soul of our blessed Savior, it was beautified with such
a measure of knowledge as excelled all creatures men or angels; even such as
was meet for such an head: the Godhead revealing unto it all things which
either it would know, or in regard of his glorious office ought to know. The
like is to be said of righteousness, holiness, and the rest of his graces:
wherein he was set so far above all creatures, as they all are not able to
comprehend them: and yet in regard of God all of them finite as his soul it
self is.

fruit or benefits of it, which will appear to be not so many as great, if we
attentively consider, either 1. the evils that hereby he has removed, or 2.
the good things he has procured unto his people. The former is manifest, in
that hence all the enemies of man's salvation, are not only utterly subdued,
but made not only not formidable and terrible, as before, but after a sort
friendly, at least beneficial unto believers: the which point after we have a
little cleared, we will proceed to the second sort of benefits hence also
accrewing. Ioshuah a singular type of Christ, wherein.
Joshua in leading the people, and putting them in possession of the land of
Canaan, was in many things a singular type of Jesus Christ: As that he
begins where Moses ends; his calling was confirmed to him by the voice of
God himself: the end of his calling to guide the people to the promised land
of Canaan: the destroying and casting out all the enemies that lifted up hand
against them: the dividing of the land according to their tribes, and so
preparing after a sort to every one his mansion: the establishing of laws and
ordinances to be observed of all the subjects of that kingdom: the peoples*
acknowledgment of him for their captain, their promise of frank obedience,
and of subiecting themselves to whatsoever he commanded them. In one word, the
whole history does represent our true Joshua or Jesus, who is the accomplisher
of all Gods promises concerning the heavenly Canaan, and the leader of Gods
people to true felicity: but in no one action did this worthy Captain of the
Lords hosts, more lively resemble the truth or true Joshua, then when at one
time in one cave he slew five Kings; who being deadly enemies against the
people of God, made out a strong head, and united their forces to hinder their
peaceable possession: For our Joshua or Jesus, which is all one, went into the
grave or cave where he was buried, and there met with, and slew five mighty
Tyrants, and came out a most glorious conqueror. The names of these five Kings,
were 1. Sin. 2. Death. 3. Hell. 4. Satan. 5. the World: over all whom Christ
by his powerful resurrection most gloriously triumphed.

The first of these enemies is Sin: who had for ever reigned in us to death,
The first enemy foiled by Christ is sin.
and held us under his power, if Christ had not broken his power by his
resurrection. So says the Apostle, If Christ be not risen again, We are yet
in our sins. 1. Cor. 15.17.
But it is plain this enemy is foiled: for if the guilt of one sin had
remained vnabolished; and Christ had not paid the uttermost farthing, he had
never risen again.

But against this will be objected, that notwithstanding Christ's rising we see
sin rule and reign in the most, A great question answered at large.
and has as much dominion and power as it ever had or can have: and if we
look at the best, they have many sinful actions found in their hands,
plainly arguing, that sin moves and stirs, and is not dead in them. How
say we then that Christ by his resurrection has slain it? Answ. We must here
observe a twofold distinction, whereby we shall more easily loose this knot.
First, of persons, some are members of his body, and some, yea the most are
not: some are sheep, but the most are goats; some are in communion with him,
as the science set and growing in the root; but the most are out of fellowship
with him, and are no otherwise knit unto him then a science tied to a tree by a
thread; I mean by the slender thread of outward profession. Now as the head only
imparteth of the life, sense, motion, protection, light and comfort which it
has, to the members of it own body, and no other: even so the head of this
mystical body, quickneth, moves, protecteth, enlightneth, graceth, saves
only such as are in true communion with him: for these sheep only he gives
his life; for these he rose again; for these he spoiled principalities and
powers; for these he slew hatred; yea not for these only, but in these also,
and in these only. As for all the rest, he prays not for the world, namely,
the wicked of the world; he died much less for them; his death killed none of
their sins; but they are left in their sins, and unto the reign and
damnation of their sins, without all benefit either of the death of Christ,
or of his resurrection. When we say then, that Christ killed sin, we must be
understood (according to the Scriptures) only for, and in true believers, who
only can receive of his fullness. The latter distinction concerns sin;
wherein we must consider two things: 1. the guilt. 2. the corruption of it. In
believers the whole guilt of sin ^s abolished by Christ, though not the whole
corruption.
The whole guilt of sin, is wholly and at once abolished to all believers by
means of Christ his death and resurrection, but not the whole corruption;
which while they dwell in the body will dwell with them: yet so as they
neither live in it, nor it scarcely live in them. For the former, the Apostle
asks this question, Romans 6.2. How can we that are dead to sin, live in it?
and hence it is that such as are in communion with Christ, are not only said to
be dead, but buried also with Christ: and consequently they leave their sins
in his grave, even as Christ himself left them there: where if they be left,
there will be a rotting and consuming of them away, that they will be every day
less then other, even as it is with the body that lies in the grave: and
those which remain yet unmortified, they will be even as dead carkases,
loathsome and stinking, which above all things the godly desire to be covered.
Now how impossible is it that these should be the practices of such as live in
sin. Nay I say more, that all the corruption of sin left in the godly, can
scarcely be said to live in them. I grant indeed, some moving and stirring
of it in them, All the motions of sin in the elect is only in letting the life
of it go.
but it is such a motion as is in a beast which has the throat cut: it
strugleth and strives in letting life go: but the beast is killed, and the
unclean issues of sin in the godly (which indeed are many) are like such
issues which come from a dead man, and are a very parting from them, rather
then any argument of the life of sin, or of any delight in them. This is that
which the Apostle aims at, Romans 6.7. He that is dead, is freed from sin:
as the thief once hanged, steals no more: so sin once dead and executed in
Christ, lives no more in state or strength: the sinews of this giant are cut,
and what strength of motion can be in it. In a word, it is in believers but
dying sin, sin destroyed: the whole host of sin is discomfited, though
some stragglers of the army wander here and there as rebels in another man's
dominions.

The second enemy is death, which entered into the world by sin, The second
enemy is death.
and went over all men in that all men had sinned, and stands in full force
and state by sin whersoeuer it reigns. Now Christ by remoouing the cause,
has also removed the effect: for sin being slain, death is also swallowed
up in victory: he has made his word good, O death, I will be thy death; who
although he be the last enemy that shall be fully destroyed, yet has he
disarmed him, taken away his dart and sting from him, and so spoiled him, as he
has left him nothing to harm the elect withal.

The third enemy is hell, the gates of which was set wide open by sin; for,
In the day thou sinnest, The third, hell.
thou shall die the death, namely, the second death as well as the former. But
Jesus Christ, by discending into hell, and suffering the sorrows of the second
death, loosed the same from himself, and all such as shall believe in his name
unto the worlds end: Reu. 1.18. I was dead, but am alive for evermore, Amen:
and I have the keys of hell and death: which phrase seems to be borrowed
from great commanders and conquerours, who having won and entered any city,
presently have the keys delivered unto them, in token of that regiment and
authority which now of right belongs unto them; and plainly imports, that
howsoever Christ was once dead, yet by his death he has vanquished hell and
death, and so has obtained full power and command over them both.

The fourth enemy is Satan, The fourth, Satan.
the arch enemy of mankind; most malicious, being a manslayer from the
beginning, and most powerful, being the Prince, yea the God of this world:
yet has the victorious lion of the tribe of Judah, put to flight this roaring
lion: whose rage and malice made him bold to set upon the Son of God
himself, that so he might work his own ruin and overthrow. How Christ
avoided his sundry fierce assaults and temptations in the wilderness: broke his
power and forces by his powerful dispossessing and casting him out of men and
women; trod upon his neck by the power of his death and resurrection, we
might at large out of the Evangelists show, but that we have spent some time
already in this argument: so as now the gates of hell can never prevail
against the faith of the godly: the seed of the woman has broken the serpents
head: the strong man is cast out by a stronger then he: the spoyler is spoiled,
and lead in triumph by him that appeared for this end to destroy the works of
the devil: who has this tyrant also in chains reserved for the blackenesse
of darkness for ever.

The fifth the world.
The last enemy, but not the least in strength, is the world, Satan's servant
and armor-bearer; which by all the power and policy it could use, could not
keep Christ down in the grave, but he rose again notwithstanding all the
opposition of it: this is that our Savior professes of himself a little
before his death, Ioh. 16.33.
Be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world: As if he had said, trouble
not your hearts, although you have all the strength and malice of the wicked
world against you, all which shall be no more able to prejudice your salvation,
or hinder your glory, then mine own, who have overcome it, so as you fight
against a conquered enemy. By all this that has been said, that of the
Apostle appears to be true: that he has subdued all things unto himself,
and has put all his enemies under his feet, that none nor all of them can
separate us from God or Christ, or our salvation, purchased and preserved for
us by him.

Now we are to see in the next place, How all these enemies are not only f^^l^d
but after a ^or^ mad^ freindly unto us.
that Christ by his resurrection, has not only spoiled these enemies for us,
but that he has made them all after a sort friendly unto us; that whereas they
desire still indeed, and seem to wound us, they do nothing else but heal
us. 1. For sin, that now out of the eater comes meat, as was said in
Samsons riddle, Iud. 14.14. 2. Death is not now to Gods children day would
fear to go to his rest at night? 3. hell keeps in* us an hatred of sin,
and a longing after heaven: yea how beneficial the terrors of conscience are to
Gods children, were too long here to discourse. The speech is as true as
common, the way to heaven lies by hell gates. 4. The Devil makes us fly to
God our help,

The second sort of blessings procured to the Church, by Christ his
resurrection, Christ by his resurrection not only removed evils, but
procured all our good as appears by 3. instances.
is the fruition of good things which it puts us in possession of even in
this life by giving us our first fruits, and a sweet taste: but vpheapeth our
measure after this life when our harvest comes, and we admitted to feed fully
at the supper of the lamb. The benefits which I will mention are three. First,
we corruption: one who must make his soul an offering for sin, and yet must
surviue to see his seed, and prolong his days: one that had power to lay
down his life, and power to take it up again. In a word, one that was put to
death concerning the flesh, 1. Pet. 3.18.
but was quickened in the spirit: that is, by virtue of his dietie, raising that
flesh up again. Let all the Jews and Atheists in the earth despise the
indignity of his death, we with the Angels will admire the glory of his
resurrection.

The second benefit is, that hence we are assured justification before God, by
means of Christ his resurrection, he brought into us an everlasting
righteousness: in that he not only bare our burden upon himself, but bare it
away from us: for what is his resurrection else but his actual absolution from
our sins which were imputed unto him, and for which he subjected himself
unto the death: Whence we grow up in full assurance, that the whole price is
not only paid to the uttermost on Christ's part, but that the satisfaction is
accepted also on his Fathers, whose justice would never have absolved him, if
all the bills and writings which were to be laid against us, had not been
fastened to the cross, and so cancelled and fully discharged: so as now we may
with the Apostle, hold out a flagge of defiance, and challenge our
righteousness; for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is
God that justifies, Romans 8.34.
who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather which is risen
again. And the same Apostle thirsting after that righteousness which is by
faith in him, counts all things loss and donge, Phil. 3.10.
save only to know him, and the virtue of his resurrection.

2. From this resurrection of Christ issues our which whosoever are grafted,
Romans 6.5.6.
they cannot henceforth serve sin, but being risen with Christ, they seek
the things which are above, where Christ sits: Colos. 3.1.
they cease further by sin to offend as such who are begotten to a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead: 1. Pet. 1.3.
and for this cause our Savior was careful after his departure hence, to send
out his spirit in more plentiful and abundant manner then before, that he
might continually inspire his people with ardent desires after the beginnings
of that life eternal unto which Christ himself is risen: who then manifest
themselves members of such an advanced head, when this new life manifests it
self in them.

Thirdly, our perfect salvation is also hence fully assured us; for if our Lord
Jesus has foiled all the powers of hell, death, and darkness in himself,
when he was yet dead; how much more does he it for us his members, being now
alive? if he could drive back and disperse all spiritual enmities, even when
he was in hell it self after a sort, Ephesians. 4.10.
how much more now being ascended far above all mooueable and aspectible
heavens? for we must not behold the victory and triumph of Christ, as
performed only in and for himself; What or who shall separate us from the
love of God, seeing it is Christ that is dead or rather risen from the dead.
but as the ground and pledge of the victory and conquest of all the believers
in the world. Look upon this son of David prostrating the great Goliath of
hell, for all the Israel of God; casting out the strong man, not only out of
his, but of our possessions, that he might take us up for his own use;
spoiling him of his kingdom and weapons, for us, yea and in us. And hence, as
out of a well of consolation, we shall draw this comfort to our selves, that
look as the gates of hell could not prevail against him our head, no more
shall they ever be able to prevail against us his members, although they
never so fiercely and forcibly assail us. And if spiritual enmities shall not
be able to cut us short of our salvation, much less shall temporal dangers:
for by virtue of this resurrection also, even in the most troublesome deepes,
when the waves of sorrows overtake one another, and go over our souls; when
with Jonas we are ready to say, we are cast from the face of the Lord; Jonah.
2.4.
even then we have hope to rise out of such evils; and because our head is
above, in short time comfortably to swim out. Add hereunto, that death it
self, nor the grave shall stand between us and home: for this rising of
Christ is both the cause and confirmation that we shall rise again: If the
head be risen, so shall also the members: if Christ the first fruits of them
that sleep be raised, so shall also the whole bulk and body of believers: if
we believe that Christ is risen from the dead, even so them which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him: 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
and if the same spirit which raised Jesus from the dead dwell in us, Romans 8.11.
then he that raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies:
for Christ has not redeemed the soul alone from death, but the body also: else
had this second Adam bin inferior to the first, if not able to save by his
rising all that which was lost by the fall of the former. Oh how would this
meditation well digested, sweeten the remembrance of death and the grave? when
a Christian shall consider, that look how it was with Christ when his soul
and body were separated, yet both of them were united to the dietie, which
brought them together again: even so I am taught by the Scriptures, that when
my soul and body shall be separated, yet shall neither of them be sundred
from Christ my head, but he will reunite them like loving friends that they may
participate in his own glory. How would this meditation bring the soul, not
only to be content, but to desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ,
accounting that the best of all. Philip. 1.23.


The third benefit befalling us by the resurrection is stronger then he, nor
able to pluck any of his sheep out of his hands. Let the Church be pressed,
it shall never be oppressed: Let the Kings of the earth band themselves and
forces against it, the Lord has set his Son upon his holy mountain, and he
shall crush them like a potters vessel: Let Heretics and Antechrist send
armies of Locusts, Jesuits, and seducing vagrants to wast the Church, and
bereave it of the truth and light leading to life, they shall only seduce such
as whose names are not written in the book of life, and of the Lamb: for
seeing Christ is risen, so long as ^e (who can die no more) lives, he will
preserve his darling; he will send out the stars that are in his right hand
for her relief; who like David's worthies shall break through the hosts of the
enemy, and bring the pure waters of the well of life: as we are for ever
thankfully to acknowledge in those worthy restorers of our religion. Lastly,
let floods of persecution rise and swell, so as this dove of Christ cannot find
rest for the sole of her foot, one means or other Christ will use for her
help: for he will either send her into the wilderness, or the earth shall
help the woman and drink in the waters, that they shall not hurt her: or he
will provide for her one of the chambers of his providence (as he did for
Ioash against the rage of Athaliah) wherein she shall be safe till the storm
be blown over. These are the principal benefits procured us by Christ's
resurrection, which belong not unto all, but only to such as are risen with him.

Quest. How to know that we are risen with Christ.
How shall we know that we are risen with Christ, that they may assuredly
belong unto us? Answ. The Apostle sets himself to resolve this question,
Coloss. 3.1. where he makes the seeking of things above where Christ is, an
infallible mark of our rising with him; for as when Christ was risen, he
minded not things below any more, but all his course was a preparation to his
ascension, to which all things tended: so now if thou be risen with him, heaven
will be in thine eye, and thine affections are ascended thither where Christ
is: if Christ were on earth, thou might fix thy soul and senses here on
earth, and yet be a Christian; but seeing he who is thy head is in heaven, thou
that art a member of him, must be there also. And as Christ while he continued
upon earth after his resurrection, lived a kind of supernatural and heavenly
life; so if thou be risen with him, thou live not the life of nature, but
have begun the life of grace, and an heavenly conversation.

Quest. But how shall I know whether I live by this heavenly life or no? Answ.
Heavenly life discerned by two notes.
There be two special notes to discern this truth by: the former is the
dissimilitude and opposition which it has with the life of sinful natural
men upon earth: 1. Dissimilitude with the life of sinful and natural men.
the latter is the similitude and agreement it has with the life of Saints and
glorified men in heaven. Concerning the former: the natural man will follow
and pursue things which tend to a sensual and natural life; 1. In the matters
of this life.
he will beat his brains for gold and silver, meat and cloth, goods and
lands for himself and his: as for heaven, he will have nothing to do there
till he be dead, and for the way thither, he cares not to know it till he be
dying at the soonest. But the spiritual man he coueteth after spiritual
things; the power of Christ's spirit where it is present, will lift up his heart
be it never so heavy, to seek the kingdom and the righteousness of it: and
he seeks after the wisdom of God; as for gold and treasures, he accounts
of the graces of faith, love, hope humility, and the fear of the Lord above
all pearls and precious things; he provides for himself and his, the food
that perishes not, and thinks himself warmely and comely arraied, when he
has put on the Lord Jesus Christ, as knowing, that only the garment of this
righteousness, can fence him from all the injury of wind and weather. The
natural man does not more seriously listen after great purchases of land and
fields, as he does cast with himself to purchase the pearl hid in the field;
for which he will sell himself, as we say, into his shirt; nay and further,
his own self, liberty, life, and if he had any thing dearer then that. As
for the things of this life, if he have them not, he wants not his portion:
If he have them, his care is that they have not him, or become his portion: If
riches increase, he sets not his heart upon them. If they decrease, his
heart fails not with them. In abundance, he carries himself warily and
weanedly. In want, cheerfully and contentedly. The things he has, he uses
as not using them: the things he has not, he knows he has no good use of
them, or else he should have them. And thus as the natural man bestirreth
himself, and all his motion tends to the bettring of his outward estate at
home; so contrarily does an heavenly minded man (accounting himself from home
while he is hear in the body) bend his chief care to settle his estate at
home in heaven; and all his trading and converse in this strange country
tends to the enriching of him in his own country. Further, if we look to
the natural man's course in the matter of his religion, we shall see as great
difference between them. 2. In the matters of religion.
For it is clear, that whereas matters of religion are a burden to the one,
they are the joy of the other. The one as heavy to pray, to hear, to read and
meditate on the word, and of his own estate, as a bear to the stake: if law,
or shame, or some such by-respect moved him not, it were all one to him to be
on his horse back as in the Church: the other, would account his life tedious,
were it not for these meetings of God and his people in the assemblies, and
those sweet refreshments they bring back from thence. The one, if he pray
sometimes in public, he makes little conscience of private prayer in his
family, and so of other private duties, to which God and a good conscience
would bind him as strait as to the former. The other, walks wisely and
religiously in the midst of his house, and preserves the worship of God at
home, and makes his house a little Church and house of God. The one, makes
little or no conscience of such sins, as either in comparison of other, or in
his own corrupt conceit, are smaller sins: such as are inferior oaths,
idleness, gaming, sins of omission, idle words or hurtful; unclean or
wandering thoughts: words he thinks to be but wind, if he mean no hurt; and
if he mean hurt, but do none, thoughts are free. As for the sins of the
time, he will not be so indiscreet as to swim against the stream; he is
here violently carried without resistance into a gulf of known evils, and
all is well, he does but as others do, and it were worse for him if he did
not: the other, makes conscience of all sin, lesser sins, and secret
sins: he can hate all, even those which he cannot avoid: he hates the
evil that himself does, and willingly will not displease God though all men
be therefore offended with him. To conclude this point, the one seeks to
approve himself unto man; the other to approve his heart to God, because he
knows he made it, and knows what is in it. And this shall serve for a taste
of the opposite disposition between natural, and spiritual life.

The second note, II. Agreement which it has with the life of the Saints in
heaven in two things.
to discern this heavenly life by, is the similitude or agreement which it
has with the life of the Saints in heaven. For the life of the Saints in
heaven, must be a counterpaine of the believers upon earth, to which they must
be daily framed in sundry regards. 1. In respect of the things they are called
from. 2. In respect of bought from the earth: Rev. 14.3.
meddling no more with earthly things then needs must, enjoying them so, as they
joy no more in them, then in things which are not their own, but borrowed only
for a time: using them so, as they abuse them not, because they are to be
counteable for them; What the Saints are called from, in three things.
abiding in their earthly business and callings, so as they be never earthly
minded: in one word, so desiring, pursuing, having, holding, and parting from
the profits of this life, as those to whom God has showed better things, then
any below; yea, and esteeming of their present life it self so indifferently,
as that they can account the day of their death better then the day wherein
they were borne. 2. As the Saints in heaven, being delivered out of the prison
of the body, have all the bolts and chains of their corruption struck off; so
the godly who have their parts in the first resurrection, have after a sort
changed their lives, and put on a divine nature: 2. Pet. 1.4.
they have bid farewell to the follies of their former times, yea renounce, and
as far as frailty will permit, loath their sins; saying unto them, as
Ephraim to his rejected Idols, get you hence: what have I to do with you? they
that were of the Synagogue of Satan, are now in the Temple with true believers.
Thus is it said of the 144000. that were bought from the earth, that they were
not defiled with women, but were virgins, that is, sanctified in part, and
washed from their filthiness, and will have no more fellowship in the
unfruitful works of darkness, The enemies whom your eyes have seen this
day, you shall never see more: even so the faithful hate the company of the
wicked, with whom they can neither do good, nor take any: whereas before their
calling, they were mixed with them, and ran with them to the same riot of
excess. Now their fellowship is dissolved; they are no more companions with
them; the light of the one admits no communion with the others darkness: and
that they are often forced to dwell in Mesech with them, it is the woe and
grief of their hearts.

Another part of this agreement, stands in the things to which the Saints are
called, What the Saints are called unto in 5 things.
which of God a perpetual Sabbath, Rev. 11.17. and 7.15.
and serving him day and night: even so believers endeavor in their measure,
that the same mind be in them which was in Jesus Christ, who thought it as his
meat and drink to do the will of his heavenly Father: they bring free will
offerings: they esteem one day better in his courts, then a thousand besides:
and account these persons blessed that may dwell in his house, because they
ever praise him. Not that much rebellion and corruption of nature, does not
often dead and dull even the most sanctified; but yet something they get
forward; and delight in the progress they make to the cheerful praise and
worship of God. And this they do, not by fits and starts, but imitate that
heavenly life in the continual endeavor, to make the pleasing of God their
principal delight, and the chief thing that most soliciteth them. Thirdly, as
the Saints in Rev. 22.35.
for he is their Temple, their light, their tree of life, their Crystal
river, etc. even so the Saints in the world, though they live by means, and
must not look to reap without sowing, as once it was, 2. King. 19.29. yet
enjoy they God above all means; and acknowledge that he is their life, and the
length of their days; that they live not by bread alone, but by every word
proceeding out of the mouth of God: that it is he that gives them power to get
substance, and blesses their children with increase: that he which cloatheth
the lillies, and feeds the sparrowes, will cloth and feed them: yea and
more, that before they shall want that which is good for them, if all means
should fail, he would sustain them without means by miracle: that his
promise cannot fail them, when the Indian mines shall come to naught: that his
word is means enough, which commandeh the rock, and it gives water; and the
winds, and they blow quails before his host shall perish. Fifthly, as the
Saints in heaven would Lord, how long, holy, and just? Rev. 6.10.
so the godly would not for all the world be separated from their estate in
Christ. A cloud of Martyrs in all ages has manifested, that all the world, the
sweet of it nor the sower; the flattery of it nor the tyranny, could draw
the godly from the fruition of their privileges in Christ. And yet dwell they
not in these first fruits, but wait still for the per^iting of this their
redemption. Hence the Apostle describes them by their inseparable property,
2. Cor. 5.2. Romans 8.23.
which is, to love the appearing of Jesus Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8.

These notes laid together, will give witness with or against a man,
Examination of a man's self by the former notes.
whether his conversation be heavenly, and consequently whether he partake of
all the former benefits of Christ's resurrection. Examine thy self by them:
Whether art thou called out of the world in thy affection? whether art thou
actually separated from the corruptions that are in it through lust? whether
do thou contemn, and avoid vile and graceless persons? do thou rejoice
in the fellowship with God and communion of his Saints? spendest thou thy days
in the constant praise and worship of God? framest thou thy life according to
the word of God, the rule of all righteousness? enioyest thou all things in
God, and God in all things? prisest thou thy present estate above all the
world, and yet longest thou for the perfecting of thy happiness, saying, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly? this is to converse in heaven, while thou art on
earth; and to seek the things above where Jesus Christ sits. Which if it
be, then how few have their conversation there, or are risen with Christ? How
few are set free from the power of sin, witnesses the general reign of it
every where. How many mind only earthly things; how many mind them
principally? How do most men swim with the stream, drinking in the
corruptions of the world most insatiably, as the fish does water? How do
sinners combine themselves against God, to run to all excess of riot? How
unpleasant and unwelcome a voice is it, to call men to delight in God and his
children? How heavy are they to the parts of his worship, coming unto them,
as if they went to some punishment? How are men's lusts become their laws, in
stead of the perfect rule and law of God? every man almost living as Israel
when their was no King among them. How do men rest in the means of their
welfare, withdrawing their hearts from the author of it? How few prize the life
of Christianity, how many skorne it in themselves, and in others? How many
wish in their hearts there were no other life to come, and that they rather had
good assurance of this which is present: and in stead of wishing and waiting,
tremble at the mention of Christ his coming again? Yet most of these men,
professors of Christ: all of them baptized into his name; and all of them will
be reputed as good Christians as the best. But all this forenamed course, has
no savor or relish of heaven; all that take it up, mind nothing but earthly
things; and the end of it, without timely repentance, Philip. 2.19.
will be damnation.

The fourth general point, is the time of Chists resurrection, set down in
the text to be the third day. To understand which, we must know that Christ
lay not in the grave three whole natural days, each of them standing of 24.
hours; for then he should have lain 72. hours, and have risen also on the
fourth day; whereas he lay not in the grave above 39. hours, and rise on the
third. But the Scripture uses a grace, Synechdoche.
or form of speech, whereby two parts of days are called by the whole: and
three days put for the time which passed in three several days; every day
having his night belonging unto him. The first day of the three, says
Augustine, is to be reckoned by his latter part, in which Christ was dead and
buried not passing three hours of the four and twenty; yet so as both the
night before when the Jews day begun, and the most of that day was spent in
taking, examining, whipping, misusing, condemning, and executing him. The
second day is to be accounted wholly and perfect, from the evening of the day
before the passover, to the evening of the Saboath following; standing of full
24. hours. The third day is to be accounted from the former part of it,
beginning at the evening of the Jewish Saboath: for Christ lay all night near
twelve hours in the grave, and rose in the morning betime about the midst of
that natural day, standing of 24. hours. And thus is Christ truly said to
have risen the third day.

Now that Christ should rise the third day, and no sooner, nor later, these
reasons show. 1. He must rise the third day, according to the Scriptures. 1.
Cor. 15 4*
For they had foretold this to be the particular time, Hos. 6.2. After two
days he will revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up: namely,
Why Christ would ^^se no sooner then the third day.
in his own person: for we also were raised with him as we have seen. The
Scriptures had also further figured this distinct time in the type of Jonas; As
Jonas was in the belly of the whale three days and three nights, so shall the
Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 2. It
pleased him not to rise sooner: he would not presently come down from the
cross, nor We trusted that it had been he that should have delivered Israel:
and as touching all these things, this is the third day that they were done.

Again, he would no longer defer his rising. Why he would no longer
defer his rising.
1. least he should utterly have endangered the faith of the Disciples, which
in that short time was sore shaken; as not only the former example, but the
heaviness of the Disciples themselves to believe the news of it, and the
wilfulness of Thomas, plainly bewrays. 2. Because upon this event Angels
and men had taken notice from his own mouth; Luke 24.7. when the women came to
the sepulcher to seek Christ after he was newly risen, the Angels told them,
he was risen, he was not there: and further wishes them to remember what he
had said to them while he was with them, that the third day he must rise
again: nay not only his friends, but his very enemies had got this by the
end, and therefore came to Pilat, saying, sir, we remember that this deceiuer
said, that he would rise the third day: let us take such order that the last
error become not worse then the first. 3. The blessed body of Christ was not
to enter into Quest. But how could his body be preserved so long, seeing
Lazarus his body, and our bodies in that time enter into many degrees of it.
Answ. Christ was indeed balmed and sweetened with odours: but all this could not
have preserved him, if his soul and body had not now been freed from sin,
the mother of corruption. Object. But he had sin imputed unto him. Answ.
Yea, but he had overcome all that, and slain it on the cross: for had he not
destroyed it, himself had been destroyed by it, and subdued for ever under
the corruption of it. In all which regards, that is verefied which himself
being risen, affirmed, Luke 24.46. Thus it is written, and thus it behooves
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day.

Other things the Evangelists observe in this circumstance: as that it was the
first day of the week; that is, the first day wherein he had created the
heavens and the earth, and wherein he would create now a new heaven, and a new
earth; and as before he had set up a marvelous frame of the world, but since
exceedingly shaken and defaced by sin, he would now restore the world again,
and repair the ruins of it, by abolishing sin: as formerly he had filled
heaven and earth with the glory of his power in creation; so would he now fill
them with the glory of his power in redemption, which is a second creation.
Hence is it, that that day is now converted into the Christian Sabbath, and
called the Lords day, or if you will, Sunday; but not as the heathen, in honor
of the sun; Rev. 1.10.
but as Christians, in honor of the the Sun of righteousness. Christ rose
early, and what we learn thence.
Again, the Gospel notes, that this our glorious Sun, rose about sun
rising, early in the morning, or a little before it, Matthew. 28.1. To show
unto us, 1. the power of his Godhead, Through the tender mercy of our God, the
day spring from an high has visited us; 79. To give light to them that sit in
darkness, and to guide our feet into the way of peace. The Chronologers
further observe, that this was the day wherein Moses lead the Israelites
through the sea, wherein all the troops of Pharaoh and his host were drowned:
Even so our Lord Jesus this third day, lead all the Israel of God out of the
spiritual Egypt of blindness and filthiness; but gloriously triumphed over
all the bands of Satan, sin, and death: all which were sunk like a stone
into the bottomless pit of hell. Other observations concerning this day might
be inserted out of authors, which, because I see no sound ground for them out
of the Scriptures, I will omit them, that I may now come to the lessons which
out of this circumstance, we may draw for our further instruction.

First, we learn hence, that all the promises of God shall be in due season
accomplished, All the promises of God are accomplished* in their due season.
whatsoever may seem to come between them and us* For seeing Christ being
dead, both could and did perform his promise to his Church, will not he much
more being alive and in his glory do it? The Israelites had a promise of a
good land: they must in the mean time suffer much oppression in Egypt, for the
space of 430. years together: but the self same night when the term was
expired, Exodus 12.41.
they went out against the heart, and yet at the entreatie of Pharaoh and his
people. In like sort Joseph had a dream, that the Sun and Moon, and the 12.
stars should worship him: in the mean time he must be cast into the pit and
dungeon, where he can see neither sun, moon, nor star: many days and
years passed wherein he saw nothing but the clean contrary, and yet in the
due season of it this dream was accomplished. And the reason is, because, 1.
God is true of his word, he cannot lie, nor repent: and 2. he is able to
fulfill whatsoever passes from his mouth: for shall any thing be hard or
impossible to God? or shall any power, or death, or the grave it self falsify
it? Lean thy self then upon this truth of God: have thou a promise of outward
or inward peace, health, wealth, or any other good thing, which thy heart can
wish? hold this promise fast in the midst of thy heart; wait for the
accomplishment of it; it shall not fail thee so far as thy Father sees good
for thee: if it be delaied and deferred, even this also shall turn to thy
best. Have thou a promise of life everlasting? hold it by the faith of thy
soul as the aim and end of all thy faith and religion: for all the miseries
of this present life shall not be able to defeat thee of it. Have thou the
promise of the resurrection of the body after death? stick to this article of
thy faith also: nothing could hinder the rising of thy head, no more can let,
but the members shall be where the head is: not the grave, not fire, not water,
not the bellyes of beasts or fishes, but they shall give up their dead, and
further the accomplishment of the word of their Creator.

The Lord denies not to help his children although he delay them till his
own due time be come.
The second observation is, that as the Lord of life raised not his Son as
soon as he was dead, but he must lie in the grave two days, yea and the third
also, till his case seemed desparate to the Disciples themselves: even so may
the members of Christ lie long in the graves of their misery, yea, so long, as
their case seems desperate; and all that while, the Lord not only deferreth,
but seems to deny their help, and utterly to neglect them. Abraham had the
promise of a son by Sarah; he looked every year for him, ten, twenty years
together, nay till the thirtieth year, till it was not with Sarah as with
childing-women, in so much as she laughed when she heard it, the case in nature
was desperate: who would have thought but that God had forgotten his promise:
which Abraham himself in all that time (if God had not shoared up his faith)
might have forgotten: but though long first, yet at length the Lord found out a
time fit enough to bring his word to pass. David in like manner had the
promise of the kingdom, but in the mean time he was so traced and hunted by
Saul, that he said in himself, I shall surely one day fall by the hands of
Saul: but howsoever the Lord still deferred his promise, he knew not how to
break it: the kingdom was rent from Saul, and given to him that was better
then he.

Now the chief reasons of this dealing of the Lords with his children, are
these. Why God delayeth to answer his children. Reasons.
1. In Gods delays there is a seasonable time for all the graces which he
gives to be set on work, such as are faith, patience, hope, prayer; all which
cease in could have done) the glory of his work had been obscured, which all
ages since have admired and extolled till this day. How did Jonah and the
Ninevites acknowledge the finger of God, in calling him to that ministry,
when as he seemed utterly cast away, being buried in the whales belly three
days and three nights? for when by the powerful word of God, the fish was
commanded to cast him on the dry ground, what a worthy fruit of conversion it
had in them generally, the history does declare. What great glory the Lord
won to himself by saving Daniel (not from the den) but from the lions teeth
in the den: and the three children (not from the furnace) but the very fire
in the furnace; it appears, in that the very heathen Kings themselves made
public edicts, that no God, but Daniels, and no God but Sadrachs, etc. should
be worshipped through all their dominions, because no God could deliver their
worshippers as he had done. Thirdly, the Lord when the Church had sought her
beloved in her bed, in the streets, among the watchmen, and found him not, at
last, after much seeking and sorrowing after him, she finds him whom her
soul loved: then she took hold on him, and would not let him go, till she
had brought him to the house of her mother.

Use. 1. Tedious and heavy afflictions may not be an argument of Gods hatred.
It is a simple opinion of simple people, that God loves not that man, who is
exercised with any strange cross, especially if it be more lasting and
lingering upon him. Why do thou not consider, ignorant man, Lingering
afflictions no sign of Gods hatred.
that the Lord suffered his own well-beloved son to lie in the grave till the
third day, before he raised him up? what say thou to the Israelites in
Egypt, did they cease to be the people of God, or to be dear to God, when the
heauiest taskes were laid upon them? Whose blood was it that Manasseh, made the
streets of Jerusalem run with, but the Saints? In the persecutions of the
Primitive Church, we read of thirty thousand of the dear Saints of God put to
death in seventeen days under the tyrant Maximinian, and as many cheined
under mettalls and mines. Who was it that asked if the Lord would absent
himself for ever, and whether his mercy was clean gone for evermore? was not
this the voice of David, a man after Gods own heart? would thou hear the
style of Gods children in the Scriptures? thou hear them called worms of
Jacob, Isa. 41.14.
dead men of Israel. Would thou know their state? neither is that
unanswerable to that style: read Heb. 11. from verse 35. to the 39. they
wandered in sheep skins and goat skins; and they (of whom the world was not
worthy) were banished the world, as unworthy to live in it. Impossible
therefore it is, as Solomon teaches, to know love or hatred by any thing
before a man. Eccles. 9.
A man may be a Dives and a devil, or little better: another may be a Lazarus,
and a Saint. Fat pastures, for most part, threaten slaughter, when lean ware
need nor fear the butcher.

2. In tedious and heavy afflictions, and graves of misery, prescribe not
unto God, neither the time, nor the manner of thy release; but leave all to
him, in whose hand, times and seasons, and means of deliverance are. We would
not by our good wills lie one day, no not one hour under affliction: our
spirits are as short as Iehorams was; what, shall I attend any longer upon the
Lord? is not this evil from him? And hence are all those murmerings and
complaints; Some crosses more smart and durable, why.
oh, never was any in such misery, or so long as I am. But the Lord knows
what he does, and whom he has in that so thou may renew thy repentance. 3.
It may be, thou have since given some great scandal to the Church, and so thy
correction abides, till

3. Hence we fetch out assured comfort, The Lord will seasonably remember his
children, at least the third day
that as God delivered his Son the third day, so will he also seasonably
deliver us. What if we seem to be dead in our graves, despised, neglected, and
forgotten one day, yea the second, yet the third day comes: Hos. 6.2. After
two days he will reviue us, and in the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight. This made Abraham hope above hope: In waiting I
waited, says David; that is, I continued waiting on God. Job after darkness
hoped for light. It may be the third day is not yet come. Thou art not yet come
to the mountain where God will provide: nor thou art not yet in that
extremity which is Gods opportunity. Isaak must not sit at home, but take a
journey of three days to be slain; he must not be sent back the first or
second day, but the third day (yet not before he be bound on the altar, and the
stroke of death a fetching) is he taken from off the wood. Is the Lord a
killing thee, yet trust in his mercy: God seems indeed not to know his own
children sometimes, but to be deaf at their prayers; to have broken the
bottell wherein he was wont to preserve their tears: 2. Cor. 6.9.
but he knows us well enough, says Paul, though we think our selves
unknown: and therefore we are sometimes, as dying, but yet we live: chastened,
but not killed; yea killed, but not overcome. He seems now to know none
better then the wicked: but the third day comes, and puts as great a
difference between them, Genesis 40.13.19.
as it did between Pharaohs baker and butler: the third day shall lift up the
head of the one, and restore him to his office; but the same third day shall
take the head from the other, and shall hang the body on a tree for the birds
to eat the flesh from it.

And caused that he was showed openly. 41. Not to all the people, but unto the
witnesses chosen before of God: even to us which did eat and drink with him,
after he arose from the dead. Now we come to the manifestation of Christ his
resurrection. Which is described, first, by the persons to whom he was so
manifested: set down, 1. negatiuely, not to all the people: 2. affirmatively,
but to us who were chosen of God to be witnesses. Secondly, by the facts of
Christ toward these witnesses: which are two, the former in this verse, in
that he admitted them to eat and drink with him after he arose from the
dead: the latter in the next verse, in that he sent out his Disciples with
commandment to preach unto the people: and especially to acquaint them with
the Article of faith concerning his coming again to judge the quick and the
dead. In which two actions, namely, of sending out his Disciples, and judging
of the world, his Kingly office does notably put forth it self.

And caused that he was showed openly.] 1. It behooves Christ to make open
show, and manifest knowledge of his resurrection: It was necessary that Christ
should manifest his resurrection* for these reasons.
1. Because confirmed: and therefore he would for the space of forty days,
Act. 1.3.
by many bodily appearances to many credible persons at once; and by many other
infallible tokens make it evident, that the same body which was crucified,
having the same hands, feet, and side which were pierced, and wherein the
prints yet remained; even the same finite and circumscribed body, which was to
be seen and handled, and no other, was now raised from the grave, and loosed
from all the bands of death.

the things which appertained to the kingdom of God: namly, in all the
doctrine they were to teach, and all the ordinances they were to observe, in
the external government of the Christian Churches unto the end of the world:
and therefore the Evangelist shows us, how Christ begun at Moses, and all
the Prophets, and opened unto them in all the Scriptures, the things that were
written of him: and not only the Scriptures, Luke 24.27.32
but their eyes, and their hearts to understand and be warmed and affested with
the same. power was given him in heaven Matthew. 18.19
3. He was to confirm this their extraordinary ministry, by an
extraordinary Sacrament, namely, breathing upon them, and giving them the holy
Ghost, that is, Ioh. 20 2^.
some smaller measure of gifts as a pledge for the time; but directing them
also when and where to expect the plentiful pouring out of the spirit upon
them after his departure* as it was most miraculously performed in the day of
Pentecost, Act 1.4.
after they had a while waited at Jerusalem for the promise of the Father. 4.
He was by Ioh. 21.7.1^.
whereby they knew that he was the Lord. 5. In that also he was (according
Luke 24.33. cum 51.
so to show himself the Son of God, and our high priest lifted up higher
then the heavens; to open heaven for us, and carry our flesh before hand
thither, where in the mean time be makes requests for us: it was meet in the
presence of all the eleven; and they all beholding that he should openly and
according to his body be visibly and locally taken up, Act. 1.9.
as the Angels witnessed, Act. 1.11.

Now though in these and other regards, it was meet he should show himself
openly, yet would he not so openly show himself as to all the people, but
only to such as his wisdom thought sit to behold him. Quest. But why did not
Christ after his resurrection, ride in an open triumph before all the people?
In all reason it would have made much to the confusion of his enemies, and the
comfort of his friends. It could not have bin but if he had risen in the sight
of the soldiers, and had gone into Jerusalem among the Scribes and Pharisees,
into the Temple among the Doctors, into Pilats palace; they would all have
been stricken down, and confounded in the remembrance of their so cruel and
wicked a fact, if they had been so plainly and sensibly convinced of it.
Answ. We may not suffer our folly to prescribe to the wisdom of God, Christ
must not show himself so openly as to all the people after his resurrection
Why.
whose ways are not our ways. The foolishness of God, is wiser then men; and
the weakness of God, is stronger then men. And there be sundry just reasons
why Christ neither would, nor did so openly show himself. For,

Neither comes his kingdom with outward pomp and observation, Luke 17.21.
as humane kingdoms do; his triumph is correspondent to his conquest; both of
them spiritual and inward, not discernable but to the eye of the soul.

2. The time was now come wherein Christ longer according to the flesh: the
world that had so known him before, ^. Cor. 5.16.
must know him so no more; but only by dispensation for the time, that such as
were to witness of him, might take the better notice of him.

3. The wicked had made themselves unworthy to see him any more: and this was a
part of the

4. As for the godly, the Lord would not have

5. If Christ had openly appeared to all the have gathered them as an hen her
chickens under her wing, Matthew 23.39.
but they would not; they should not thenceforth see him till they could say,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. As if he had said, from
henceforth, namely, after you have crucified me, ye shall not see me till
the end of the world, when I shall come again; which coming some few of you,
namely, that are elect, shall gratulate unto me, and say, blessed is he which
comes in the name of the Lord. And perhaps (as some interpret it) all you
who now reject me, as a vile person; will then, but too late, and to no profit
of your own, either by force, or in imitation of the godly, acknowledge me
the blessed that comes in the name of the Lord: and to this also makes that,
Math. 26.64. where giving a reason of his confession to Pilat, that he was the
Christ the Son of God; he tells them, that they shall hereafter see the
Son of man; but not before he be sitting at the right hand of the power of
God, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

6. It appears that many more of the Jews their sins, many thousands were
converted at some one sermons and how many were daitly added unto the Church,
whose faith was far more sound in that they attained the blessing which
Christ pronounced upon those that believed, and yet had not seen.

All which teaches us, that in matter of divinity, we must always subscribe
to Gods wisdom* shutting up our own eyes. If we have a word to believe any
thing, or to do any thing, although our reason be utterly against it, though
custom, though example, yet must we follow our direction, esteeming the word
as our pillar of the cloud by day, and our pillar of fire by night, to guide
all our motions, while we are wandering in the wilderness of this world; and
even till we attain the rest which is prepared for the people of God.

But unto the witnesses chosen before of God,] We read of many and sundry
sorts of witnesses of Christ his resurrection, Sundry sort^ of witnesses of
Christ his resurrection.
and therefore it is worth inquiry, which of them are here to be understood.

1. There was a divine witness of the Angels, Luke 24.6. Why seek ye the
living among the dead? he is not Secondly, there was a real witness of the
Saints that rose again with him, and of the soldiers, Matthew. 28.11. They came
into the city, and told all things that were done: whose first report was a
maine proof of the truth of the thing, howsoever after they were hired to
turn their tongues. Fourthly, there was the witness private or public. The
private witness was of many private Christians, not only men, but women also
who followed Christ, who also were by Christ vouchsafed to be the first
preachers of it even unto the Apostles themselves; as we read of Marie
Magdalen, Marie the mother of Ioses, Salome, Ioanna, and diverse others. Such
was the tes^^monie of the two disciples who went between Jerusalem and Emaus,
Luke 24.
to whom Christ made himself known the very day of his resurrection, and yet
were no Apostles. Thus were many other private Christians undoubted witnesses
of the resurrection, who no doubt saw and heard him in many of his apparitions
as well as the Apostles themselves; in so much as Paul says, that he was
seen of more then five hundredth brethren at once. 1. Cor. 15.6.
But the text is not meant of any of these sorts, but restrains it self to
the public witnesses, even the twelve Apostles; (...)
who were to carry the tidings of this with the other Articles of Christian
faith, throughout the whole world. For, 1. these witnesses are said to be
chosen of God, What these chosen witnesses were.
which word is borrowed from the elections of men, who were set apart to their
several offices by la^ing on of men's hands upon them: even so God laid his
hands on these, that is, Christ immediately by his own voice called these to
be witnesses unto him, which was one of the privileges of the Apostles. 2. The
Apostle in the words expresses himself, by limiting them to themselves; to
us, namely, Apostles, who eat and drunk with him: not only who before his
death lived as it were at bed and board with him, but after he rose from the
dead, that we might not be deceived in our witness of him. 3. To us, whom he
commanded to preach and testify (namely, to the whole world) these things,
together with his coming again to judgment.

Now for the further clearing of this public witness of the Apostles, we
will consider three things: 1. That these twelve were appointed by Christ
himself to this witness; which the Apostle Peter plainly concludes, Act.
1.22. where speaking of one to be elected into Judas his room, he says, he
must be chosen of one of them which have companied with us all the time that
the Lord Jesus was conversant among us, beginning at the baptism of John unto
the day that he was taken up: implying, that whosoever was not thus qualified,
he was not fit to be made such a public witness with them of his
resurrection: because to the making of an Apostle, was necessary either an
ordinary converse with Christ upon earth, or else an extraordinary sight of
him in heaven: by which latter, Paul, who made an honorable access to that
number, proved himself an Apostle.

By what means the Apostles were furnished to their witness.
1. by their senses, they ate and drunk with him, that is, were in a familiar
sort conversant with him after he rose again. 2. by word of mouth, he gave
them as my father sent me, so I send you. 4. by adding thereunto Act. 4.33.
great power to give witness of the resurrection of Christ.

or gave testimony to Christ. Answ. Because they were to be authentical and
faithful witnesses to all the world; and that both in the age wherein they
lived, as also in all the succeeding ages to the end of the world: therefore
was it necessary that they should give witness two ways. 1. By zealous and
painful preaching by voice while they lived. 2. Even after their death, by the
holy doctrine left behind them in their works and writings: and thus do they
still remain public witnesses to us, on whom the ends of the world are come.

Doctr. Hence observe, that the office of the Apostles was to give testimony
unto Christ after a peculiar manner: Act. 1.8. When the holy Ghost shall come
upon you, ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria,
and to the uttermost parts of the earth. The Apostle* were to be peculiar
witnesses to Christ, and why.
I say they were to be witnesses after a peculiar manner, for these reasons. 1.
To distinguish their witness from ours, who are ordinary Ministers: for every
Minister is called of God to give witness to Christ: but properly to That
which we have heard, and seen, and our hands have handled, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
that we testify unto you. 2. They were all faithful witnesses and faithful
men; endued with faith, and full belief of the things they wrote and
testified; as all ordinary Ministers are not. Whence the Evangelist John
professes of them all, that they knew the testimony to be true. Ioh. 21.24.
True for the matter: for they delivered the whole counsel of God, and kept
nothing back that was fit to be known; and true for the manner, 2. Pet. 1.21.
they all speaking as they were moved by the spirit of God: and therefore
exempted from all error in their witness* as we are not. 3. with their eyes
saw his Maisstie: verse. 16.
who did not at any time deliver any thing, which they either heard not of
Christ, or saw him not doing, or suffering: but all other ordinary Ministers
are so far to be believed, as they consent with these; and so far as they
testify no other thing then what these oculate witnesses have left in writing.

Object. But Christ needs not the witness of any man, he has a greater
witness then John, or then any Apostle: therefore there is no use of the
Apostles witness. Answ. Christ has indeed three greater witnesses then the
witness of all his Apostles, Ioh. 8.18. and 5.39. and 5.36.
namely, 1. His Father that sent him, bears witness of him. 2. The
Scriptures, if they be searched, testify of him. 3. His works that he did
bear witness of him: but yet howsoever in regard of himself, he need no
other testimony of man, that we might believe and be saved; he uses the
witness of men, of John, and the Apostles: and of this divine testimony in
the mouth of the Apostles may be said as Christ did of the voice from heaven,
Ioh. 12.30. This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.

Use. 1. From this doctrine we learn, In divine things we must lean upon a
sure word.
how necessary a thing it is in causes of faith, to lean upon true and
certain things, and not upon tottring traditions, or unwritten verities, which
are the maine pillars of Popish doctrine. Oh how good has our God been to
this Church and Land of ours, in giving us a surer word of the Prophets, and
Apostles, to become a light unto us in a dark place; and a sure ground whereon
we may build the truth, and certainty of our faith, and religion; that we need
not be carried about with every wind of corrupt doctrine? These witnesses
being sensible, faithful, and so extraordinarily assisted, neither would nor
could deceive us: yea, and writing in such a time, and the same age in which
the things were done; if they had written any false or corrupted thing; all
that lived at that time could easily have confuted them. And therefore as Moses
when he had written the book of the law, Exodus 24.7.
called all the people to be a witness of the truth of it: even so the
Apostles writing the books of the Gospel and finishing them, appealed to the
men of that age for the truth of them: as John the last of them all in the last
end of his book says, we know, that is, all this age knows, that this
witness is true.

2. This Doctrine gives us direction, how to carry our selves to the present
Ministry; for some man may say, as the devil once did, Paul I know, and Cephas
I know, but who are you? Surely even we are sent by Christ as well as the
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Pastors, some Teachers. Where it is evident, that he that gives the Apostle,
gives the Pastor also. Ordinary Ministers must be received, as Apostles,
while they teach things heard or seen by the Apostles.
We being then called by Christ to teach this doctrine in the Church,
whatsoever our own unworthiness be, yet to contemn us shall be the contempt
of Christ himself: yet we being men subject to error (as they were not) must
hold us to our rule, which is Apostolical doctrine: for as the Apostles have
faithfully performed their parts, so our part and duty is faithfully to depend
upon them: and then not to depend upon, or depart from us is to depart from
Christ and his ordinance. We that are teachers reserve to every Christian his
privilege, which is not to receive every thing from us hand over head, nor any
thing at all on our bare words, but to try our spirits, to search the
Scriptures (as the Bereans.) They have or ought to have their Bibles, we wish
them to look and enquire there whether our doctrine be true or no: and by this
note shall they know it what it is, according as we shall be able to show the
Apostles the ear or eie-witnesses of it: for else are they not bound to believe
it. Let any man come with a coniecturall, or probable truth, or any
traditionarie doctrine, and cannot show which of the Apostles heard or saw it
in Christ, no man is bound to believe it as necessary to his salvation. But if
any come, and can back his doctrine thus from the Apostles, it is all one as
if the Apostles did utter it. Let every Minister, if he would be believed,
tread in the steps of the holy Apostles; and see he be able to clear, that all
he speaks be spoken in their language, be seen with their eyes, or heard
with their ears: which he is sure so to be, if it be contained in their
writings. Hereof the Evangelist John gives a notable president, The word,
says he, was made flesh: Ioh. 1.14
here was a great mystery, and a maine principle of salvation: but how knows
he it, is he sure of it? yea that he is: and therefore adds, we saw the
glory of it. Again, it were to be wished, that hearers would take up their
duty, which is, in reverent manner to come to their teachers in things
doubtfully delivered, and ask the question; I beseech you tell me which of the
Apostles heard, or saw this from Christ which you have taught us, that I may
believe it? for they delivered nothing else. To which rule would Ministers and
people frame themselves, it would bring the Scriptures into request, which for
most part, are least set by in many sermons; it would make men more careful of
their doctrine, and thrust out an infinite deal of trash, and foolish conceits
of froathie brains: which make it a chief part of their ^eputation, to see
with any eyes save the Apostles, and speak with any tongues save theirs: by
which means it comes to pass, that Gods own voice is least heard in Gods
house, in Gods business, and among Gods people.

The Lord Jesus chose mean and weak men for his witnesses. Why.
3. Hence note also, what mean and weak men did the Lord choose to be his
witnesses to all the world; not great Rabbyes, not rich, not worldly wise: (who
are not so expedite and ready, neither to preach, nor receive the Gospel) but
poor, simple, and mean men. For these reasons, 1. that Christ, in that he
chooses illiterate and unlearned persons, and presently makes them wise,
learned, and intelligent, able by the wisdom of God, to put to silence the
most learned and exercised adversaries they can meet withal. Earthly Kings
and Princes, not being able to give such gif^s, are forced to advance such as
are wise and experienced already; and set over their business the wisest, most
learned, and most noble that they can find: Christ need choose none such, but
honors himself in choosing foolish and ignoble things, to make them wise
and noble, and every way fitted to his work. Again, herein he honors also
his instruments, who being in themselves mean and contemptible, yet upon
their calling received such a portion of the spirit, as that they drove the
wisest and most learned into admiration: and daunted the greatest and most
powerful, when they saw that no power or glory of this world, could draw or
hinder them from the execution of that office, to which they were deputed.
Hence was it that the wise and mighty, seeing the freedom and wisdom of
Peter and John in speaking (knowing them to be unlearned men) they wondered,
Act. 4.
and knew they had been with Jesus: and seeing the man standing with them
which had been healed, they had nothing to say against them. How great glory
won Christ hereby to himself, and his servants? 4. By this choice kingdom
vpholdeth the truth of God, which is strong of it self, and well fenced by the
power and strength of God watching over; it and needs not the arm of man's
wisdom, or humane power to lea^e upon: but if it get simple and plain men to
carry it through the world, it disperseth it self as the light: twelve naked
and unlearned men shall be enough to overcome all the power and wisdom that
the world can make against it. But the kingdom of Antichrist, maintaining
nothing but fables and lies, needs all the colors that wit and learning can
devise, and all the power and tyranny in the world to maintain it: false
doctrine can never stand of it self, if it have not the two legs of humane
policy, and power to stand upon. And what other is it that for these many
years (especially since the light of the Gospel was by the mercy of God
restored to these parts of Europe) has vndershoared that tottering kingdom,
but a flourish of wise, learned, prudent, and holy Fathers: the profound
pollycies, equiuocating tricks, and acute sophistry of their Jesuits: the
cunning practices, powder plots, hellish attempts of their Priests and
Disciples, against Kings, and Kingdoms, whose power they cannot command: the
base insinuations and flattery on the one side, and false fears and
treachery on the other, whereby they hold fast unto them sundry other great
powers and kings of the earth; to which add the insatiable thirst of money,
and their base tricks to lay false fingers and purloine goods and lands, which
they heap and lay together as the sand of the sea, you may take a view of the
maine props of that kingdom. It must have the wit of men, the sword of
Princes, the strength of arms, the support of wealth, and every way a glorious
outward estate; else down must it needs fall like Dagon before the Arc.
Christ's kingdom has none of these, needs none of these, and yet it
propagateth it self, and prevails daily, and so shall do; whilst this
Antechristian kingdom being now in a consumption already, by the breath of
his mouth, shall be utterly abolished by the brightness of his coming.

4. In that the Apostles were chosen witnesses of God, it is a notable proof
of Christ his resurrection, which is the Apostles own use: for it Christ be
not risen, we are (says he) proved false witnesses: but that cannot be for
the former reasons, and therefore he is surely risen. The like deduction may
be used for the confirmation of any other Article of faith delivered by them,
wherein they are no less true witnesses, then in this of Christ's resurrection.

Who eat and drunk with him after he arose from the dead. Christ manifested
himself to be both God and man after his resurrection by 2* sorts of actions.
] In these words the Apostle Peter uses another argument of demonstratiue
force to prove Christ his resurrection, who both before his death and after
did manifest himself to be both God and man, by two sorts of actions. 1. Such
as were cum 13. but with the two disciples with whom he joined himself going
to Emaus, Luke 24.30. and with all the eleven gathered together, Luke 24.33.
cum 43.

Quest. How could Christ eat and drink, seeing he was not raised to a
natural life which he lived before, and we now live: but to a spiritual life,
which cannot be nourished by corporal means, no more then our bodies shall be
after the general resurrection.

Cib^s hic ad humanae naturae indicium, non ad corporis gloriosi ^^lorum
perti^ui^: and con^estio potestatis fuit ^ora non ne^cessitatis. Til^^^s.
Answ. Christ did not eat seemingly, or in appearance, as one deluding them;
but as before, truly both eat and drunk: for else this could be no infallible
proof of his resurrection unto them, as our Savior intended it should be.
For when the Disciples had seen his hands and feet, wondered at the matter, and
yet believed not for joy: Luke 24.41.
for their further confirmation he called for some meat, and having a piece of
broyled fish, and an honeycombe given him, he took it and did eat before
them. 2. Although Christ eat and drunk truly and indeed, yet was it not
necessary, as before, Considerations of Christ's eating and drinking after his
resurrection.
for the nourishment of his body; which now living a spiritual life, took no
nourishment from it. And as he needed not to eat, so that which he did eat,
went not through his bodies as it did before, or as ours now does. It will be
asked first, what became of it; and secondly, whether that can be true eating,
where can be no nourishment. To the form^^ I answer, that himself, when, and
as it pleased himself, dissolved the substance of it into his first
principles, or into nothing after he had truly eat it. To the latter, that
every man has experience that he can truly eat many things which never nourish
him: and so will avoid further curiosity and inquisition into questions so
needless. But it will be more materially objected, that this eating and
drinking does not necessarily and infallibly prove the point of Christ his
resurrection, seeing the Angels have eat and drunk, and yet were no men. Answ.
As for the Angels which eat and drunk with Abraham, Lot, and others, the
truth is, that (whatsoever some speak to the contrary) they did truly eat as
well as they truly walked, spoke, and indeed had their feet washed: all which,
though they proved them not to be true men, yet proved them to have had true
bodies, which were assumed for the time of their message, and again dissolved
into their first nature, as also was the meat which they did eat: even so our
Savior Christ is proved hereby after he was dead, to have a true, living
organicall body, which is a sufficient proof of his resurrection, and
confirmation of our faith in that Article; especially seeing that it was the
self same body that was laid in the grave, the testimony of the Angels, the
emptiness of the grave, the prints of the nails and spear, with many other
evidences sufficiently confirm.

1. Note hence, in that our Lord Jesus, would not only appear once, but very
often, and not only that, To believe the res^rrection is an hard point.
but eat and drink sundry times, and this also in the presence of many
authentical witnesses; what an hard thing it is to believe the resurrection
from the dead: yea, if we should hear it preached from the blessed mouth of
the Son of God himself. The Disciples of Christ had often heard him,
teaching them particularly of his resurrection the third day; they had seen
him accordingly risen; yea they had handled him with their hands: yet unless
he condescend to admit them as familiarly to eat and drink with him as
before, they scarcely believe: neither can we think the Disciples slower of
heart to believe then our selves are, who are ready to say in any thing that
our eyes see not, with Marie, How can this be? But that neither they nor we
should sink down in this weakness, he has pleased to condescend to our
infirmity, to remove all scruple from them and us, in this maine article of
our religion. His wisdom saw how necessary it was, that they who were to be
witnesses unto him, should be enabled with much persuasion, both by lively
voice, and by writing, to assure all other believers of the certainty of his
resurrection, til his return to judgment: and therefore to all the other
means of manifesting himself, he added this, to sit down among them to eat
and drink with them: not to feed himself by that meat, but their faith, and
in them the faith of the whole Church. For what is it that more confirms and
strengthens our faith, then the boldness and liberty of the Apostles, both
in their sermons and writings? and whence is this but from their own full
persuasion of the truth, which makes them bold? and whence is this persuasion,
but from certain sense and undoubted knowledge, arising from their familiar
converse with him after his resurrection?

Use. 1. To strengthen this our weak faith by this consideration, conceive
with thy self that Christ eat and drunk with his disciples, that thy faith
might be nourished as well as others: and in that they saw him, heard him,
handled him, eat and drunk with him, and being faithful witnesses have
preached, and by writing avouched the same to all the world; thy faith must be
as fully assured, as if thine own eyes had seen him, thine own hands handled
him, and thy self had sit with him at the table while he eat and drunk among
them: yea so often as thou hear, or read, or think of any of these
things; so often must thou be renewing and adding something to thy faith in
this behalf; as every new apparition or manifestation of Christ, added
something to the faith of his Apostles.

2. In that our Lord after he was gloriously raised from the dead, would still
for those forty days depart from his glory, abasing himself to converse with
sinful men; yea to eat and drink corruptible creatures; of which his
incorruptible body had no need: and would still humble himself to condescend
to the weakness of his Church: we are to learn the same lesson toward our
brethren, to be of a yielding disposition, ready to depart with some of our
right for their good and edification; and carry our selves as weak to the
weak, and become all things to all men, to save some.

Verse. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
he is ordained of God a Judge of quick and dead. A third argument to prove
that Christ is raised from the dead, and so is indeed the true Messiah, and
Lord of his Church is, that he gave commission and commandment to his Apostles
to become Preachers and witnesses, as of other points, so especially of this;
that howsoever he was adjudged to death according to that judgment executed,
and laid as one foiled by death for the space of three days, yet he is now
gloriously raised again, and appointed of God the Judge of all that ever have
lived, do, or shall live to the end of the world.

In the verse we have three things to be handled. 1. that preaching is a
reverent and necessary ordinance of Christ himself, And he commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify. 2. The object of this ordinance, or
what we must preach, namely Christ, that he is, etc. 3. What particular
doctrine concerning Christ must more especially be preached, that he is
ordained of God a judge of quick and dead.

In the first of these, are two branches to be cleared. 1. That preaching is
the ordinance of Christ. 2. The necessity, which will easily be deduced from
the former. That Christ instituted this holy ordinance, is plain, Matthew.
28.19. Go preach to all nations, baptising them, etc. the which commission,
that it was extended beyond their persons, to such as should in after ages
succeed them, appears by his last words, and behold, I am with you to the end
of the world. Preaching the ordinance of Christ.
And that the ordinary teachers are no less the gift of Christ then the
Apostles themselves, is as plain, Ephesians. 4.11. he therefore gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers.
Neither must this trouble us, that both in this place alleged, as also in
some other it is attributed to the Father, to send and give Pastors according
to his own heart: and sometime to the holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. Ier. 3.15. and
25.4.
Take heed to your selves, and the flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers: 1. Cor. 12.11. and all these things works even the self same
spirit, distributing to every man severally even as he will For, 1. all these
external works are common to all the three persons: and where any one of them
are named in any action done without themselves, no one of them is excluded,
but all the three must be included. 2. The divinity of Christ is not obscurely
proved, in that the same glorious actions of the Father, and the holy Ghost,
are ascribed also unto him, as from heaven whither he ascended to give several
gifts for the work of the ministry. 3. That we might better instruct our
selves, in their several order and manner of working the self same action:
for the Father is the fountain, and the first author of all these gifts; the
Son properly is the distributer and giver: for the Father works all in us
by the Son, and both of them by the communication of the blessed spirit: even
as the sun by his beams sends light, and heat unto the inferior creatures.

Object. But this ordinance of preaching, seems not to be Christ's, because it
was long before his incarnation; and now remains after his ascension, when
he cannot call men as he called the Apostles while he was on earth. Answ. The
Ministry of the Gospel, in the proper acception of it, has two things to be
considered. First, the being of it: Secondly, the virtue and efficacy of it.
The being of it (as it was the Ministry of the new Testament, wherein glad
tidings were published to all nations) was temporary; beginning in the time of
Christ, and shall have end with the world: yet can it be called no new
doctrine, because the sum and substance of it, was (though more obscurely)
delivered to Adam, and the Fathers of the old Testament. But if we consider the
virtue and efficacy of it, Reu. 14.6.
it is an eternal Gospel during from the beginning of the world to all
eternity. Now therefore will it not follow, that because it was before his
incarnation, it was not his; but rather therefore it was his, who was before
Abraham was, the chief Prophet of his Church, that raised, according to the
several ages of his Church, such men as were fit, either more obscurely, as
before his coming (when rather some Evangelicall promises of things to come
were preached then the Gospel it self, or else more manifestly to preach and
open the mysteries of the kingdom of God. And this latter kind of preaching,
was not before his incarnation; neither was it fully settled before he ascended
into heaven, and from thence gave gifts to men; that thereby he might show
himself a careful head and governor of his Church, even then when he was
set down at the right hand of his Father. It is true indeed that before
Christ's suffering, he called his Apostles, instructed and furnished them with
many gifts of the spirit; yea, and these gifts were increased very much after
his resurrection, whereby they were more confirmed in their Apostleship; and
although they did before Christ's death, exercise the office of Apostleship in
Judea amongst the lost sheep of the house of Israel, yet had they not received
that fullness of the spirit, and power from above, which was necessary to
Apostles, before they had received in visible form of fiery tongues, the
spirit in abundant measure: whereby they were before all the people of the
world, after a sort, solemnly inaugurated, and confirmed to be the Apostles of
Jesus Christ: neither had they, till after Christ's resurrection, received this
commandment (of which our Apostle speaks) To preach to all nations, and to
every creature under heaven: the practice of which commandment they took up
after that (they having stayed at Jerusalem for the promise) the spirit came
upon them, Luke 24.49.
and they were endued with power from on high.

As for the second branch of the objection, that because ordinary Pastors and
teachers are not immediately called by Christ, being now in heaven* therefore
they are not ordained by him, it is false: for of the Pastors and elders of
Ephesus is said, that the holy Ghost made them over seers: and Paul accounts
Apollos ordained by Christ as well as himself, 1. Cor. 3.5. What is Paul, and
who is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye believe? and, as the Lord gave to
every man? only the difference must be observed in their calling; both are
called of Christ, but the Apostle by himself immediately, not by men: the
ordinary Pastor called of him by the Ministry of man. I call it a Ministry,
because the whole power and authority of the Church in calling Ministers, is
but a service unto Christ; approouing, declaring, and testifying to the Church
those whom Christ has called. And therefore both before his incarnation a long
time, and after his ascension also, the exhortation which was enforced upon
believers turn in this tenor, to day if ye hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Psalm. 95.7. Hebr. 3.7.
Whence we conclude, that his voice has over sounded in the Church, and so
shall do in the ministry of his servants, Luke 10.16.
until his coming again to judgment: he that hears them, hears him;
he that receives them, receives him; he that refuses them, refuses him:
he by his servants entreats men to be reconciled; by them he binds and
loses, saves and destroieth.

Secondly, for the necessity of this ordinance, Necessity of preaching
evinced by four reasons.
can any deny it who sees the Son of God so careful before his death,
after his resurrection and ascension also into heaven, to furnish and fit with
an extraordinary measure of the spirit, Apostles and Apostolic men, for the
founding of the Church of the new Testament; and not only so, but now sitting
in his glory at the right hand of his Father, is mindful of his promise, and
is with his Church to raise up successively faithful Pastors and teachers,
gracing them with variety of excellent gifts; and blessing those gifts for the
building up, and repairing of his body, and the gathering of the Saints: of
whom, as of living stones, is reared a spiritual house or temple fit for his
own use. But because most men are willingly ignorant of this necessity of
preaching, I will a little enlarge it by some reasons.

1. Consider the condition of those that are unconverted, In regard of the
unconverted.
for how can they believe, except they hear? and the hammer of the Lord to
break asunder the hardest stones in men's hearts. Ier. 23.29.
Who were ever begotten to God, without this immortal seed, and these
spiritual Fathers? who ever became living stones in the building, without the
hewing and polishing of Gods builders? what harvest was ever brought into God,
without these laborers? what soul was ever pulled out of the kingdom of
darkness, and brought to be a member of Gods kingdom, but by this means?
The word in this ordinance is called the Gospel of the kingdom of God, that
is, whereby men attain both the parts of Gods kingdom: Mark. 1.14.
both that of grace here in this life, and that of glory in the life to come:
from which effects it is called, 1. the word of grace, Act. 20.32. 2. the
Gospel of glory, 1. Tim. 1.11. also the word of reconciliation, because
hereby sinners are reconciled to God: Ephesians. 1.13. and 6.15.
the word of life, because it quickneth the dead in sin: the Gospel of peace,
because it alone pacifieth the conscience, and setleth it in the peace of God:
to conclude, The good word, because it only reuealeth Christ, Heb. 6.5.
who procures all good unto believers. Who sees not then the necessity of
preaching, seeing none are added to the Church without it, Act. 2.41. no
spiritual life can be preserved without this feeding, Act. 20. no Saints are
gathered, nor no body of Christ built up without Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. And it pleased not God by any other means, but by the foolishness
of preaching, to save such as believe.

Secondly, if we consider those that are called to knowledge and faith, it will
appear also a most In regard of the converted.
1. seeing a man cannot safely and comfortably pass Church, that even
believers themselves by hearing the Scriptures daily explained, obscure places
opened by those which are clearer, and figurative speeches cleared by the
proper; might attain not only to a clearer understanding of the Scriptures,
but also to have them printed in their minds and memories, so as they might be
able to draw them into continual use. 2. Even the best have at, Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we all meet together in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the
son of God, unto a perfect man, implying, that the scope of the ministry,
is to bring and preserve all the members of the Church in this unity of faith
and knowledge; which in this world it cannot do, but so soon as it has done
this, it self shall cease, namely, in the life to come. He must needs be
wilfully blind, that espieth not very great necessity of the word preached,
for the strengthening of those joints and bands, whereby believers are knit both
unto the head, as also unto the members.

Thirdly, the necessity of this ordinance appears, From the opposition of
the de^^l, and wicked ones.
have ever resisted it above all other, as being the greatest enemy unto his
kingdom, which makes him fall down like lightening in the hearts of men.
Hence is it, that he stirs up Iannes and Iambres, and all the rabble of
Egypts inchanters against Moses; and sets all his power against him to
prove him a counterfeit. Hence is it that he will not want a Pashur to smite
Jeremy, nor an Amaziah to do as much to Amos. Hence raised he up many armies
against Paul; Elymas and Alexander, Hymeneus and Philetus, Diotrephes and
Demas, and from his mouth he casts out floods of reproachful and virulent
slanders against him; that he is a pestilent and seditious fellow; that he
speaks against the law, and against the Temple, away with such a fellow, it
is not fit that he should live. And has the devil grown any whit more calm,
or can he digest Paul's preaching better since Paul's time? no sure, he is no
changling, except because his time is shorter, his malice be stronger and more
raging; I wish Gods faithful ministers every where found it otherwise. But to
omit other proofs, observe generally the voice of the multitude. Where there
is no preacher, but some poor creature to serve, as they say, or starve them
rather; it is wonderful how well people think themselves with him: he shall
be commended and defended, for a very honest peaceable man, or for a very
good fellow, that will bear his neighbors company, they could not have a
better; and for all he cannot preach, a worse (they fear) will come when he is
gone. But whose voice is this? and is not the hand of the devil in all this?
Well, on the contrary, where there is by Gods mercy a painful and faithful
Minister, that preaches constantly and conscionably; how goes the cry and
common voice of people upon him: we have one that preaches indeed often, and
(perhaps) is a good scholar; but he is very unpeaceable, a reproouer of every
man, a spyfault, he has made such contention in our parish since he came, that
we wish he had never come amongst us; we were quiet enough, and held peace and
neighborhood before he came. And thus he is counted, as Jeremy, a man that
strives with the whole earth.

Fourthly, the necessity appears by common experience, if we compare the
people, who have had the Ministry planted amongst them, The same proved by
experience.
with those who have it not. In the one, what shall a man sooner meet with,
then woeful ignorance, Popish opinions, superstitious practices, heathnish
conversation? they live as men without God in the world: or, as if the old
Sodomites were alive again. But in the other, by Gods mercy some seal of the
Ministry you shall meet withal; some men of knowledge, of conscience, and
out of conscience performing duties in public, and in private; in the house
of God, and in their own houses; you shall hear godly and gracious speech in
their mouths, see good example in their lives, holy desires and endeauours to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. And whence is this
difference, but from the presence or absence of this ordinance, and Gods
blessing attending or departing from it?

Use. 1. The Ministers of Christ must urge upon themselves this self same
commandment, Ministers must urge themselves to diligence by this nec^ssitie.
to provoke themselves to diligence in preaching: for it lays necessity upon
them, and woe unto that Minister that preaches not the Gospel. A lamentable
thing is it to see how little either this commandment, or the denunciation of
this fearful woe prevails with many: but some are given up with Demas, to
embrace this present world; some give up themselves to idleness, and
voluptuousness of life; some to ambition, and further preferments; some to
policy, and state matters; and very few only to faithful and painful
preaching. Thus this commandment of Christ is generally forgotten, the sheep
and lambs of Christ unfed and forsaken, the kingdom of Christ vnbuilded and
vnrepaired, and the kingdom and power of sin generally stands in the state
of it unshaken in the hearts of men.

2. We see hence what little need we have of a dumb, or blind Ministry;
unless there be need of breaking so express a commandment of Jesus Christ,
who seals no man's commission, but to preach to his people. What need is there
of wells without water, No need of a dumb or blind Ministe^ie.
of mouths that speak not, of candlesticks without light, of stars without
shine, of salt without savor? Christ needed not to have ascended to send men
without gifts; he sends no messenger without a message, no steward without
his provision, no Captain without weapons, no watchman without eyes: this were
a folly which the wisdom and weakness of man cannot brook: but he sends
an interpreter, the learned tongue, the prompt Scribe in the law of the Lord;
such as are mighty in the Scriptures, and are stored with things new and old.
Let us not implead the wisdom of the Son of God, and say, where shall we
have such store of Preachers for our several parrishes? If we want them, the
salt is our own, and not Gods; who has given means, men, and maintenance
enough; if all these were wisely and thankfully disposed to his glory, and the
service of the Church.

3. This doctrine must be applied also to the more ignorant sort of men, who
never as yet came to see the absolute necessity of this ordinance of
preaching: as witness, Few men see ^his necessity of preaching.
1. their formal coming hereunto, as forced by law, or constrained by
custom: and thence departing again without any fruit of faith, or increase
either of knowledge, or obedience, or of comfort. 2. The inbred corruption, yea
and malice of their hearts against it; which bewrays it self in a number of
frivolous objections, which they shame not to bolt out among their mates. As,
that this preaching of the Gospel, is but foolishness: they see other have
lived honestly and well without it, before them, and so have themselves done
for many years: and yet they live as well as those that are the forwardest to
run after Sermons. Alas, poor souls, how has Satan ouerreached them in a
matter of such moment, as is their whole estate and freehold of heaven: who if
ever they come to see their lost estate, and what a woeful condition they stand
in for the present, they will tell us another tale, with shame in their faces,
for that they have said: they will profess the ministry of reconciliation,
to be as necessary as their atonement and freindship with God, which is
better and sweeter then life it self. Others conceive and complain, Many
plead against it.
as the Israelites, that there is too much preaching, and too much of this
Mannah: and some of better place, but no better hearts, avouch that it is so
common, that it grows into contempt. Now would I ask of these, was it the
abundance of Mannah, the Angels food, that was the fault, or their wicked
loathing of it? even so is it the commonnes of the word, that makes the wicked
contemn it, (for the hungry soul of the godly would never despise it, if it
were ten times more common) or rather because they see not the worth, nor taste
the swetnesse of it? despise we the sun because it rises daily and shines
all the day long upon us? or the air which we breath in every moment? or does
the ordinary and common use of the bread upon our tables, bring bread out of
request with us? No, we see the necessity that without the Sun, and without
our daily bread, and without the air we cannot live. And did we see also as
clearly that where vision fails, people perish: we should change with our
minds our note; and highly bless God for the commonnesse of it, as we do in
the other: and sure I am that either the Apostle Paul did not fear this
inconvenience, or else he ouersawe it, when he enjoined the Ministers to
preach instantly, both in season and out of season. Others say the world was
better when there was less preaching, and thence conclude, that it is far
worse now, because there is more: which though it be a rude fallacy scarce
worthy answer, as putting that to be a cause of men's wickedness which is not,
yet something must be said unto it; and fools must be answered in their
folly, least they be wise in their own conceit. Let these men bethink
themselves, and then tell us whether the holy Gospel (being the power and arm
of God to save every believer, the glad tidings of salvation and word of life)
can make the world worse then it is. For if that be the use of it, our blessed
Savior was far ouerseene to leave his glory of heaven, to take our flesh,
and in it to submit himself to the obedience of the whole law; and to the
suffering of the whole curse of it for our disobedience; if by all this he
leave the world, or make the world worse then he found it. How shall it be true
that is written of him, that the Son of man came not to destroy, but to seek
and save that which was lost, if the preaching of him make the world worse then
it was? we will easily grant that the Gospel, being a great light, it daily
discovers that corruption and darkness which before lay hid; as the sun
rising manifests all those things which were wrapped up in the darkness of
the night. But to say that sin is the more, because it is more seen by the
light of the Gospel, is a fancy: or if sin it self in these days of the
Gospel by the multiplication of people be multiplied; shall we say the gospel
is the cause, or rather the malice of men, who pervert it to their own
destruction, taking occasion by it to turn the grace of God into wantonness?
Let not us therefore look (as the old idolaters in Ieremies time) who told
him plainly, that they would not hear the word that he spoke in the name of
the Lord, for while they served the Queen of heaven, they had plenty of
victuals, and were well, and felt none evil: Ier. 44.17 18.
but since they left to burn incense unto her, it was never well with them,
they had scarsenesse of all things, and were consumed by the sword and by
famine: and therefore they were resolved to do as their Fathers did. But let
us with thankfulness cast our eyes upon the grace of God that has appeared,
and learn (as it teaches) to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Many other allegations of simple people against this ordinance I might
allege, but they are well met withal by some others; and my self have
elsewhere answered many of them, Beauties of Bethel.
and therefore referring the reader thither, I content my self with these few
for the present: and conclude this point with this exhortation to these poor
seduced people: that considering the strait charge and commandment that lies
upon us to preach in season, and out of season, they would be willing to pick
out their duty therein employed; which is to be diligent, yea swift to hear,
to attend as earnest suitors at the gates of wisdom, for their own good; to
lay up instruction as they would treasure gold, and to call after the wisdom
of God revealed in this ordinance, without which never was any made wise to
salvation. And let them further know, that (seeing God does not extraordinarily
save men, where the ordinary means are afforded or offered) the neglect of
this means is to despise great salvation; and to make themselves unworthy of
life eternal. And from the evidence of truth I avouch against every soul,
that turns his ear from hearing the word preached; that he despises the
pardon of the king of heaven, he rufuseth life and salvation offered; he
chooses death, and forsakes his own mercy: Ioh. 10.27.
he is no sheep of Christ, for then would be hear his voice; Ioh. 8.47.
and if he were borne of God, he would hear the words of God.

Secondly, the object of this ordinance, or what we must preach, and that is
Christ. Christ the matter of our preaching.
The scope of the whole Scripture is Christ, and it is wholly resolved into
him. The Law, that is a schoolmasters to Christ; for by convincing of sin,
and making the sinner exceeding sinful, it leads him forth of himself to
seek salvation in Christ. The Gospel preaches nothing but Christ and him
crucified for sin, 1. Cor. 2. We preach Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. Mark 1*1.
Hence is it called the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and the word of Christ, Colos.
3.
not only because it is from him being God, as an efficient cause, and
preached by him as the chief teacher of his Church; but also for the material
cause which is Christ. The Apostle Paul calls it the word of truth, not only
for the truth of it, but because it publishes that eternal truth Jesus
Christ: as also the word of the cross, not only because the cross ordinarily
attends the faithful preaching and profession of it, but because the matter
of it is Christ crucified. 1. Cor. 2.


Quest. What is it to preach Christ? Answ. It stands in two things. To preach
Christ wherein it stands
1. In plain manner to teach the doctrine of Christ, concerning his person,
truth is in Christ, is to apply every particular to the heart of a sinner, that
he may be framed to conversion and repentance; which is the most difficult
labor of the ministry, and most to be striuen in. Many teachers who can
choose hard texts, and make learned discourses, and show much dexterity of
wit, reading and humane literature, have not thus learned Christ themselves,
nor can after such a lively manner teach him to others. And pity it is to see
that whereas so great an Apostle as Paul, who wanted not Arts, tongues, and
humane learning, desired to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified among
the Corinths themselves: it should be the study of many men to show the
knowledge of any thing rather then of Christ; and how they may paint out
themselves rather then Christ in their preaching. Is not the end of preaching
to make Disciples of Christ? Matthew. 28. (...)
was it instituted to please the ear, or to prick and pearce the heart? Let
the minister therefore strive to ransacke the hearts of men with whom he is to
deal; that discovering their secret things they may fall down and say, God is
in him indeed. Let him think he has spoken the word of Christ; when he has
both taught him, and led his hearers unto him. And this will not be done but by
the plainness of words, and evidence of the spirit. It is thought a reproach
to preach a plain sermon; whereas indeed, that is the best sermon which
teaches Christ most plainly. 1. By true interpretation of Scripture. 2. By
wholesome sauorie and proper doctrine gathered thence. 3. By sound application
of that doctrine for the information of men's judgments, and reformation of
their lives: where Christ crucified is thus held out, there need no wooden
Images nor pictures, nor the real sacrifice of the abominable Mass, to put
men in mind of him.

2. Hearers may hence learn to judge of themselves, whether they have heard
aright or no. And then have you heard well, when you not only know that which
you did not before, but when you believe more, love more, hope more, and are
more changed then before. When you find our sermons as the glass wherein you
see and discern the true estate of your souls; when you are cast into the
form of this doctrine; when your lusts stoop and yield to this scepter of
Christ: without this no knowledge is saving; but all our preaching and your
hearing tends to damnation: if ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye
do them. Ioh. 13.17.


The third point is, what is the particular doctrine which the Apostles, The
Apostles commanded in special to teach the doctrine of the last judgment.
Reasons.
and we in them are so straightly enjoined to preach: and that is, the Article
of Christ's coming again to judge the quick and the dead. And surely it is not
without reason, that our Savior should wish them to insist in this the
remembrance of this judgment to come, is a notable means to quicken the godly
in their duty, to work in them a reverent fear, and shake out security,
which breeds hardness of heart* therefore did the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. 5.11.
considering the terrors of the Lord, provoke both himself and others unto
their duty: and no marvel, seeing the children of God, have even at the
consideration of more particular judgments, been stricken with the fear of
the Almighty. The Prophet Abacuk when he heard but of judgments to come,
says, that his belly trembled, his lips shook, Habac. 3.16.
and rottenness entered into his bones. And David, being a noble King, has
these words, Psalm. 119.120.
my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. A
special example whereof, we have in that famous Preacher of righteousness,
Noah, of whom it is recorded, Heb. 11.7.
that being warned by God of the flood to come an hundredth and twenty years
after, he was moved with a reverent fear of God to make the Arc. And as Noah
was by hearing of the waters, so the servants of God hearing of fire, wherewith
the world shall once again be destroyed, ought to be, and are moved with a
reverent fear of God, which is as a steel spur to provoke them to their
duty. 3. The Scriptures make never dreamed of the judgment, before it came,
and so perished in it; so men eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage,
till the day come upon them as a snare, and they taken as a bird in an evil
net. What was the cause that the evil servant sat him down with drunkards,
and rose up to beat his fellow servants, but because he said with himself, my
master will still defer his coming. In all which regards, neither the
Apostles, nor we the ordinary Ministers succeeding them, can want good reason
to stir up our selves and others, by the often and diligent propounding and
applying of this holy doctrine of Christ his coming again to judgment.

The verse contains two things: 1. Christ his appointment to this office,
that he is ordained of God. 2. the execution of it, a Judge of the quick and
dead. Touching the former, it will be asked, how God could ordain Christ a
Judge, Dan. 2.9. Ioh. 16.8. How Christ is ordained a Judge, seeing the Father,
and holy Ghost judge also.
seeing that both the Father and the Holy Ghost judge as well as he? An. In the
last judgment must be considered, 1. the decree of judging. 2. the authority,
or judiciary power. 3. the external and visible act, or execution of
Judgment. Now in regard of the two former, all the three blessed persons, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost concur, as having an equal decree of judging,
an equal authority and iudiciarie power, an equal dominion over all
creatures, and an equal consent in the judging of them. But in regard of the
third, the visible judicial act, Christ is the Judge and that according to
both his natures, the godhead, and manhood: and yet both of them herein
retaining their own properties. Thus is Christ ordained of God a Judge: and
thus is it said, that the Father judges no man, Ioh 5 2^. (...).
but has committed all judgment to the Son. Where by judgment, must be
meant the administration of judgment: for so the Evangelist expounds it in
the 27. verse of the same chapter, where he says, that the Father has given
him power to execute judgment. And by committing it unto the Son, (...).
not as opposing the second person in Trinity, to the first or third, or as
excluding the other two; but only appropriating it thus far, that by the
Son in a visible form, and according to his humanity, shall the last and
general judgment be exercised. For all that power of judging which is in God
by nature, shall be in Christ as man by grace of personal union, for the
execution of it

Now the wisdom of God thought fit in this manner, Administration of judgment
laid upon the Son for sundry reasons.
to lay the administration of the judgment upon the Son, for sundry reasons.
1. Because Christ having in his humanity accomplished the work of man's
redemption, and in it had bin he pleased to cover and veil his glory, which
now he will reveal and display above the shining of a world of Suns: Matthew.
25.31. when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then he shall sit upon the throne of his glory: Luke 21.27. Then shall
they see the Son of man come Secondly, he shall show his near affinity
unto man, in that he shall in his humanity be seen visibly discending in the
clouds, as he was seen visibly to ascend by a cloud: this was long since
prophesied, that every eye should see him: Act. 1.11.
and how meet is it, that the Judge of all should be seen of all. Thirdly, in
regard deliver up the kingdom unto his Father: not that he shall then cease to
be an everlasting king of glory, 1. Cor. 15.24.
but because he shall no longer exercise any temporary government, as now he
does. He shall not rule his kingdom by civil magistrates, nor his Church by
such officers and ministry as are now appointed under him for the gathering
of the Saints. It shall not stand in need of the means of edification by the
word, Sacraments, or censures; the Lamb himself shall be all these in the
midst of the throne of God. In both these regards, he shall deliver up his
kingdom; but he must first appear in a most glorious humanity to finish this
great business. For these reasons is this great work committed to the Son
immediately to execute.

Use. 1. Is Christ appointed the Judge? The comfort of Gods children that their
Savior shall be their Judge.
then may every godly man and woman comfort themselves, seeing their Savior
shall be their judge If a man's brother were to be his judge, he would not
fear but to get the day, and the cause to go with him: but he is the elder
brother of every believer: he bad the women go tell my brethren that I am
risen again: I know (says holy Job) that my Redeemer, or near kinsman,
lives: yea he is nearer then a brother, being the husband of every faithful
spouse. If the wife should have her loving husband, who loves her better then
his own life, to judge her cause, what need she fear but the matter will go
well with her? what need the members fear the head? Let us comfort our selves
with these words, and lift up our heads* because this day wherein our head
shall show forth both his own and our glory, who are his members, draws
near.

2. This doctrine serves also to daunt the wicked and ungodly: Here shall
judge the wicked against whom all their villainies have been committed.
They shall see him whom they have pierced: he is their judge against whom
all their villainies have been committed, whose servants they have villanously
entreated, whose kindness and peaceable conditions they have despised and
refused. What a fearful sentence awaiteth them when they shall come before
him? no mervaile if they call for the mountains to cover them, and the hills to
hide them, rather then they should appear before the presence of his glory,
whose wrath is as a consuming fire, and no stubble can stand before it. Oh
consider this ye that put far from you this great day of the Lord, speaking
peace to your selves, whilst every thing wageth war against you, in that you
still by living in your sins proclaim open war against the Son of God. Why
should you any longer abuse his patience? why will you treasure up wrath for
your selves against this day of wrath? why will you fit your selves as fuel
for the fire of that day, when the Lord Jesus shall come from heaven, in
flaming fire to render vengeance against all them which know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus? Well, if you will not be warned* but
you will go on in such impenitent courses; know it, that the party wronged by
your sins, is he who is appointed of God to be your judge: you will think it
will go hard with Pilar, seeing he is to be his judge who was judged by him to
death; and with Judas that betrayed him, and with the soldiers that put him to
death: but change the persons, the case is your own.

Secondly, in the execution of this office, two things must be considered: 1.
the persons upon whom, here said to be the quick and the dead. 2. the manner
of it.

First, by the phrase of quick and dead, is meant all mankind without
exception, of what age, condition, sex or quality soever they be, even all
that ever have received life from God, from the first man that ever lived upon
earth, to the last that shall be found living at the coming of Christ; even all
these shall be judged. And the dead are mentioned as well as the living;
because the carnal and unbelieving heart of man makes more question how those
who have been resolved into dust many thousand years ago, can be quickened
and raised to judgment, the^ those that shall be found alive at that day:
therefore is the Scripture very express in this particular, Rev. 20.12. I saw
the dead both great and small stand before God: 2. Cor. 5.10. We shall all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ. In like manner those speeches admit
no exception, which we every where meet withal: as, Every eye shall see him:
every man shall bear his own burden: every man shall give account of himself
unto God. Romans 14.12. The means whereby both quick and dead shall be gathered
to judgment.
And that we should not doubt of the certainty hereof, the Scripture
condiscendeth so far to our weakness, as to show us the means how this
great work shall be brought about. As, 1. by the mighty those that are in the
graves shall hear his voice. 2. By the ministry of the Angels, who shall all
(not one excepted) come with him, and they shall gather the elect from all
winds, and present and force the wicked to the bar, before the Judge of all
the earth; even then when they shall fly to the hills to cover them, if it were
possible, from his presence. 3. By the diligence of

Object. But how can the quick and dead be then presented to judgment,
seeing the godly shall not enter into judgment; and for the wicked they are
judged already: for he that believes not, is condemned already. Answ. First,
for the godly they shall not enter into the judgment of condemnation. 2. they
are by their particular judgment acquitted already, but they must also by the
general judgment receive in their bodies (which till that day are not
absolved) according as they have done in the flesh. 3. they must be solemnly
and publicly inaugurated and invested into the glory of their head; and their
blessed estate manifested to all the world both men and Angels, and even in the
eyes of the wicked themselves: therefore although they enjoy God already in
pa^^, and the beginnings of the life to come; and such as are dead in the grave
rest with the Lord, and enjoy his glory in their soul, yet are they not fully
happy, nor can be, till this day breath on them, and this their morning awake
them to their perfect glory. As for the wicked, although they are already
condemned: 1. in Gods counsel before all worlds. 2. by the word wherein their
sentence is read, Wicked al^^adie judged five ways.
declared, and published. 3. in their own consciences, the judgment of which
forerunneth the final

Use. Let every man make account of this judgment, high and low, rich and
poor, learned and unlearned: the mightiest Monarch shall not be able to
withdraw or absent himself, unless his power be above the power of Christ
the judge: the poorest soul that ever saw the Sun shall not be neglected:
the most rebellious of all creatures men or Angels must of force appear, No
man can avoid this judgment unless his power be above the power of the Judge.
and that not by a procter or advocate, but in his own person: for every man
must give accounts of himself unto God. None can be forgotten, no not through
the passing of thousands of years: Caine died many thousand years since,
Judas many hundreths; yet both must appear, the one for killing his innocent
brother, the other for betraying his innocent Master. No excuse will serve the
turn: the Friars plea, we are exempted Lord, will do no good here: no nor
that which all men's courts must needs excuse absence by, that the party is
dead: for this judgment seat is set up for the quick and the dead. God must
for his glory, truth and justice, bring every man to this tribunal; that if
he have been good and faithful, he may have his time of refreshing; and be
put into the perfect state of happiness in soul and body. And contrarily if
he have been hard hear^ed, and impenitent, he may know the weight of Gods
justice and power, and be in full state of endless and easelesse misery both
in soul and body. Oh then what great cause has every man to forecast this
day, and expecting it to prepare for it; rather then to betake themselves to
that Epicurean and profane practice of mockers, who put far from them this
evil day, saying, where is the promise of his coming? we see all things alike
since the beginning: he makes but small have. And thus because judgment is not
speedily executed, they resolve themselves on a most wicked course; not knowing
that as a snare it shall come upon the^ when they least look for it, and that
though slowly, yet he will come surely, and make the^ know what it is to abuse
his patience which should lead them to repentance.

Now follows the manner of this judgment, and that is comprehended in three
things. 1. it shall be glorious and powerful. 2. just and righteous. 3.
strict, and accurate. For the first, it is said that the Son of man shall
come with power and great glory, yea in the glory of the Father: The glory
of the last judgment described.
that is, such as belongs to his Father with himself, but to no creature
else. The clouds and the air shall be as a fiery chariot to carry him with
admirable swiftness: his train and attendants shall be the Archangel making
his way by the sound of a trumpet; which the v^rie dust and ashes shall hear,
and follow: and all the other Angels of heaven, from whose multitude, power,
and glory, this coming shall be wonderfully glorious; and yet the Judge
himself shall surpass them all in glory and brightness; and as the sin
does darken all the lesser stars, so shall his most admirable glory obscure
them all. This appearance may be shadowed by the coming in of earthly Judges
to hold assizes through their circuit, attended with the honorable, nobles,
justices, and gentelmen of the country; yea with the high Sheriffs power,
besides all their own followers* by which great state and attendance, they are
both honored, and aided, as becomes such public Ministers of justice; as
also are made formidable to daunt and quell malefactors. Or rather, look as
Princes going to their Parliament to make laws, put on their royal robes, and
show themselves in their greatest glory; even so shall this great King of
glory coming to require the obedience of his laws, cloth himself with such
a roabe of glory as the brightest sun shall not endure to behold: neither
the heavens nor the earth shall be able to see this glory, but shall shrink
at it, and melt away with a noise: Rev. 20.11. John saw a great white throne,
and one that sat upon it, from whose face fled a^way both the earth and heaven,
and their place was found no more. Thus may we in some dark resemblance
something conceive of this glory of the Judge of all the world; unto which the
consideration of the persons that shall be judged by him, adds not a little
moment: for not only small, but great must stand before him. It is indeed a
great honor among (...) to be deputed the Lord high Steward under a King,
whose office is to sit in judgment upon a noble man: what an height of glory
then is it for the Son of God, to sit in judgment, and call personally
before him, not nobles only, but all the Kings and Monarchs that ever the earth
bare? If there be such preparation, and state amongst men for the trial but of
some one noble man: what glory may we conceive must attend the mighty God,
whilst he brings to their trial not only (...) persons, but all the most
powerful Monarchs and Potentates that ever were, or shall be to the end of
the world.

This consideration ministers comfort to the godly, seeing he comes to
judgment, who is able perfectly to free them from all misery; able to strike
off their bolts of sin, to acquit them from terrors of conscience; fears of
death, the grave, the devil, and hell it self: he comes from heaven for
their release, who has trodden all his enemies under his feet^: and all this
glory is for their saftie and happiness, Tit. 2.13.
who wish and wa^te for the appearing of this mighty God. And on the
contrary, it serves to strike the wicked and ungodly with terror and dread,
seeing the Lord Jesus shall come from heaven in such power and majesty, and
all to judge and condemn them: whom when they shall see arraied with vengeance
against them, no marvel if they be driven to their wits ends: yea, as it is
with guilty malefactors, when they see the judge coming in so honorably
attended, so shall it be here; this very glory of Christ shall strike them
with fear, horror, and amazedness, and force them to all miserable, and
unauaileable shifts; and to wish, if it were possible, that the rocks would
fall upon them, and crush them to pieces, so as they might never come before
his presence: for the great day of the Lord, which is to all the wicked of the
world a black day, a cloudy day, a dismal day; this day is come, and they
cannot abide it.

Secondly, this judgment shall be righteous, and according to the truth: (...)
Romans 2.2. We know that the judgment of God is according to truth. The
righteousness of the Judge and judgment.
Heb. 1.8. Thy throne, O God, is for ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a
righteous scepter: Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity. Hitherto
is to be referred that of Daniel, 7.9. who says, that this judge shall sit
upon a great white throne; alluding to the white Ivorie throne of Solomon, but
infinitely more glorious: the whiteness be rekoning the purity and
righteousness both of the Judge, and the judgment: for every man shall
receive according to his works. Here shall be no conceilment of things: for he
will bring every secret into judgment, he will lighten all things that are
hid in darkness, Eccles. 12.1. Cor. ^5.
and make the counsels of the hearts manifest. Here shall be no daubing or
saluing up of bad matters in corners: no pleading of lawyers, who craftily
cloud the truth of causes for gain: no respect of persons, no favoring for
the sake of any friends, nor fear of foes, or any displeasure. Here shall be
no inducement by gifts, which blind men's eyes to pervert judgment: the purest
gold of Ophir shall guild no matters here: for what shall gold or silver,
pearls or Jewels do, when heaven and earth shall be on a light fire? Here
shall be no sanctuaries, nor privileged persons, or places, to hinder the
course of justice: hence shall be no appeals; but every person shall receive
an eternal sentence of every cause according to the truth and equity of it:
for else the Judge of all the world should not do right.

Use. 1. To comfort Gods children, who in this world are herein conformed unto
Christ; Gods children who here have all sentences pass against them, shall
have justice at this day.
for the most part, causes, and sentences pass against them, and their light
is darkened, their innocence by the might and malice of the wicked trodden
down: but then shall they be sure of the day, God will cause their uprightness
to break out as the sun in his strength: for when wickedness shall turn the
sinner into hell, righteousness shall deliver their souls from death.

2. To teach them to possess their souls in patience, when they see the
confusions that are in the world: to beware of revenge, but commit all (as
Christ himself did) to him that judges righteously. We must be content for a
while to see our righteous ways depraved, our good repaied with evil by evil
men: and be so far from thinking hence that there is no providence, or care
in God over his children, as that we must necessarily conclude hence this
judgment day. Observe the rule, Eccles. 3.16. When thou see in the place of
judgment wickedness, and iniquity in the place of justice, think in thy
heart; surely God will judge the just and the wicked: for there is a time for
every purpose, and work, and, Chap. 5.7. If in a country thou see
oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not
astonished at the matter: for he that is higher then the highest regards it.
The same ground do the Apostles often lay, to raise this same exhortation unto
patience in enduring wrongs: as, Philip. 4.5. Let your patient mind be known
unto all men: the Lord is at hand. Iam. 5.7. Be ye also patient, and settle
your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws near. As if these holy men
had said with one mouth; look not to have your right here in this world, as
neither the wicked have their hyre, but wait the appointed time, as the
husbandman does for the weeks of harvest: and this time is the coming of the
Lord, before which time neither is the full recompense of righteousness given
to the Saints, nor punishment rendered unto the wicked in the full measure of
it. Grow not weary of well doing, though ye meet with nothing but
discouragements; no^ out of love with the practice of piety, although the
world hate you for it, as it did your head before you; for in due season ye
shall reap, if ye faint not.

3. This teaches men carefully to look to all their works and ways, that
they be just and justifiable, The works and words of men which shall abide the
trial of that day, must now be tried before hand.
such as will hold water (as we say:) For there is a day of trial, when all
those causes which they have by money, friends, or wicked policy contrived and
ouerwaied in, shall be brought about again into a clear light, and put into
the balance of equity it self, where they shall be found too light. And
think seriously with your selves, how causes, words, and actions, will abide
the trial o^ that day, which even for the present, can bring no sound comfort
to the heart; but rather heaviness to the heart, accusation and guiltiness to
the conscience, fear in the thoughts, and shame in the face, if any man should
know how impiously, and injuriously they have been contrived: how many
oppressions, wrongs, cruelties, vsuries, reuengefull suits, only commensed to
make men spend their goods, and loose their peace; how much of many men's
estates would give a loud witness against their owners, but that men will not
so long before hand trouble themselves with such thoughts? Well, look to thy
self, whosoever thou art. If thy conscience now accuse (...), or can accuse
thee, but thou will either stifle it, or stop thine ears against the cry of
it; know that it has a voice, and will do good service to this judge one day;
a thousand witnesses cannot do more then it will do: it will bring back old
reckonings, which Christ has not reckoned for, and set them in order before
thee; when thou that can find none now, shall have leisure enough to look
into them, but all to the breaking of thy heart, and increase of thy torment,
that thou did not, till too late, look into thy reckonings. Now to all such
as mind hereafter to look into so maine a business as this is, The touchstone
of this trial is the word of God.
I will for the present commend only one rule, whereby they may discern
whether their actions will abide the trial that abides them, and that is
this; If the word of God do now approve them, they will then be justifiable;
but whatsoever word or action has passed from thee, for which thou cansts not
bring thy ground thence; the same will cast thee in judgment. This is that our
Savior tells the Jews, Ioh. 12 48.
the word that I speak shall judge you at the last day.

Thirdly, this judgment of Christ shall be most strict and accurate. 1. In
regard of the persons that shall be judged, who shall be enquired into and
brought to give accounts of themselves, The strictnes of the last judgment. 1
in regard of persons judged.
not only generally, as men or Christians; but in special, according to the
particular places, and courses of life wherein they were set in this world. For
example^ public persons must give account for themselves and others, that have
been committed unto them: magistrates for their people; ministers for their
flocks; both of them how they entered, how they ruled, how they walked in and
out before their people: what faithfulness they used in discovering, and
discountenancing sin and ungodliness; how diligent they have been to draw
and force men to the keeping of the two tables; how they have acquitted
themselves from communicating in other men's sins: and whether they have
faithfully in their places denounced, and executed the judgments of God,
whilst both of them have stood in the room of God. In like manner, private
men must be counteable, no^ only for themselves, but for all those that are
under their charge: as Fathers for the education of their children; masters for
the instructing and governing of their servants, and family; tutors for their
care or negligence toward such as are committed unto them: for the rule of the
Law is general, and will take fast hold upon many a soul, that think it
enough to look to themselves, that whosoever hinders not that sin which he
can hinder by good means, commits it. Be now thine own judge whether thou
have well looked to one, when thou have neglected to reform the disorders of
such as God has put under thy power. Thou have not a person in thy house, but
if it any way perish under thy hands, thou must give account of the life of it
to the parents of it, or to the Magistrate the parent of the country: in like
manner, there is not the meanest soul in thy family, but if it perish by thy
default, for want of instruction, correction, or wise government of it; thou
shall be called before the God of the spirits of all flesh, and shall be
arraigned and condemned for the blood of that soul. And this is not to bear
the burden of that soul, which bears the weight of it own sin, but to
bear thine own sin in not preventing that evil from him, which by thy
negligence came upon him.

Secondly, 2. in regard of things, 1. done. 2. received.
it shall be strict in regard of the things, either received of us, or done by
us. Account must be made what goods of our Masters we have received, both for
the kinds and measure. What number of talents were committed to our trust: If
one, or more, how we have laid them out; what we have gained, whether we have
faithfully returned this gain to our master, as having sought his advantage,
and not our own: how we have husbanded our opportunities, and redeemed our
times: how we have employed the gifts of our minds, understanding, judgment,
wisdom, learning, memory: how we have used or abused to sin, the strength,
health, and beauty of our bodies: how we have justly and charitably received
in, and retailed out, the matter of our maintenance and reuennew. And in all
these lesser things, if our unfaithfulness be found out, let us never look to
have greater matters committed unto us: for the things that are done by us,
they shall all be straightly judged, whether they are conformable to the law, the
rule of righteousness; or acceptable by the Gospel, the restorer of our
righteousness: Eccl. 12.14. God will bring every work into judgment, good or
evil, open or secret: for all things are naked before him, with whom we are
to deal: he planted the ear, and must needs hear; and formed the eye, and
therefore must needs see things secret, and covered with darkness. Hence is
he said to have books, and to open them, because all things are as certainly
recorded and registered by him, as if he had registers in heaven to keep roles
and records of all that ever were or shall be to the end. Yea, he has not
only his own books of judgment in heaven, but for more surenesse that
nothing escape him, he has millions of books of record in earth, that shall
all help forward his judgment, and give testimony to the righteousness of
it, so as every mouth shall be stopped at that day: and these are the books
of every man's particular conscience, which howsoever they be now shut, or as
roles folded up; yet shall they also then be opened and unfolded, to give
witness of whatsoever any man has spoken or done in the flesh, be it good or
evil.

3. This judgment shall be strict in regard of every man's words: Jude, 15. 3.
In regard of words.
In this judgment he shall rebuke all the ungodly of all the cruel
spea^kings which wicked sinners have spoken against him. For if of every idle
word we must give account to God, Matthew. 12.36.
much more of every wicked word. Every man thinks words are but wind, and
he may speak his mind, and he has done: but in this judgment by thy words
thou shall be justified, or by thy words thou shall be condemned: and though
thou when thou have spoken thy mind against thy brother have done, the Judge
has not done with thee.

4. It shall be strict in regard of every man's thoughts: 4. In regard of
thoughts to be judged.
for even these are not so free as men say they are, nor shall go scot free:
for even they are bound to the conformity of the law, as well as our words and
actions. The commandment is very express, Thou shall worship the Lord with
all thy heart, and all thy thought, and all thy strength: and when the Apostle
Paul would note the damnable estate of the Ephesians before they were called to
the faith; Ephesians. 2.3.
he sets it forth in this, that they then followed the will and counsel of
their own thoughts. Add hereunto, that the Lord Jesus is the seer, the
searcher, (...).
and judge of the heart, and therefore hereby shall the throne of his judgment
be advanced above all the tribunals in the world, in that the most secret
thoughts and reasonings of men's hearts cannot escape him, which the highest
seats of justice amongst men, can take no notice of at all.

Use. 1. Let this doctrine abate somewhat the pleasure of sin, which most men
swallow up so delightfully, Sin carried never so secretly shall come into a
clear light.
yea and glory in their iniquity, when they can carry it so close and clear
away, that men see it not, and can stop the cry of their ^eared conscience
for the present: but remember that God has written it up, and the time
hasteneth when that conscience of thine, now in a dead sleep, and seared up,
shall be awakened, and become as a thousand witnesses against thee; that if all
other accusers should fail, thy self should not fail to do that office
against they self; but shall be both a servant to Gods justice, as also the
subject of it. Be admonished then in time, whosoever thou art, to beware of all
secret sins, as close cousenage, lying, uncleanness, whisperings, and all
other cunningly contrived wickedness: seeing there is a clear light into
which they shall be brought, and by which they shall be reproved. True it is,
that open shame of the world restrains many one from committing open and
gross sins; but where conscience is wanting, the same sins, if they can
cleanly conueie them, are made no bones of. Hence is it that the adulterer
watches for the twilight, before he go into his neighbors house; he cares
not for his chastetie, so be he may charily, and cautelously compass his
uncleanness. If a child of four or five years old stood by, he would
forbear his sin; but the presence of the mighty God that stands at his
elbow, who sees and records his foul sin to bring it into judgment,
moves him never a whit. Would a fellon commit burglarie, if he thought the
judge himself looked upon him? would Gehezi have run after Naaman, if he
had thought his Masters eye and spirit had run after him? would Ananias have
lied to the Apostles, if he had thought they had known he did so? Even so it
is a shame to speak what is done of many Christians in secret; because their
eye is not upon the judge, whose eye is upon them, and who is framing a bill of
indictment against this day of general assise.

2. This consideration must move us to carfulness, both of our receipts, and
expenses, Be careful of thy receipts and expenses because thou fittest in
another man's to whom thou must be counteable.
whether they be gifts of mind, or of body, or of our outward estate. He
that spends, and wastes his own, need care the less, because none can call
him to reckoning why he does so? but he that sits in another man's, or has
a matter of trust in his hands, and cannot mispend but out of another man's
stock, had need look about him; because he is to be counteable, and must
make good whatsoever his reckoning comes short in. Ask thy self, What have
I which I have not received of my Master? How came I to be so rich? Is all the
wealth I have of my Masters gift, or have I gotten goods into my hands by
wronging, or iniuring some other men? Again, I remember I received at such and
such a time a great sum of my Masters money, he betrusted me with a great
portion; how have I laid it out, that I may give him up a just and comfortable
reckoning, to which I am sure to be called. Thus much I have spent upon suits
in law: Thus much upon my pleasures and sports; my dogs have ravend up a part
of my revennue; my hawks have flowen away with another end: cards and dice have
cost me no little: and a great deal is wasted by compassing my sin,
uncleanness, pride, revenge, gluttony, and the like. But O thou unfaithful
servant, that have thus wasted thy Masters goods; how much have thou given to
the poor? how much to good uses, to works of mercy, to a settled Ministry,
to help Joseph out of his affliction? oh no, here he can set down little or
nothing; the dogs are preferred before Lazerus by many a Dives, who if they
timely look not better to their reckonings, must make the foot of their
account to be this; no sooner to be dead then to be buried in hell, according
to the sentence, Take that unprofitable servant, bind him hand and foot, and
cast him into utter darkness, there shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth.

3. This strict account shows, No man can be too precise because the
judgment shall be thus precise.
that a man cannot be too strict, to precise, or too careful of his ways* Men
generally cast the reproach of purity upon men, that desire to approve their
hearts and lives unto God: and count them more nice then wise, and say, it were
hard if every one that were not so precise and curious, should be damned. But
what, does not the Scripture say plainly, that the Master is an hard man; that
is, a most just God that will straightly stand for justice? shall not every idle
word, every ungodly thought and motion, though not attended, nor assented
unto, come unto judgment? and if it must, is it more then needs for men to
look to the door of their lips; yea to keep out, if it were possible, every
vain, and wandering thought out of their minds? shall not he that breaks the
least commandment, be the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, have no
place at all there? shall not all omissions and faylings in duty be set upon
the heads of sinners, seeing the sentence shall run; In that ye did not these
things, depart from me ye cursed? or shall we think that the least
carelessness of men shall be justified in this judgment, or the ungodly be
taken by the hand? far be it from the judge of all the world, not to judge
with righteous judgment; howsoever loose persons wrap themselves in the woe of
those that call good evil, and evil good.

Now for the general use of this doctrine of the last judgment. To what other
end has the word so expressly discovered this holy doctrine, and enjoined us
to teach it in the Church, but that every man should lay it to heart, 1. Cor.
15.
and benefit himself by it? and therefore,

The godly may lift up their heads in expectation of this day of redemption.
First, the godly are to comfort themselves with these words, seeing they hear
of this day wherein they shall be gainers, receiving receive their sentence of
absolution: and therefore, 1. perfect redemption from all the danger of all
spiritual enmities: the first fruits whereof they have already attained: hence
is it called the day of their redemption. 2. Perfect security and saftie
against all the molestation of sin, death, the grave, the gates of hell,
temptation, and tribulation: for all these shall be cast into the lake. 3.
Perfect glory with the Saints, for they shall be from henceforth ever with the
Lord, and enjoy the sweet fruit of that prayer which the Son of God in the
days of his flesh requested, and was heard in: Father, I will that where I am
they may be also, that they may behold my glory. Ioh. 17.24.
Why should not we then lift up our heads in the expectation and ardent desire
of this day, which the very dumb creatures long for, Romans 8.19.

Secondly, let every man labor to fit and address himself unto this
judgment, Godly must adresse the^s^lues to this judgment two ways.
that he may be able to stand before the Son of man: And that by two things:
1. by making full account and reckoning of it: 2. by using the best means
aforehand to pass through it happily. The former is charged servant that
wayteth for his Masters coming, and has every thing in a readiness, and that
at all watches: and by that of Peter, 2.3.11. Seeing all these terrors of the
Lord; what manner of men ought we to be in all holy conversation? And for the
furthering of this care, two things must carefully be shunned, Two things
hinder this care.
which shut it quite out of the hearts of the most. The first is, security and
deadness of heart: which is a slumber of spirit, and that the Master will not
yet come; they shall not yet be called to their reckoning; there is time enough
behind to repent in: they crave but an hour on their death beds, and that they
hope they shall have. In the mean time they are eaten up with dissoluteness
and profanenes, casting away sobriety and watchfulness, so as their Master
comes unexpected, and in an hour they know not. How does it therefore stand
every man in hand, to awake from his sleep, and stand up from the dead? with
wise virgins to prepare and trim their lamps with oil before hand, and so
wait for the coming of the briedgrome: to take heed of every sin, thought,
word, and deed? to watch narrowely their own lives, to provoke themselves to
the best duties? What, is not sin a fearful thing, which made the Son of
God cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Is not the greatness of
them like the mountains, and the number of them like the sand of the
seashoare, which is numberless? Is it not a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, whose wrath and justice against the least sin, all
creatures in heaven and earth cannot stand under, but be oppressed and shaken
in pieces? Is not the night past, and the day come, the sun of righteousness
risen, so as if ever we mean to wake out of this deadly sleep, and walk as
the children of light, it is more then time? Would thou be taken lying, or
swearing, or gaming, or drinking, or railing, or breaking the Sabbath, or
stealing, or whooring; would thou have thy master find thee in any of these
practices and distempers? oh no, I mean to repent: But he comes suddenly
as a thief in the night; and this sudden coming, at least to thee in
particular, may cut off al thy purposes: for it is just with God, that they who
take not his time of repentance, shall never attain to their own. What will
now be the issue of thy delays? surely thou had better been a dog, or a
toad, or the vilest creature of all the creation, then a secure sinner
overtaken in thy wickedness.

The second thing that hinders this expectation suffer thy soul to be so
surcharged with earthlynes as to forget treasuring in heaven, making ready thy
account, and the finishing of thy reckoning: thou would not suffer the
thornie cares of this life to choke all the seed of thy salvation: neither
could it be that the ox, or farm should so still fill up thine eyes, as that
the supper of the King should be despised. But, in truth men live generally as
though there were no judgment to come, or as though they had stricken a
covenant with it to pass over them: for when we preach, and men hear or read
of the judgment to come, who trembles at it, as Faelix an heathen did, to
hear Paul dispute of it? When we teach that the judge is at the door, who
sees all the facts of men, and draws them into bills of remembrance, and of
them all is drawing a bill of indictment; who fears more, who sins less?
who is it that smites his thigh, or says, what have I done? who forsakes his
wilful ignorance, his contempt of the word, his abuse of Gods servants, his
blasphemies, his pride, uncleanness* unlawful games, or lawful unlawfully
used, his sabbath breaking, his swearing, his oppression, his usury, or the
like? We like Lot forwarne men of the evil to come; but men like Lots cousins
and kinsmen, entertain our words as a jest: we are as though we mocked; and so
they sit out the summons to their further danger: yea more then this, when the
Lord thrusts his fearful judgments into the eyes and senses of men as
forerunners of this general; men shut their eyes and will not see the
brightness of them; nor the danger of sin by them; nor the special anger of
God bewraying it self and broken out in them; but still live as they did in
the days of Noah, and will lay none of these things to heart till it be too
late.

The second thing whereby every man must address If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged of the Lord. Judging of our selves aforehand stands
in 4. things.
Now this judging of our selves before hand, stands in four things. First in
arraigning our selves before Gods judgment seat; that is, when by serious
consideration memento that Solomon gives the young man who is set upon his
pleasure, Remember that for all this thou must come to judgment. And if the
young man must sauce his pleasures with this remembrance, much more the older
had need as being in the ordinary course of nature nearer it then they: some
of the ancients have so acquainted and accustomed their hearts to this
meditation, that one of them professes of himself that wheresoever he was,
or whatsoever he was doing, he thought he heard always this voice in his
ears, arise ye dead, and come unto judgment. Secondly, in examining of our
selves, and this is, when we search and fan our selves, when we sift the
secret corners of our hearts, and enquire narrowly, and without partiallitie,
What have I done? that look as the Kings Attornie sifteth out, and
exaggerateth every circumstance of the crime against a Traitor at the bar, to
make his offense as foul as can be; so should we become the King of heaven his
attournie against our selves; not lessning or mincing, and much less excusing,
hiding, or defending any sin: but labor to see our sin in every
circumstance, and make it as vile as we can that our hearts may be convinced,
and beaten down in the sense of our misery. For this purpose, lay thy life,
and every particular action of it to the law of God; that as a straight line
will show thee all thy crookedness and fetch thee in by such circumstances as
whereby thou shall not content thy self with a confession in gross, that thou
art a sinner; but shall confess thy sin to be out of measure sinful. But
many a Christian is like a desperate bankcrupt, who being afraid to look into
his reckonings, goes on till he be clapped up in prison; and at length they see
there was no heavenly husbandry in all this. Thirdly, In confessing our sin
Prove. 20.13.
this is the covenant that whereas he that hides his sin, shall not
prosper; he that confesses, shall find mercy; Psalm. 32.4. I said I will
confess my iniquity, and thou forgauest me the punishment of my sin. Ioh.
31.33.
It is too near joined to our natures, to hide our sin with Adam, and
conc^ile it in our bosom; or else to sum up all in a word without special
grief for any special sin, and herein they think they have peace which is
but vnfeelingnesse. But those that belong to God, he brings them to sound
humiliation, he makes them sick in smiting them and sets their sins in
order before them like a bill of parcells; to the breaking of their hearts, and
the utter acknowledgement of themselves to be miserable bank^rupts. For this
purpose he makes their own consciences also to be judges of their actions,
pronouncing sentence of guiltiness and death against themselves: As David,
Against thee, against thee have I sinned: and again, I am the man: and again,
I have done very foolishly, but these sheep what have they done? The penitent
thief thus judges himself, we are righteously here: To conclude this point,
he was never truly humbled, nor ever aright judged himself, that is more
ashamed to confess, then to commit sin. Fourthly, After pleading guilty, in
pleading for pardon, as for Oh Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou
have fallen by thine iniquity: Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and
say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. And which of
the Saints have not placed all their happiness in the pardon of sin; or have
not preferred the shining of Gods countenance upon them, above all the outward
happiness that the earth affoardeth? Now in the seeking and suing for pardon,
because God will not hear him that regards wickedness in his heart, for
wicked Esau shall find no repentance nor favor with tears: therefore thou
must forthwith cease to do evil as being ashamed of it; and learn to do
well; lay laws upon thy self; be most severe against thy self in the things
wherein thou have displeased thy God; watch diligently over those corruptions
which have most foiled thee: this is the way both to make and preserve thy
peace. Bring thy self then with fear and trembling before Gods righteous
judgment, accuse thy self and bewail thy sins: be not ashamed to confess,
but to commit them again: be so far from purposing any wickedness in thy
heart, as rather thou be strongly armed with full purpose against it: And thus
remembering thy sins, God will forget them: thus writing them deep in thine
own books, God will blot them out of his. Thus if thou hide them not, but
cast them out of thy heart and life, he will hide them for ever, and cast them
utterly out of his sight: so that if thou can thus judge thy self aforehand,
thou shall never be judged of the Lord.

Verse. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all
that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. The Apostle Peter
although he has sufficiently proved whatsoever he has formerly delivered
concerning the doctrine, and miracles, life and death, resurrection and
ascension, and the coming of Christ again unto judgment: yet as though no
proof could be too much; or as if he could not satisfy himself in enforcing
this holy doctrine, and binding it upon the consciences of his hearers; he
shuts up his sermon in this verse with an other assured testimony above all
exception, drawn from all the Prophets; who all consent and conspire with the
Apostles in all their doctrine concerning him: the sum and maine end of all
which is, that through believing in his name, the elect should receive
remission of sins: which is the sum and effect of this verse.

Where first may be asked, Why the Apostle infers so many testimonies
concerning Christ. Reasons.
why does the Apostle induce so many testimonies one in the neck of another?
In the answer where of we shall see, that none of them are needelesse or
superfluous. For, 1. all the points of Christian religion are above
foolishness: and in the Athenians, 2. Cor. 2.23.
who when they heard Paul preaching of the judgment day* and Christ's
resurrection from the dead, Act. 17.32.
they mocked him. The hardened Jews at this day, on whom the wrath of God is
come to the uttermost, do the like: and well it were for many, if professed
Christians in the midst of such a light, made more reckoning of our painful
preaching of Christ, who teach the same points, then some of the former: which
were they so slight matters as most account them, what need they be so
enforced? We are therefore hence fitly informed, both to make more high account
of such great mysteries, which the spirit of God is so careful to commend unto
us, as also to bewail the infidelity of our hearts, that need so much
working upon them to entertain such necessary truths as these be.

no other doctrine, 1. Tim. 1.3.
neither contrary, nor diverse from it; no private opinions, which are the
causes of scismes and heresies; nor vain conceits or iangling, which breed
questions, but no godly edifying. It was not only their precept, but practice
Paul spoke no other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come: to wit, that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first
that should rise from the dead: Nay, the Lord of the holy Apostles; Jesus
Christ himself preached no other doctrine; of whom it is said, Luke 24.27.
that he began at Moses, and all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in
all the Scriptures, the things which were written of him: shall the Son of
God, who might have made every word he spoke Scripture, tie himself to the
Scriptures, and make them the ground of all his sermons; and shall not weak
men who cannot without error depart an hair breadth from them, be careful to
contain all their doctrine within the limits of them? especialy seeing nothing
else binds the conscience of the hearer.

3. The Apostle knew that this was a conuincing

Now in the verse we have three things to consider of.

1. The generallity of this testimony: that all the Prophets bear witness
unto him.

2. The scope and end of their witness; that men might believe in his name.

3. The fruit of this belief; that believers might receive remission of sin.

For the first, we will by a brief induction make it appear, A proof that
all the Prophets witness unto Christ.
that all the Prophets bare witness unto Christ: and then gather some
observations from it. To begin with Moses, who by Christ his own confession
writ of him. In Genesis the first thing after the creation and fall is the
maine promise, Ioh. 5.46.
that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head: Exodus sets
out Christ our Passover: Leuiticus in all those sacrifices points out Christ
our sacrifice: Numbers sets before our eyes Christ our brazen serpent lifted
up upon the cross: Deuteronomie describes Christ our chief Prophet, Deu.
18.18.19 Act. 3.21.
whom whosoever will not hear, he must die the death: Ioshuah bears his name,
and most lively resembles him in slaying the enemies of Gods people, and
bringing them into the promised land. The Judges were all Saviors and types of
him. The book of Ruth shows the family whence he sprung. Samuel, Kings, and
Chronicles, his genealogy, and the very persons of whom he descended:
especially David and Solomon, both eminent types of him. Ezrah and Nehemiah
built the second Temple into which he was to enter, and so to become the
glory of it, as both Aggee and Malachie foretold. Job knew that his redeemer
lived, and that he should see him last on the earth. David in the Psalms
acknowledged that the stone which the builders refused was become the chief
stone of the corner; and expresses the pearcing of his hands and feet.
Solomon in the Proverbs describes his wisdom and eternity. In the Canticles
his contract and espousalls with the Church. Isay is called the euangelical
Prophet, then whom no Evangelist could more lively express his person, his
doctrine, his life, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension: that he
seems rather to write an history of something past, then a prophecy of
things to come. Jeremy plainly styles him the Lord of righteousness. Ier.
23.
Ezechiel in all his dark shadows figureth out the government of Christ from
point to point. Daniel reckons the very year and time when the Messiah shall
be slain; at the end of whose 70. weeks Christ was put to death. The small
Prophets testify of him also with as joint consent. 1. Malachie mentions
with him his forerunner John Baptist. 2. Micha describes the place of his
birth, Micah. 5.2.
And thou Bethlem of Ephrata art little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth that shall be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth
have been from the beginning, and from everlasting. 3. Zachary names the
place of his education, which was Nazaret, Zach. 6.12.
There must he grow that must build the Temple of the Lord. 4. Hagge
prophesies of his coming into his Temple and purging it. 5. Nahum wishes
Judah to behold on the mountains the feet of him that declares and
publishes peace; N^h^m. 1.15.
which tidings none can bring but through Jesus Christ the prince of peace. 6.
Obediah promises to Judah and Jerusalem such Saviors as should advance and
set up the kingdom of the Messiah; Obed. v. 21.
and s^ the kingdom shall be the Lords: that is Christ's, who shall reign in
his Church for ever; and of whose kingdom there shall be no end. 7. Jonas in
his own person preached his death, burial, and resurrection, in that he was
swallowed of the whale, and lay three days in the belly of it; and in the
third day was cast alive on dry land. Hos. 13.14.
8. Hosee records his triumph and victory over death: O death, I will be thy
death* O grave, I will be thy destruction. 9. Abacuk the sending out of his
blessed Gospel into all the world by his Apostles; so as all the earth should
be filled with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the sea. Joel. 2.28.
10. Joel foretells of his ascension, and the pouring out of his spirit upon
all flesh. 11. Amos of the calling of the Gentiles, Amos. 9.11.
a fruit of that ascension, which he calls the raising of the tabernacle of
David: as James notably applies it, Act. 15.16. 12. Zephanie shadoweth his
second coming to judgment, and shows what a fearful and terrible day it
shall be to all the wicked of the earth. Thus have we shortly seen all the
Prophets witnessing unto the doctrine taught in this sermon by our holy
Apostle. And that the chief aim and drift of all these Master builders was to
lay this, the maine foundation of all our religion; that Jesus Christ the Son
of Marie, was the Son of God, the true Messiah, the Lord of all, and the
only Savior and Redeemer of the world.

First note hence, Consent of the Church to any do^ctrine to be received with
these cautions.
what is the true consent which all teachers must aim at in the delivery of
any doctrine unto the people of God; namely, the consent of the Prophets and
Apostles: it forces not a doctrine to be orthodoxe, or ancient, for a man to
say, all the Fathers are of this mind; which is the Popish cry for all their
heresies: but to this doctrine give all the Prophets, and all the Apostles
witness; and therefore it is ^ound and perswasiue. Yet we refuse not, but
challenge to the doctrine which we teach, the consent of the ancient church;
but with these cautions. 1. With the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, which
as they were necessary to salvation, more holily, more clearly and more
eloquently then all the Fathers put to^gether, who if they had any true
wisdom, had it from the Scriptures; to which we must still hold our selves,
both as the ground, as also the judge of consent. 4. If any Father or fathers,
shall by a unity a note of the Church, but make no mention of verity at all:
for the strong man may hold all at peace and unity, whilst Paul and Barnabas
having the truth may be at odds between themselves. On which conditions, as
we are able to justify our whole religion by antiquity, and consent of the
most ancient Churches and Fathers, so also has it been and may be made as
clear as the light, that the doctrine of the Church of Rome, wherein they
dissent from us, is a stranger, and novelty, never known to the Prophets and
Apostles, nor the purest Churches after them: neither had it ever that which
they brag of, the consent of the ancient Fathers; neither do they consent
in it among themselves.

Secondly, note hence what is the force and work of consent of the Church in
doctrine, The force of consent wherein it stands
it is not to work faith, for that is in the next words tied to the word and
witness of the Prophets and Apostles, which is called the word of faith,
because it is by Gods ordinance a means to work that faith by which it self
is believed: but to move the heart, and prepare the way to faith. For it
cannot be that any spiritual grace, such as faith is, can be wrought by any
but supernatural means: of which kind no outward testimony, if it come
backed with the voice of all the Churches in the world can be; for all this is
but an humane witness, simply and in it self considered. If they say the
Churches testimony is a divine testimony: I answer, so far as it carries
with it the agreement of the Scriptures, and holy Ghost speaking therein, it
may be said to witness a divine truth. And thus in no other respect can the
voice of the Church be called a divine testimony, then the preaching and
writing of some other teacher in the Church, who delivers nothing but what is
agreeable to the Scriptures. From this ground it follows, that the doctrine
of the Church of Rome is wicked and derogatorie to the glory and majesty of
the Scriptures, in that they stiffly after conviction avouch and maintain, that
the authority of the Scriptures depend upon the testimony of the Church, some
of them blaspemously saying, that they have no more credit then Esops fables,
further then the Church gives it unto them: which is to say, that God must not
be believed for himself: and as if the Kings word should have no credit or
command, but from his guard.

3. Hence note, that in our reading of the Prophets, we must still be led
further unto Christ; In reading the Prophets thou must be led still nearer unto
Christ.
for as all the Scriptures, so the writings of the Prophets were reserved for
this purpose, and set apart by God to be the ordinary outward stay and
foundation of the faith of the Church. And if our Lord Jesus himself, whilst
he was yet in the flesh present with his Disciples, did for the confirmation
of their faith in his doctrine, life, death, and resurrection, interpret unto
them the writings of the Prophets; how much more need have we now in his bodily
absence, to read with diligence these same writings, to help us forward
being so wavering and staggering in our faith, and the attendant graces of it?
And hereunto answers that commandment, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures,
namely, Moses, and the Prophets: that is, do not only procure these writings
to your selves, nor only read perfunctorily; but diligently and studiously
search to find out the chief scope and matter contained therein; which lies
not in the crust or shel, but within, in the very bowels of them: and this
kernel himself in the next words shows to be himself and life eternal
through him. And why must we thus search the Scriptures of the Prophets?
himself renders the reason, the very ground of our exhortation; because they
testify of me. This is the natural scope of them, to bring men to the
acknowledgement of the persons, offices and benefits of Christ. Thou loosest
all thy labor in searching the Scriptures, if thou searchest any thing but
Christ; if thou have not and hold him not in thine eye; if thou give over
searching before thou have met with him: and then thou have met with him in the
Scriptures, not when thou historically know something of him, which thou
did not know before; nor when thou art able to discourse, or dispute of deep
points of divinity: but when thou come unto him, as the context shows,
when by the quickening of thy faith and repentance, thou laiest faster hold upon
him for life everlasting. Alas, how few searchers of the Scriptures thus search
them: to say nothing of them who search them not at all, but cast them aside as
refuse wares; of whom we may renew the woeful complaint of Christ against the
Jews, who when he had exhorted them to search the Scriptures, presently
adds, But ye will not come to me that ye might have life, Ioh. 5.40.

The second point, is the scope of all the Prophets witness: and this is to
bring men to believe in the name of the Son of God; which is by faith to
receive Christ, as he has described and propounded himself in the word and
promises of the Gospel. For although the Apostle might sooner have said, that
whosoever believe in him, yet he uses this phrase rather of believing in his
name, thereby secretly to refer us unto the word of the Prophets and Apostles
which testify of no other name to be saved by but only the name of the Lord
Jesus. For our better clearing of this point, we will consider, 1. what this
faith is. 2. the benefit of it. 3. the marks and signs of it. 4. the use.

Faith, what it is.
First, what this faith is, It is a supernatural gift whereby every believer
apprehends and applies unto himself Christ and all his merits unto
salvation. I say, it is a gift: nay the Scripture says, that it is the gift of
God, Philip. 1.29.
and it is given you to believe as also to suffer: And that it is supernatural,
all the commandments we have to believe plainly euince; for were it natural
we should need no commandment to do it. Opera naturalia non indigent
praecepto.
Further, it is such a gift, as whereby we apprehend and apply unto our selves
Christ and all his merits: for the very nature of justifying and saving faith
stands in these two degrees. 1. In apprehension and receiving of Christ: for
to believe and receive Christ are all one, Ioh. 1.13. 2. In applying to ones
self Christ and his merits particularly, which is not only to know that
Christ is God in himself, and all other parts of truth necessary to be
believed; but a full persuasion of the mercy of God through Christ to belong
unto himself in particular: so as he be able with Thomas to say, My Lord, and
my God: not only confessing that Christ died for sinners (which the very Devils
believe) but as Paul describes the true faith in the Son of God by the
proper speech and voice of it, Gal. 2.20. Who died for me, and gave himself
for me. Further, the description restraining this grace to believers, gives
us to understand, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
that faith is not of all, nor so common as men take it to be: not every one
that can say, I believe in God, has faith; nor every one that will boldly say,
Christ is his Savior, has presently saving faith. For, 1. The Prophet Isay
speaks of a number that believed not the Prophets report, Faith is not of all.
and to whom the arm of Isa. 53.1.
The Evangelists and the Apostles also complain in their times how this
prophecy was accomplished, notwithstanding they heard the blessed word of
truth from the mouth of truth it self, and saw the wonderful miracles in the
hands of Christ himself, and his Apostles for the confirmation of that truth.
2. The end of faith, which is salvation, belongs not to the be expected. 4.
The Scriptures not only deny true and saving faith to the reprobate, whose
eyes the Lord blinds, Isa. 6.9.4
and whose hearts he hardneth, least they should see and believe; but
impropriateth it to the elect, whence it is called the faith of the elect: ^it.
1.1.
To them whom God has predestined to life: for so many as were ordained to
life everlasting, believed, Act. 13.48. to the sheep of Christ, Ioh. 10.16.
But ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep: to them that are regenerate
by the holy Ghost; as 1. Ioh. 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ
is borne of God.

Lastly, the description adds the final cause of faith to be salvation,
namely, in regard of believers: for the maine end of all graces is the glory
of God: and so Abraham by believing is said to give glory to God: Romans 4.20.
but the subordinate end of faith, is the salvation of the elect, and therefore
is it called saving faith: (...). Insalutem animae Beza.
Heb. 10.39. we are not they which withdraw our selves unto perdition, but we
follow faith to the conservation of the soul: 1. Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end
of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Faith never quite lost.
And from hence follows it, that saving faith can never be quite shaken out
of the sin not because this seed of God remains in them, 1. Ioh. 4.4. 4. It
victory that overcomes the world: the intercession of the Son of God, that
it fail not, Luke 22.32. and the confirmation of the holy spirit, who by it
seals up, and gives his earnest into the hearts of believers, 2. Cor. 1.22.
so as unless the mighty power of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit upholding
it, can be shaken, it can never be by all the gates of hell so shaken out of
the heart, but that the end of it shall be salvation; which could not be, if
the elect did not ever abide in communion and fellowship with Christ.

From which description of true justifying faith, Popish doctrine teaches not
true faith to (...) day.
it is evident that Popish doctrine knows not, teaches nor, nor suffers
men to be taught the true doctrine of saving faith, because it utterly
disclaimeth the very essential form of it, which is special application of
Christ and his merits, with affiance and resting only on them unto salvation;
yea and more, they condemn this glorious work of faith as a mortal sin,
and style it by the name of presumption: and so, by Gods just judgment, they
take up such a faith in stead of it, as is common, not only to Heretics and
reprobates, but to the very Devils themselves, who believe as much as Popish
doctrine requires to salvation, yea and more, they tremble also. For do not
they know and assent that there is one God; that all that is in the word of God
is true and certain; that all the Articles of the Creed are the true grounds
of Christian religion? and if you go any further (excepting the thrusting in
of general counsels and traditions which every good Catholic must take in
with the former) Popish faith leaves you, and bids you farewell: and even
those things which are absolutely necessary to salvation to be believed by
saving faith (as that the Scriptures are Gods word, that the Articles of faith
comprised in the Creed of the Apostles are of undoubted truth) they embrace
only by historical faith; by which yet was never man saved: for if ever man
were, then might the Devils also by the same faith. But justifying faith is
another manner of thing; it seals not it self in the understanding only, as
the former, but takes up the whole soul, even the heart, will, and affections
also, all which lay hold and cleave unto Christ for salvation. Neither is it a
common and general work of the spirit upon good and badde, as the former
illumination and assent is; but a special favor and extraordinary grace
proper to the elect, as we have heard, and the stranger enters not into this
their joy.

The second point to be considered, is the benefit or excellent fruit of this
grace. Five excellent fruits of saving faith.
1. It is the first stone to be laid in the building of a Christian, substance
and foundation: and the Colossians are said to be rooted, Heb. 11 1. Colos. 2.7.
and built, and stablished in the faith: this is that rocky foundation which
shall bear up the house against all winds and weathers. It is the first work
of change in the heart, and the first difference between man and man, when God
by faith purifieth the heart. It is the foundation of all obedience; Act. 15.
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. It is the root of all Gods worship,
for till we believe in God, we can neither trust, nor hope, nor love, nor pray,
nor perform any other part of his service truly or acceptably. It is the
mother of all good works: the word is the seed of them, which faith
conceiueth and digesteth, and so brings forth commanded and commended
actions. General faith knows the work to be good in the kind of it, and
special justifying faith begins it, and makes it good in the person, and
endeavor of the doer; and lays hold upon Christ to cover the defects of it.
Hence is it, that often in the Scriptures we read it to be the first
commandment given by Christ and his Apostles, to such as were desirous to know
the way of life, and how they might please God. The Jews come to our Savior,
and ask him, what they might do to work the works of God? and Christ
beginning here, tells them, Ioh. 6.28, 29.
that this is the work of God, that they believe in him whom he has sent.
And, 1. Ioh. 3.23. This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another: for we cannot perform any work of
love before we believe. In one word, faith is the very soul of all obedience,
without which, the most sightly and glorious actions; be it of alms, prayer,
preaching, hearing, worship, or miracles themselves, all are but very corpses
and carkases of good works dead and liueles.

condition of the new covenant of life, it tieth God himself unto us; Ioh. 3
16.
who is not further bound to any man, then he is a believer. True it is that
love places it self upon Christ, but it is after faith, for he must be
apprehended before he be loved. Hope waits for salvation, but faith first
believes it. Trust leans upon the promises, but faith first lays hold on
Christ the author and accomplisher of them. And though the Apostle say, that of
faith, hope, and love, 1. Cor. 13.
love is the chiefest, himself interprets it to be in respect of durance and
continuance, but not in respect of our justification, or acceptance with God.
Love indeed suruiueth and lasts longest; for our sight of God as he is shall
vanish faith; but yet faith is before it, and the mother of it.

Thirdly, saving faith is a living thing, and makes a man to live by it: It
purges his own dwelling by purifying the heart and conscience, it renews
the spirit and mind, it quickneth to all good duties: for it being an
instrument to unite unto Christ, by it as by a bond of union, we receive from
him our head, life, and power to move and stir in Christian duties: yea, it
so governs the whole life, that we henceforth live not, but Christ lives in
us. In our business and labor, it makes men diligent in the work, but leave
the success to God. In temporal wants, it says with Abraham, God will
provide at least in the mountain: it cares not so much for bread, as the
staff of it: if it have means, it blesses God, and uses them; but trusts
not in them: if it have them not, it rests on God, but uses no unlawful
courses for them. In afflictions it stablisheth the heart with assurance of a
good issue, and still waits the Lords leisure without making have. In
temptations it goes against sense and feeling, and rests upon the naked
promise: yea, when it can scarce apprehend any thing but wrath, it will uphold
the heart, and rear it, even when God seems to kill him to trust in his
mercy. In the use of things spiritual, as the word, Sacraments, prayer, and
other holy means, only faith draws virtue from Christ; and all of them are
unprofitable, further then they are mingled with faith. In the use of
temporal, it is faith that weaneth the heart, and keeps it that earthly
cares choke it not, earthly pleasures possess it not, and earthly comforts
oppress it not: but it holds the mind heavenly in the midst of earthly
business, and suffers it not to love pleasures more then God, nor to enjoy any
comfort of the creature above, or against the comforts of God and his word,
whom they acknowledge the very life of their lives, and the soul of their
souls and bodies here and for ever. Thus is faith every where diffused; if
we walk, we walk by faith: if we live, we live by faith in the Son of God:
if we stand, we stand by faith: if we die, we must die in faith, as the
Patriarks did, Hebr. 11.13.

fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16. and, 1. Pet. 5.9. Your adversary the
Devil goes about like a roaring lion, whom resist steadfast in the faith. This
is the victory also that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
This the conquest over the lusts of our own flesh, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. be sober,
and put on the brestplate of faith. Again, as it moundeth and fenseth, so it
stilleth the heart disquieted and distressed, when it sees it self beset with
spiritual wickednesses, and lusts, and even almost drowned in the gulfs of
sinful and earthly courses. Therefore the poor Iaylor that could not tell
what to do with himself, that of an unhappy man now ready to kill himself,
he might become happy, and an heir of salvation, was sent no where else by
the Apostle, but to the doctrine and practice of this grace of faith. This only
resolves fully the question, Oh, what shall I do to be saved? Believe in the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved: he gets no other answer of Paul,
because he well knew, that no other would have answered his question, nor
settled his conscience now touched with sense of his sin. If he had sent him
to the word, that could have done him no good, if he did not mingle it with
faith. If to his prayers, only the prayer of faith is available. Iam. 5.^5.
If to the Sacraments, they must be seals of faith, Romans 4.11.
or else do no more good then seals set to blankes. If to a good life, it
must be the life of faith, which the just must live by. If to the Church to
join himself to that, he must himself be first of the household of faith.
Nay more, if to Christ himself: Gal. 6.10.
if he carry not faith with him, he is after a sort disabled from doing him
any good. As he could do no great works in Capernaum, Mar. 6.
because of their unbelief: only thy faith in the Son of God, is the
beginning, and accomplishment of thy happiness. Add hereunto, that it not
only remooueth discomfort, but brings with it all the ^ound joy and comfort
of our lives; whence it is that Christian joy is called, joy of faith: Philip.
1.25.
and all the Sons of faithful Abraham tread in their Fathers stepps, who saw
the day of Christ and reioysed; Ioh. 8.56.
because God has not only reserved mercy for us, but by the faith which his
spirit works in our hearts, he lets us know, yea and taste what he has
done for us: so as hence have we peace with God, and with our own hearts,
boldness in prayer, and not patience only, but joy in sorrow: thus give a man
faith once, and sin flies before him, bands of temptations are discomfited,
afflictions dismay him not, death and deadly things are disarmed unto him:
faith has gotten, and holds Christ his victory, his strength, his life;
yea, whilst he walks in a thousand deaths, the faith of his heart has
filled his soul with that heavenly and spiritual joy which all the world
cannot give, neither can it take away.

brought into the grace by which we stand, receive increase of it through the
communion of Christ his death and resurrection, Romans 5.2.
Colos. 2.12.
as also the inhabitation of the spirit in our hearts; but also we are fitted
unto our glory: for faith assures every believer of his salvation; and every
believer is kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13.
which is prepared to be showed in the last time, 1. Pet. 1.5.

Thirdly, seeing that this is so special a grace of God bestowed but on a few,
A believer may know he has faith by four marks or notes.
it is worth inquiry, by what touchstone a man may know the soundness of his
faith, and that it is much more precious then gold: And therefore that a man
may not be deceived in a matter of such moment as this is; the Scriptures have
furnished us with such marks and notes, as such, who will use diligence in
laying their faith thereunto, shall certainly know the truth or unsoundness
of it: for else why should we be commanded to prove our selves whether we be
in the faith or no, 2. Cor. 13.5.
unless the believer know that he does believe? Again, who be they that know
not that Christ is in them, but reprobates? and can Christ live in any man, and
he not know it at one time or other, and be able to say with Paul, I live not
henceforth, but Christ lives in me? and, I know whom I have believed? 2. Tim.
1.12.
Which if any say Paul might know, being an Apostle, and having a revelation,
which ordinary men have not, the same Apostle answers it, 1. Cor. 2.12. when
be joins with himself all believers, we have not received the spirit of the
world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
given us of God. Now whosoever have received this spirit, want not this
revelation: who if he reveal unto us any thing that is given us of God, then
would he not neglect the greatest gift that ever was given us, even Christ
himself, and life eternal through his name.

The first mark of sound faith, is the seat and dwelling of it: 1. The seat
of it an humbled soul.
and that is an humbled soul that longs and almost faints for Gods mercy
in Christ: that not feeling faith, can bitterly complain for want of it: that
strives against doubting because God has commanded to believe: that
endauoreth to assent to the promise touching forgiveness of sin, with
purpose to sin no more; this holy seed is sown in no other ground but this.

II. The essential properties of it, 3
The second mark, are the essential properties of sound faith: and they are
three in number. 1. It is most pliable to the word, of which it is begotten:
Romans 4.19.
This is that the Apostle ascribes unto it, that it establishes the whole
law; yea the whole word of God, the Law and Gospel, by provoking to cheerful
endeavor in the obedience of them both. 2. Sound faith subsistence, it
enableth a man to stand under a great burden, (...).
and not be crushed, Psalm. 46.2. Therefore we will not fear, though the earth
be moved, Job will not let his hold go, if the Lord should smite off his
hand; yea if he kill him, he will trust still: it rests upon Gods arm, and
truth in all estates; in life and death: whereas every cross puff of wind of
temptation or affliction, vnsetleth, yea, and sinketh the unbeliever. 3. It
being promiser, who can do what he will. It sees him that is true of his
word, who cannot lie, 2. Cor. 6.18.
and who cannot but do what he has said. It sees a merciful and loving
Savior, whose eyes are upon them that trust in his mercy: and seeing these,
Psalm. 33.18.
it sees enough. Besides, it estrangeth the heart from the world which it
sees, and seeks an unseen country. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, acknowledged
themselves rather strangers in this world then inhabitants, Heb. 11.13.15
and that they came into it rather to see it, and go through it, then dwell or
set up their rest in it. It weigneth the heart from the things below, as the
woman at the well once meeting with Christ, she forgets her waterpot. What
cares Zacheus for half his goods, yea, or all, when Christ once becomes his
ghest, and brings salvation to his house. And on the contrary, it sends up
the heart to those treasures which the eye of flesh cannot see, but are
reserved to the seekers of the country where they are. And these are the three
worthy properties, whereby the naturalnesse, and soundness of it may be
discerned of such as are willing to try the same.

The third mark or note of true justifying faith, is by the attendants and
companions of it: III. The honorable attendants and companions of it, 4.
for this being as Queen among the virtues, goes not alone, but with all the
train of virtues, as hand maids attending upon her. The chief of them,
knowledge of the word of God, acknowledging it in part and in whole to be the
truth of God, and that himself is straightly bound to believe and embrace the
same, and that he has a special part in the promise of grace and life by
Christ, in which grace he rests himself, daily growing up in the certainty
and assurance of his salvation. 2. A sound joy of the heart, which
unspeakable, and glorious; breaking out into thankful praises, in that the
Lord has begun his happiness, by making Christ his wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. The poor, blind, and lame
persons, of whom we read in the Gospel, never leaped more joyfully when they
had met with Christ, and had their eyes opened, and their limbs restored by
him, the^ he that has met with him, and received him into his heart; to
enlighten him, to quicken him, and to heal him of all his infirmities. How
gladly did Zacheus receive Christ? with what joy of heart finds any man the
hidden pearl? Matthew. 13.44.
how did the Enuch converted go away rejoicing? Act. 8.
And all this is, because they can value such a commodity as this is, which
they see God has made their own: for if they either knew it not, or not to
be theirs, they could not thus joy in it. 3. Christian hope is another
handmaid of faith: for so the Apo^stle teaches, Romans 5.2. being justified by
faith, we have peace -- etc. we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.
For this is the special work of hope, to wait for, and rejoice in the
expectation of the glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus. And hence is it, that
whereas unbelievers are glewed to the earth, and cannot think of heaven, but
either with sorrow, or a formal and false joy (and what marvel is it, that
those who have no better should set their hearts upon the worse) believers have
preserved in them a willingness to leave this world, and to be with Christ,
which is best of all: yea, so sweet is their present taste of Christ, through
faith and hope, that they are unquiet till they be filled with the fruition of
his fulness; being often in his absence sick of love, and pine away till
they be with him whom their soul loves. 4. An assured trust relying upon
God, believing his word of promise to raise and feed the heart, of threatening
to shake it, and cast it down, and submitting it self to the counsel and
good pleasure of God: because his faith has let him see the truth, the
wisdom, the equity and righteousness of all these. Such a man's heart
sets nothing above God in prosperity: it distrusteth not but has God for
his God in adversity: it endeavors in all things to walk with God: it is a
sweet usher and disposer of the whole life, so as it is most obedient to the
word, and most full of comfort and sweetness to it self.

The fourth mark or note of true faith, IIII. The infallible fruits of it. 4.
is taken from the infallible fruits, and effects of it, which are many, I will
only note four of the principal. First, it frames and fitteth the own
habitation, purifieth the heart, Act. 15.
it suffers not unclean thoughts, unlawful lusts, or wandering motions to
harbor there: it guides the affections of love, hatred, joy, sorrow, and the
rest; that a man love nothing more, or so much, as God and his image: he hates
not men's persons but their sins, and no man's sin so much as his own: he
rejoices in nothing so much as in doing the will of God; this is as his meat
and drink: he sorroweh for nothing in the world so much as for offending so
good and patient a God. This pure heart also guides the words with wisdom,
and makes it his chief study how to preserve with faith, Act. 24.16.
good conscience in every thing.

faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. both toward God, and toward man: toward
him that begat, and him that is begotten, yea, and him that is yet not
begotten. Our love of God expressed in 3. things.
This love of God expresses it self, 1. in much thankfulness unto him, who
has loved us first; who has given so much, rule of righteousness; but
especially against the glorious Gospel, which of all other are least observed.
3. In desire of that blessed fellowship of ever with the Lord, and to enjoy the
pleasures at his right hand for evermore, to be at home with him, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yea with Jesus Christ himself, should make us
groan in our souls, and say with David, Oh, when shall I appear in this thy
presence? The Spirit says, come, and the Spouse says, come. Even so, come
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The love of men by which faith works, discovers it self not only in just
dealing with them as we would be dealt by; which many civil men, endued only
with civil righteousness, have excelled in; nor only in merciful
distribution of outward comforts for the releeuing of the bodies of our
brethren, yea and of our enemies; which hardlier goes down with the
unconverted then the former: but also in showing most love unto their souls,
in helping forward their conversion and salvation. For so soon as any man is
converted, he will strengthen the brethren. Faith, wheresoever it lives, it
loves, and love being an hand giving out, moves men converted to counsel,
exhort, rebuke, admonish, comfort, pray, and wait when God will give unto
others the grace of repentance. As soon as Andrew was called, he brings his
brother Simon to Christ. No sooner had Christ found Phillip, but Phillip
finding Nathaniel, he brings him to Christ. The woman at the well no sooner
hears that Christ was the Messiah, but she brings all the city. In
finding this treasure, the Christian cannot hide his joy; neither can any man's
joy be so full, unless he with others rejoice together. For it is not here as
in earthly things, which the more they are communicated, the more are they
diminished, and every man's share is the less; but heavenly things are by
communication the more increased; for we read not of any man that laid out his
tallent, but to increase: and as the light of the s^nne is never a whit
impaired by communicating it self to the whole world; or as he that lights
one candle of another, diminishes not in either, but increases the light; so
is it in the light of the Son of righteousness much more, and in the
kindling of these heavenly sparkles, whose property is to diffuse themselves
as fire, and the further they spread, the greater and brighter is the flame.

The third fruit or effect of faith, is an undaunted With the heart we believe
to justification, and with the mouth we confess to salvation. For where faith
is in the heart, it will be also in the mouth. The spirit of faith, and the
speech of faith are undivided: as, 2. Cor. 4.13. And because we have the same
spirit of faith, according to that which was written: I believed, and therefore
I spoke, even so we believe, and therefore also we speak. Now there be three
actions of faith which help forward this free confession. 1. It makes a man
bold in a good cause, Act. 5.29. Peter being full of faith, with a bold spirit
told the Counsel that had the power of life and death in their hands, and
himself in their power, we ought rather to obey God then you. 2. Faith keeps
a man in a preparedness to suffer by leading him along in the denial of
himself; and hereof we have a notable example in Paul, Act. 21.13. who
professed how ready he was, not only to be bound, but to die also at
Jerusalem, if God called him thereunto. 3. It works joy, yea much rejoicing
in the heart, in the suffering for Christ and a good cause: Romans 5.3. after the
Apostle had laid down the justification of faith as a ground, he says, that
we then rejoice in tribulation: and that they did so indeed is plain, Act.
5.41. They departed from the Counsel, rejoicing that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for his name: hence could they sing Psalms at midnight in the
dungeon, and fetters: and hence could the Martyrs embrace the fire, kiss the
stake, and testify such joy in the flames, as all men might acknowledge the
truth of the speech of our Savior, Your joy shall no man take away from you;
no Tyrant, no tormentor, nor any kind of torment.

The fourth and last fruit or work of faith is, that wheresoever ^ound faith
is, it is most diligent in preserving, yea and increasing of it self. The most
covetous man is not more complaining nor gathering then the believer, who is
ever complaining of want of faith, Mar. 9.24.
or of the weakness of it; and knowing the want of it to be so dangerous and
hurtful, as without which he wants Christ himself; as also that the
weakness of it depriueth him of much comfort, and many good things; for a man
of weak estate must needs want many rich commodities and sweet comforts which
the wealthy enjoy in abundance. Therefore he uses all good means to increase
his stock: Means to increase the stock of faith.
as, 1. He is much in hearing, reading, and meditating in the faith comes by
hearing: and every thing is preserved and nourished Lord I believe, Luke 22.32.
Mar 9.24. Luke 17.5.
help my unbelief: and with the Disciples, Lord increase our faith. And these
are the marks by which the soundness and currence of faith, as by a
touchstone may be tried, and distinguished from all that false and counterfeit
faith which is so stirring in the world, and whereby most men are lamentably
deceived.

The use of this doctrine is, 1. to stir up men to examine, and by these
notes to prove themselves, whether they are in the faith or no, to try their
faith of what kind it is, least in the end they find that they have leaned
upon a staff of reed. By which examination, I fear it will be too evidently
seen, that these are the last days wherein the Son of man shall come, and
scarcely find faith upon the face of the earth. Sure it is, that the common
faith of men is neither thus, The most common faith ^f ^en i^ not thus
qualified.
1. founded, 2. nor qualified, 3. nor attended, 4. nor thus fruitful: as will
briefly appear in the particulars. First, every man says he has faith; but
faith.



3. Others boast of a sound faith, which were it all-sufficient for them and
theirs. Genesis 17.1.


faith as any, but never prise such a pearl as it is: can a man have such a
commodity, but he shall value it according to the worth? but these think
themselves never the richer for it: they have more sense and joy in the
smallest, and most trifling earthly profit, then that Christ is become their
gain, which although they profess, yet this undervaluing of him in their
hearts, gives their tongues the lie. Besides, if they did esteem of faith
indeed, they would profess it boldly, and confess it to all the world,
whereas they are ashamed of Christ before men, and cast themselves into the
night with Nicodemus, as fearing least if they should come to Christ by day,
men would see them, whose praise they love above the praise of God; and whose
reproach they fear above the rebuke of the Almighty. But how unlike is this
to the faith of the Saints, whereby they could esteem the rebukes of Christ,
above the treasures of Egypt. And further, were it so they made reckoning of
their faith, they would much more care for the end of it; for ^ound faith
carries the heart even in the constant waiting and wishing for Christ's
appearance; but these rather fear it then hope it. Now what a faith is that
which never cares to come to the end of it, that feign would still be
pitching upon earth, saying with Peter when he wist not what he said, It is
good being here: Is this faith an evidence of things not seen? or does it
look at things within the veil?

5. Another sort would be loath to be otherwise God; for they will do nothing
for him, will be at no costs or pains for him: and as little will they suffer
for his sake, not a reproachful word; much less will they rejoice in
suffering: neither to Gods children, these can they pinch and disgrace, whereas
loved they him that begat, they would love those that are begotten of him. As
for helping others to heaven, they are so far from it, as that if any will
cast an eye that way, they can tell what he is presently, and they would be
loath to be such an hypocrite, or precise fool as he is. To conclude,
although true faith is most industrious in the means of preserving and
increasing it self, these men hold their wont: enemies to the word were they,
and so are they still, they neglect the means, and absent themselves from the
Ministry; and can no more believe then Thomas, Ioh. 20.24.
who was absent when Christ came and showed himself to the rest of the
Disciples: and that which they do hear, they mingle not with faith, and so it
becomes unprofitable. The Lion roareth, they fear not in their hearts,
because they apply not the threats of the law against their own sins. The
Gospel propounds promises of life and salvation, but they trust God no
further then they see him; they rejoice no more in them then they can in
another man's money or evidences; they pray not to be taught of God, nor hear to
be increased in faith; nor meditate nor confer of the things they hear,
further to edify themselves and others in their most holy faith. Now will
these fruits stand with faith? or if they will not, is faith so common as men
pretend? but I hope I have a little helped many a man to see by this
application, how that his gold is turned into copper, and his faith but into a
dream and fancy.

Use. 2. This doctrine teaches every man to labor for the truth of this grace
as earnestly as for salvation it self: Labor for the truth of faith as
earnestly as for salvation.
for this is the scope of all the Prophets to bring men, not so much to faith,
as to the end of faith through the Messiah, which is salvation. And hence is it
that faith is said to save; believe and thou shall be saved: and in many places
and phrases besides, the Lord ascribes that to the instrument which belongs
to himself the principal efficient. 1. Both to show the excellency of the
grace in it self, Necessity of this grace to him that expects salvation.
in that it comprehends such an excellent object as Christ, heaven, and
happiness which are infinite; and holds such great things being absent as
present in the hand of it. 2. As also the necessity of it to the party that
looks for salvation: for he that believes not, must Romans 4.11.
yea, is damned already. For 1. he has not set his seal that God is true,
but so far made him a liar. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
2. he has defiled for without shall be unbelievers: and if infirmity of
faith in Moses, the servant of God shut him out of Canaan; what shall the want
of it in the wicked do but shut them out of the heavenly Canaan, which is a
rest prepared only for the people of God. 3. To teach in what an high reckoning
it is with God; who is the author of it, the finisher of it, the accepter and
approouer of it, yea of a grain of it; and not of it only, but of our persons
and imperfect works because of it: and consequently that every believer should
make as high account of it as of salvation it self, it leading to the very
gate of heaven: nay being the threshold over which every one must step that
means to enter into the holy city.

3. Use. This teaches us that seeing the Ministry of the Prophets, Apostles,
Pastors and teachers was instituted to this purpose to beget and confirm men
in the faith: all such as frequent the Ministry must be careful to grow up
in the strength of faith. For otherwise they frustrate to themselves this holy
ordinance? for the sum of our commission is this, Go teach all nations, he
that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16.16. And what is Paul, Apollos, or any
other ordinary Minister but the Ministers of your faith; both for the
begetting and confirming of the same? So as whosoever under the Ministry
wants either the work of faith, Grow up in the strength of faith. Reasons.
or the working of it to further strength and degrees; that Ministry is by him
perverted to his own danger, and damnation without repentance. And if we
search further into the Scriptures, we shall not want store of reasons to the
same purpose. As, 1. according to the increase of faith is the so must we walk
from faith to faith; from strength to strength; of weak becoming strong; not
standing in the infancy, or childhood, but growing up to our full age and old
age in Jesus Christ. 3. It is true that a grain of true faith is great faith
in Israel; and according to this great faith shall it be to this party. Seeing
therefore the Lord has still afforded the Ministry and word of faith, let this
be thy chief aim to find the work of it upon thy faith; and content not thy
self that Christ may say to thee, Oh thou of little faith: but rise up in the
degrees of it, that he may say as of that woman, O man, great is thy faith:
this will bear thee up in the waves of temptation and affliction: no blast or
billow shall sink thee, not all the gates of hell shall prevail against thee.
But alas, how is this principal end of the ministry neglected of the most,
and many come to hear a sermon, and that is all: some rather to see a sermon,
or be seen at it, then to hear it: some to know more then they did, some to
reform something, as Herod, who heard John gladly, and did many things, but
few to learn to become believers: which till they have done, all moral
precepts urged upon them are but lost, because the inside is not yet clean:
and fewest of all do live by their faith in the Son of God: for of all
sins that the spirit shall rebuke the world of, this is the chief, that they
believe not in him. Thus much of this worthy doctrine concerning faith, which
is the scope of all the Prophets and Apostles.

The third point in the verse, is the fruit of faith, namely, that all that
believe in his name should receive remission of sins. Where for the meaning
must be known, 1. what is Remission of sins. 2. what it is to receive it. 3.
the persons receiving it, namely, those that believe in the name of Christ:
even all they, and none but they. First, Remission of sins is a grace of God,
whereby for the merit of Christ, he accounts the sins of believers as no
sins, and acquitteth them from the guilt and punishment of them all. Where I
say, it is a grace or favor of God, this remission of sin is distinguished
from all other: for man has also from God power and commandment to remit
sins; and that either publicly or privately. The former, when the minister
by authority from God, remitteth the sins of believers, and repentant
sinners; by publishing the grace of the Gospel, and applying it unto such. And
such as are thus ministerially loosed in earth, are loosed also in heaven. The
latter, is of every private man, Offense is either 1. against God which he
alone can forgive. 2. Against public peace which belongs to the law. Or 3.
personal against our selves which must be forgiven of us.
who has also received a commandment of God to forgive the sins and
offenses which his brother has committed against him: not that any man can
properly forgive the sin of his brother, so far as it is a breach of Gods
commandment, but as it is wrong and injury against himself: and even this
private remission of a man's brother, if repenting, confessing, and asking
pardon, is ratified and confirmed in heaven also: but if they seek not
forgiveness at us, we must still not only our selves forgive, but seek it
for them of God, saying, Father forgive them: yea, and forgive us as we
forgive them. But this remission of sins is proper unto God, to whom it
belongs to say, The Lord only properly forgiueth sins.
I will forgive. 1. Because it is he against whom all sin is committed,
Against thee, against thee have I sinned: and who can forgive the debt but the
creditor. If any man shall offer to forgive another man's debt; what does he but
deceive the debtor, who thinks him self free from that which lies as heavy
upon him as before; as also abuse and wrong the creditor, whose right without
his knowledge he has his prerogative, proclaiming himself, The Lord, the
Lord, strong, merciful, gracious, slow to anger, Exodus 34.6.7.
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin: and Isay 43.25. I, even I am he that
puts away thine iniquity, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins. 3. Our Savior in his prayer taught us to beg the forgiveness of our
debts, Who is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage: he retains not his wrath
fer ever, because mercy pleases him: Psalm. 130. vlt. He will redeem Israel
from all his iniquities. 5. The very Jews themselves accounted it an high
blasphemy for Who is this that speaks blasphemies, who can forgive sins
but God only? Whence it plainly appears, that the Pope or any other of his
shauelings, whilst they challenge (though a subordinate) power properly to
forgive sins, and do not content themselves with the ministerial publishing
in the name and authority of God alone, and pronouncing forgiveness to all
repentant sinners; become open blasphemers against God, and not without an high
wickedness set themselves in the room of God.

2. I say in the description, that the Lord does account the sins of his
elect as no sins, and that for the merit of Christ: both which appear in the
former resemblance, which compares sins to debts: wherein God is compared to
a creditor, man to a debtor, the law to the bill or bond which binds man to
God, 1. to obedience, 2. in default of that to punishment; so as here is
nothing but either satisfaction, or to go to prison. Now we being banquerupts
by our fall, and of such broken estate, as we are not able to pay one farthing
neither of the principal, nor the forfeiture: the mercy of our creditor
steppeth in, who himself procures us a surety, both able and willing to
discharge our whole debt, and the forfeit as well as the principal: that is,
Jesus Christ, who by his obedience active, and passive, has made a full
discharge, and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of all the believers in
the world: the which being accepted of his father in full payment, he further
imputes not to us our sins, but covers them, casts them all behind his
back, Isa. 38.17. Micha. 7.
and into the bottom of the sea, as things which he will never remember more.
Thus they become as though they had never been, and we accounted as innocent,
as if we had never fallen from our first estate of innocence. From this we
learn how to conceive that place and the like, where it is said, that the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: 1. Ioh. 1.
wherein not the action of remission, which is proper to the deity is ascribed
to the blood of Christ; but only the cause of remission is signified, for
which God the Father remitteth sins: and that is the blood of Christ,
including his whole obedience, and the merit of it, which is a just price, and
pacification of his father; Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his
blood; even the remission of sins.

3. I add, As the Lord forgiueth properly, so also perfectly both the guilt
and punishment.
that the Lord does acquit believers from the guilt and punishment of all their
sins: for as where the debt is once paid, the whole obligation is void, and
there remains no more satisfaction to be made; so where the Lord forgiueth a
debt once, he thenceforth acquitteth the debtor, and is far from requiring
any new satisfaction. This will not stand with the justice of God, to exact
the satisfaction of one debt twice, once in our surety, another time in our
selves. It will not stand with the glory of God, with whom is plentiful
redemption: It will not stand with the honor of Christ, to work out with all
his obedience, but an half redemption, which would argue but half a
satisfaction. Christus communica^do nobis sine culpa poena^, and culpam soluit
and poenam, August. sermon. de temp. 141.
It will not stand with the price of his blood, nor worthiness of his death,
not fully to satisfy the whole justice of his father. It will not stand with
the faith of our prayer for remission of sins: for if our whole debt be not
forgiven, but some satisfaction remains for us to perform, to believe
remission of sins were no faith, but a vain opinion and fancy: nor with our
peace with God, if his wrath be not yet fully satisfied. Nay it will not stand
with right reason: for is it reason, that he that owes nothing to a man,
should be forced to make a satisfaction where nothing is due: but where the
debt is remitted, nothing is due, nothing is owing, the debtor is freed, and
the whole obligation cancelled. Who sees not therefore by all this, what a
wicked and detestable devise it is of the schoolmen, Council. Trident. sess.
14. Can. 14.
and defended by all the Papists at this day? to affirm, that only the fault
of mortal sins is remitted by Christ, but not the punishment or
satisfaction; the which being as they say by the grace of God, changed from
eternal to temporary, remains to be born either here in this life, or in
purgatory, till Gods justice be fully satisfied, and the uttermost farthing be
paid. Upon this string hang their indulgences, pardons, masses, pilgrimages,
and the whole body of their troumperie, devised to make a prey of the world; a
great part of which (being the cunningest theiues in all the world) they have
by such craf^tie and fraudulent conveyances gotten into their hands. And least
they should want all color, they allege the example of David, 2. Sam.
12.13. Whose sin the Lord put away, David's si^ne and punishment both forgiven
notwithstanding the child must die.
and yet the child borne to him must surely die: and again, though the sins
of the godly be pardoned, yet death which is the punishment of original sin
remains. I answer, 1. that David's sin and punishment were both remitted,
for so said the Prophet, Thou shall not die. 2. we must distinguish between
punishments of sin, whereby Gods justice is satisfied, and chastening of
sin with a fatherly rod. The former are always remitted with the sin, not
always the latter: by the former, the Lord reuengeth the sins of men, by the
latter, he corrects. The former can only be borne away by Christ: the latter
cannot be borne off by any masses or indulgences; but are wholesomely dispensed
and disposed by God to his dearest children for their good. Of this latter kind
was the death of David's child, not properly for his sin, but that in the deed
doing he had caused the enemies of God to blaspheme. Of this kind was the
sentence against Moses and Aaron, whose sin of not glorifiyng God at the
waters of strife was pardoned, Numb. 20.12.
and yet they must not enter into the land of promise: they were corrected with
rods of men (not punished in proper speech) both that others with themselves
might be more careful not to offend in the like kind, as also that being
deprived of the earthly Canaan, they might more studiously seek for the
heavenly. The like is to be said of the Corinths, of whom Bellarmine says,
Bellarm. lib. 4. de paenit. cap. 2.
that they were reconciled to God, and yet diverse of them were stricken with
death for unworthy receiving of the Sacrament. As for the example of the
Israelites, Number. 14.20. whose sin of murmuring God is said to forgive at
Moses prayer, yet they must all for this sin die in the wilderness. The
answer is, Note well this answer.
that Moses did not pray that God would absolutely and for ever pardon their
sin; nor that the Lord would abstain from all judgment and punishment of
that sin: but that now at this present time he would be pleased to appease
his great anger so justly conceived, and desist from that great judgment of
the utter destroying of them; threatened, v. 12. as may appear, both by the
arguments used by him, as by that he expressly notes the manner of this
forgiveness, ver. 19. as thou have forgiven this people, even from Egypt till
now: and forgive them, even according as thou have spoken, ver. 17. but how the
Lord had after they came out of Egypt forgiven them, appears Exodus 32.35.
when they had made a calfe, and the Lord wished Moses to let him alone that he
might consume them, yet by Moses intercession, the Lord did not consume the^,
but plagued them with a great plague and destruction; and yet the holy man
prays, he would forgive them as he had done from Egypt till now. And what
was it the Lord had said which Moses takes hold on? namely, in verse 34. of
that 32. of Exodus Go now, bring the people unto the place which I commanded
thee, behold mine Angel shall go before thee: but yet in the day of my
visitation, I will visit their sin upon them. So as this place rightly
interpreted, yields no patronage to any such Popish and wicked collection.

Further, for the second objection, that death remains though the sin be
pardoned. I answer, it remains not as any satisfaction to the justice of God
to believers; Though death remain after sin is pardoned, both the fault and
punishment is removed
nor as a punishment of sin to such as have their sins remitted; but it
has lost his sting, which is the guilt of sin; and is become a remedy
rather then a punishment, Physic rather then poison, an end of their misery,
and an entrance into a better life. So as it still abides firm against all
such detestable devises of Popery, that remission of sins carries with it
the remoouall of all the guilt and punishment of sin to such as have their
parts in the same.

And it is lastly to be observed in this description, that I say the guilt and
punishment of all sin is taken away: for if any be not remitted, they be
either greater sins or lesser: to remit the lesser and not the greater, what
were we the better; how could our salvation be effected or perfected; how
could grace be every way grace? or do we pray for remission of lesser, and not
of greater also, seeing our selves must forgive our brethren, not only lesser
offenses, but even the greatest? Again, to remit the greater, and retain the
lesser, were to say that the Lord is either not so able, or so willing to
forgive lesser sins as greater. Shall a man frankly forgive a debt of
thousands of pounds, and will he not forgive also to the same party a few
pence? A bundle of Popish blasphemies.
The Popish Church confidently avouch, that many sins need no remission; as
concupiscence, which they say is not properly a sin, albeit indeed, it is the
mother sin of all. And all the heap of their venial sins, which they say
are not against, but besides the commandment, because they are not attended
unto, or deliberatly done with full c^ensent of reason: because they cannot
hinder the habit of virtue, but the act of it, and that a very little; nor
turn us from our end, but hinder so much as it is our progress unto it: and
because they (though themselves displease God) yet they make not God displeased
with the party committing them, for they can stand with grace, and have not
properly and simply the reason and respect of sin or offense: therefore are
they not to be punished with eternal but only temporary punishment. These
need not the blood of Christ, nor grace, nor confession in particular, nor
absolution, nor any new habit of charity; but these are easily wiped away with
a little holy water, or any meritorious work, or by the Sacraments received,
or by general confession, or by a small humiliation; as knocking the breast,
fasting, alms, the Lords prayer, an ave Maria, or by entering into a
consecrated Church, or by a Bishops blessing: or if all these help but a
little, presently after death they are all consumed in the fire of purgatory.
Oh horrible blasphemies, derogatorie to the blood of Christ which purges us
from all sin; and to the truth of the Scriptures which teach us that when we
had nothing to pay, Matthew. 18.32.
our Master forgave us our whole debt. But I have followed them to far, were
it not that the discovery of their impieties may bring some profit to such as
are not so well acquainted or exercised in their writings. Thus much of the
description of this Grace.

The second thing propounded, is what it is to receive remission of sins?
which because it implies a gift or oblation, therefore we must know that
pardon of sin is offered generally to all in the word of grace publicly
preached, and conferred unto believers, not only in the beginning of their
conversion, but through their whole life. Now to receive this remission, is
when a capable, How remission of sin is received.
that is, a contrite heart by faith (which is an hand taking in) receives
Christ and all his benefits, (among which remission of sins is the chief)
preached and published in the Gospel. And this it does on this manner: 1. Upon
a touch of sin, and sense, that without this gracious pardon there does
indeed belong unto him, so as he rests in that assurance. Thus the Lord will
not only give us mercy, but lets us know that he does so, that our joy and
peace, and boldness in him might be more full.

Thirdly, the persons receiving this remission, are all believers. Whosoever
believe in his name: whose faith intitles them to the maine promise of life,
Believe in the name of Christ, why.
and all other depending thereupon: they must believe in his name. For, 1.
there is no other In him alone is the matter of our salvation, seeing remission
is obtained by his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. 2. He alone is God and man, propriety,
as the Father and holy Ghost also have; but more special of propinquitie,
being our brother, and first borne of our family; the next of our kindred, and
therefore of right belongs to him to recover our weak estate, as was figured
in that law, Levit. 25.25. If thy brother be impouerished, and sell his
possession; then his redeemer shall come, even his near kinsman, and buy out
that which his brother sold. 3. He only was deputed of God to derive life
believe in his name.

Now from these words we learn two instructions. 1. What is the chief thing
which every Christian must strive to obtain while he lives in this world:
namely, remission of sins. 2. What is his estate and condition that has
attained it. For the first, it is grounded in the text, The chief duty of
every Christian while he is in this world
because howsoever remission of sins is here only named, yet in it are included
all the other gracious mercies of God: not only all deliverances, and freedom
from the evils and punishments that attend upon sin, but even all our
redemption and salvation with the means of it, and blessings accompanying the
same. And indeed, this is the sum or epitome of all Gods mercy, in which the
Lord crowns his Saints with compassion; a mercy which reaches up to heaven,
and draws them out of the most miserable thing in all the world; which is to
lie under the curse and danger of sin, and consequently, under the endless
displeasure of the Almighty. Which point being even as the one thing
necessary to be known and attained, I will stand a little longer upon it,
hoping to spend my time well in setting down these five points. 1. the
necessity of remission of sins. 2. the benefits of it. 3. the Lettes of it.
4. the helps to it. 5. the companions of it, by which as by so many notes we
may know we have it: and so we will add the use of the whole doctrine.

First, the necessity of it will appear, 1. Necessity of remission of sins
in 3 points.
if we consider, 1. the multitude and abundance of our sins, which are to be
remitted, being for number as our hairs, and as the sand of the sea which is
numberless; which cannot be other, seeing we drink in sin as the fish does
water, Job. 15.16.
that is incessantly, for the fish ceasing to drink in water, cease to live;
neither can we cease to sin, till we cease to live. Nay, seeing our very best
actions hold no correspondence with the law of God; and in strickt justice are
no better then so many sins: this consideration exceedingly multiplieth our
sins; in that not only in failing in, but in doing of our And more, all the
men that ever were or shall be in the world, were never able to rise from under
the burden of one sin, if it were imputed unto them: and yet the most of the
world see no part of this danger of sin, and therefore no such necessity of
the remission of it. 3. Consider thy

The second point, is the benefits issuing from it, Benefits flowing from
remission of sin. 4.
and these are: 1. peace of conscience, an immediate fruit of our justification
by faith, and reconciliation with God: Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, and
it was ordinary with our Savior to join them together; as Luke 7.47. Thy
sins are forgiven thee, go in peace. This benefit the most know not what it
means, but he that has the feeling of the wrath of God against his sin;
and sees nothing but an angry face of God burning like a consuming fire; he
that is so straightened as he can think no other thing but that the Lord in his
just judgment has cast him quite away: this man, as of all other torments
that can be suffered in the world he lies under the greatest, so nothing in
the earth can content or comfort him, but only the sense, and persuasion of
Gods favor. Now the conditions of peace with his God, are the most joyful
tidings in all the world, as is the unexpected news of a pardon to a
malefactor ready to execution for high treason against his prince.

2. The right and possession also of life everlasting: By whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins: Coloss.
1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness
of sins. And it must needs follow, that if they who are justified, and
sanctified, are also glorified, then they have attained the beginnings of their
glory, who have attained remission of sins.

3. The benefit of Christ's intercession, which meriteth all our good; for he
prays not for the Ioh. 17.19.
and this is no small benefit, seeing no part in the prayer of Christ, no part
in his death: he will not endure death for him for whom will not vouchsafe to
pray.

4. Consolation in affliction, strength in temptations, and assured comfort in
life and death, are the sweet fruits arising from remission of sin. For, 1.
although afflictions entered with death into the world by sin, and in their
nature are testimonies Satan's temptations foiled by this assurance.
For Satan urges the poor sinner sundry ways, as 1. by the multitude and
vileness of his sins, with which his conscience tells him he is covered:
and thence infers, that because the wages of every sin is death, and
because he has deserved eternal death, he must needs perish, he can expect no
other. But now can the believer stop his mouth, and say, I grant Satan al
thy premises; no sinner is worthy of, or can expect salvation in or by
himself, or so long as he continues in sin: but my sins are remitted by
means of Christ's satisfaction; and though in my self I am worthy to perish,
yet in Christ I have a worthiness to bring me to salvation. I continue not in
my sinful estate, but am drawn out of the guiltiness, the filthiness, the
service, the love and liking of my sins, through the grace wherein I stand:
and therefore thy consequent is false, I fear it not being so forcelesse. 2.
From the justice of God, who cannot but reject whatsoever and whosoever is not
fully conformable to his righteousness: but here the believing heart is
quieted, in that through remission of sins, the justice of God is fully
satisfied, though not by the person offending, yet in his pledge and surety
Jesus Christ, who being just, died for the unjust, that we might be the
righteousness of God in him. And hence the justice of God is a matter of most
comfort to the poor sinner, in that this righteousness cannot suffer him to
demand satisfaction twice for one and the same sin; for this directly
fights with justice and equity. And if Satan be still instant, and say, But
what shall an others righteousness avail thee, if thy self be not a keeper
of the law, for the soul that sins, that soul shall die: the believing
heart will readily answer: That although the law require proper and personal
obedience, yet the Gospel translateth it to the person of our surety, who
being God and man, not only paid the whole debt, but performed all
righteousness, absolutely fulfilling the whole law: whence it is that his
obedience is called the fulfilling of the law for righteousness to every one
that believes: and himself was made under the law, Romans 10.4.
that he might redeem from it those that were under it, Gal. 4.4. And whereas
the tempter will allege, But for all thy righteousness thou have innumerable
sins, original and actual, which the Lord hates, and every day adds to
the huge heap of them. The heart which holds this article of remission of
sins, abides undaunted: for though it feel a body of sin dwelling with
it, yet is it not reigning sin, it is not sin at quiet, but daily battle
is maintained against it; it is sin weakened, and in daily consumption; and
therefore shall never be laid to the charge of him that is in Jesus Christ:
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ: for the
law of the spirit of life which was in Jesus Christ has freed me (though not
from all molestation and presence, yet) from the law, that is the service and
slavery of sin and of death, verse. 2. But numbers (will he say) who make
account to partake in the death and righteousness of Christ are damned, and
have no benefit by it: and numbers have reuoulted and fallen away, and why
may not thou: to which the believer will readily answer, that those that were
thus plucked up, were never of the Fathers planting; only infidels and
unbelievers have fallen away, and withered for want of rooting and moisture;
but I believe the remission of sins, not by any ungrounded persuasion, but
with a sound, lasting, and vnfayling faith, resting it self wholly upon
Christ; so as I am persuaded, neither death nor life can separate me from his
love, the work of whose spirit makes me bold to call upon God as my tender
father; and produces the fruits of true faith and conversion into my whole
life, whereby I know as infallibly the truth of my faith, as I know the
presence of the sun by his light, or of fire by his heat. Finally, he that
has begun to make me good, The sound comfort of this article.
will make me also persevere in goodness. 3. This assurance of remission of
sins, yields most assured comfort in life, and in death: the This is our
rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience: and in the agony of death,
this is the Christians comfort, that his sin being remitted, the sting of
death is gone; the locks of this strong Sampson wherein his great strength lay,
are clipped off, and he is disarmed of his weapons which are our own sins.
So as a Christian may challenge him into the field, and say, O death where is
thy sting? which because he is bereaved of, when he intends to kill, he
cures; when he does his worst, which is to separate soul and body, he can
sever neither from Christ; nay rather he sends the member of Christ, and
sets him nearer to his head, which is best of all.

The third point propounded, 3. Lets which hinder men from seeking so pre^ious
a grace, 3.
is to consider of the lettes which hinder men from seeking the assurance of
the remission of their sins, which is indeed their true happiness, if they
could so esteem of it: some of which I will set down. 1. An erroneous
Believers may and must know the pardon of their own sins.
are you sure they are pardoned; and here he is set up, he stammers out a
careless answer; he cannot surely tell, but he hops well, and this is all
you can wring out of him: he knows not whether Christ be in him or no, whether
he be in the faith or no, he believes he knows not what. But to let men see
their error herein. 1. does not our text say, that men must receive the
remission of sins: and can any man receive so precious a gift from God, and
not know I believe the remission of sins: what believe we more then the
devils, if we believe no more then that God forgiueth the sins of the elect,
and not our own; and then, how is this one of the privileges is his
commandment, 1 Ioh. 3.23.
and therefore no presumption, but a necessary obedience so to do. 4. doubting
O thou of little faith, why doubtest thou? Object. But experience teaches that
every man is full of doubting, Objections answered.
and therefore no faithful man can believe it. Answ. The consequent is false,
seeing this doubting exercises, but destroys not faith; and that they go
together, not only the speech of our Savior formerly alleged, but the prayer
of the father of the child proves, Lord I believe, help my unbelief: as
also the two natures of which every Christian consists, flesh and spirit,
which are in continual combat. Object. Romans ^1.34.
But no man can know Gods mind, and so cannot be assured. Answ. By his mind
is there meant his secret will: but his mind revealed we may, and must; a
part of which is, that whosouer believes in his name, shall receive remission
of sins: which general promise while we specially apply to our selves, the
spirit begets this assurance. Object. But we are commanded still to fear,
Blessed is he that fears always. Ans. We must not fear the mercy of God
concerning salvation, but carry a reverent fear in regard of Gods judgments.
2. we are to fear in regard of our selves, and sins, by which we deserve the
judgments of God as well as others; but this is not contrary to the assurance
of forgiveness of sins; for mercy is with thee that thou may be feared:
which the holy Prophet would never have said, if fear could not stand with
assurance of mercy. 3. such a fear is commanded as may shake our security,
but not to drive away the boldness of faith: a fear of falling into sin,
not of falling away from grace: a fear least we offend a merciful God, but
not least he take away his mercy from us.

A second let, is the want of judgment to discern aright of the best things,
and of resolution is it that makes men run over sea and land to provide for
the body and bodily life, and in the mean time cast off all the care, and
means of the knowledge of God, and conscience of their ways, but that they
see no profit in serving God? they taste a little sweetness of the creature,
but not of the creator himself; a small piece of earth has more savor to
them, then the God of heaven. This is it that causes men to walk painfully
all the week in their personal and particular calling, but all the week and
sabbath too neglect the general calling of a Christian: whereas had they any
judgment in the things of God, reason would teach them that the particular
must yield to the general, as the inferior give place to the superior. Yea,
this is it which strongly forces men to choose the profits and pleasures of
this life, Learn to esteem every thing in the measure and degree of it
goodness.
which altogether cross and hinder this chief and principal care of gaining
the favor of God; because they do not follow the rules of wisdom, which
esteems of things according to their degree and measure of goodness, and not
above. Which if men would give themselves to be ruled by, they would with the
Saints of God in this comparison, account but meanly of the things in the
highest account with earthly minded men. The Apostle Paul comparing his gain
of Christ with the gain of the world, he esteemed this as loss, yea as dung,
which indeed is the right estimate of it in this comparison. Holy David would
rather be a doorkeeper where Gods face may shine upon him, then enjoy the
honors and pleasures of the world in the palaces of Princes without it.
Solomon himself the wisest and welthiest of all men, after good trial,
pronounced of all earthly indowments, abstracted from the fear and favor of
God, that they were vanity and vexation of spirit: and determines this to be
the sum of all, to fear God, and keep his commandments. Thus are the wise
man's eyes in his head, Eccles. 2.
and his heart is at his right hand, both for deliberating and executing of
things most necessary to be done; whereas the heart of the fool is at his
left hand, he does all as it were with a left hand for want of this judgment.

A third and maine let, are frivolous and fleshly conceits which dead and
quench any such motions Say not God loves thee unless thou have such sure
grounds as follow.
Ans. But look to thy self who thus reasonest; It is not enough to say God
loves me; but to have sure evidence of it, yea surer evidences then any thou
yet speak of, I mean common and outward blessings; which like the sun, or
the rain are generally disposed to the good and bad; and by which no man can
know love or hatred. Again, Eccles 9.
Gods love goes with election, justification, sanctification, effectual
calling, faith, love, hope, patience, repentance, mortification. Examine thy
self by these notes: for if God love thee as his child, thou love him, and
keep his commandments; thou love not sin, but hate it, even thy
dearest sins, and preseruest a care to please him in all things: Ioh. 14.23.
If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him.

2. Whereas they say that others which nourish this care, are as much crossed
as any other, and therefore they see no reason that they should make their life
so uncomfortable to no purpose: let them know, that all the crosses Gods
children, whose care is to make up their peace with God, are exercised with, 1.
proceed from the love of God, Godly life not to be feared for the crosses
attending it. Reasons.
and not from hatred. 2. they are trialls of graces, not punishments of sins.
3. their end is not reiection from God, but through their purging and amendment
to draw them nearer unto God. 4. By this reason, Christ and his Apostles might
have been refused, and all the Saints of God, who through many afflictions are
passed into heaven. 5. The way to avoid crosses and punishments is, to intend
this one care of getting sin remitted. And 6. if the way to heaven be so
strawed with crosses, what is the way to hell: If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the wicked and sinner appear?

3. Whereas they object further against this care, that men of good note, and
perhaps Preachers too, account it but fantastical, and more then needs; and
only a few, and those despised ones in the world, do thus disquiet themselves,
who make their lives more uncomfortable then they need. I answer, this is
indeed one of Satan's greatest bolds, but such a snare as God leads his
children out of in safety: whom he teaches that it is their happiness to
go to heaven, Better going to heaven alone, then to hell with company.
though alone, rather then to hell with company. Marie will sit her down,
though alone, at Christ's feet, if she cannot get her sisters company: she
knows it is the good part that shall never be taken from her. And for those
(especially if they be Ministers, who should most advance this care) but
disgrace it as a needless vexation of the spirit, let them know, that the Lord
Jesus was of another mind, who pronounced blessedness on those that mourn
now, and promised that they should be comforted: and far are they from the
guidance of that spirit who has taught us, that of all sacrifices none is
comparable to that of a broken spirit and contrite heart which the Lord never
despises.

IV. Now follow the helps to the obtaining of remission of sins. As, Helps to
attain this grace of remission.
1. thou must become a member of the Church, Isa. 33.24. The people that dwell
there shall have their sins forgiven: And Chap. 62.12. They shall call them
the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord. Now to know a man's self a true
member of the Church, the Prophet David gives two infallible notes, Psalm.
15.2. The former in regard of God, to walk uprightly and sincerely as in Gods
presence, and under his eye: and the latter in regard of men, to exercise
righteousness, both in confession and forsaking of thy sin, which is the
highway to find mercy, Prove. 28.13. for the former, Psalm. 32. I said I will
confess my sin, and thou forgauest me the iniquity of my sin. And for
the latter, it is plainly implied in Christ's reason, Ioh. 5.14. Go thy ways,
now thou art whole; but sin no more, least a worse thing follow. The fellon
that has been in prison, endured the misery of his yrons, has been
condemned, and with the rope about his neck in fear of present death, if he
have escaped, he will take heed of coming into the like misery again: and
he that has found this grace in truth, cannot by turning again to his sin
turn it unto wantonness. 3. Carefully use the means of peace, remission of
sins, and life everlasting. 2. As also of the holy Sacraments which are the
seals of remission of sins to all believers, Lord have mercy. But the
tender and distressed conscience, that sees and combateth with the danger,
sueth for pardon as one that would speed. A poor fellon on the gallows ready
to be turned off would think a pardon the welcomest thing in all the world:
but the hardness and drowsinesse of men's hearts, every where argue that they
be a very few that find this rare grace, unless we will say that the greatest
blessedness that living man is capable of, can be given to him that sleeps
on both sides, that never thinks of it, and never makes means after it.

V. The companions of remission of sins whereby it may easily be discerned,
are five. Companions of remission of sins.


1. The daily exercise of true repentance in all the parts of it: as, First in
judging ones self for chief of all sinners, he saw in himself many sins,
and great sins, which needed great mercy and much forgiveness: the which
one consideration kept him under continually, and fostered in him the grace of
humility, when as otherwise through his abundance of gifts and revelations,
he might have exalted himself out of measure. Secondly, in watchfulnes and
fear of sin in time to come, according to our Saviors holy counsel, Thou
art now made whole, go thy way, and sin no more. Thirdly, in daily purging
and clensing from known and secret corruptions: many are the places wherein
the pardoning and purging of sins are joined as inseparable: Ier. 33.8. I
will cleanse all their iniquity, yea I will pardon all their iniquities,
whereby they have sinned against me: 1. Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our sins,
faithful is he to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our
unrighteousness. This was the sum of the baptism, that is, the doctrine
which John preached, Mark. 1.4.
even amendment of life for the remission of sins: never hope of remission,
unless thou hungrest after this grace of repentance: for the Lord will not be
merciful to that man that blesses himself in his sins, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
but if the wicked return from his sins, he shall live and not die, Ezech.
18.21.

second companion, is gladness and cheerfulness of heart, yea an
unspeakable joy that the Lord has done so great things for his soul, and
made him so happy as to bring him from such extremity of misery to partake
in the wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption of Christ: for can a
man have a gift bestowed upon him of more price and use then all the kingdoms
of the world, and never find his heart made glad in it? or is it possible that
he that finds the pearl, can go away without joy? The Eunuch being
converted, went away rejoicing: and if every believer must rejoice; in another
man's conversion, much more must he in his own.

The third is love and thankfulness to God, which are enforced by this
excellent grace, Luke 7.47. loved much, because much was forgiven her: Psalm.
116.1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice: and wherein the Lord
had thus graciously dealt with him, the whole Psalm teaches; especially verse.
8. Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my
feet from falling. Now if David for a temporal deliverance from Saul in the
wilderness, did thus provoke his heart to the love of God; how should the
consideration of our spiritual deliverance from sin, death, and all hellish
powers, blow up these heavenly sparkles in us? And what can so liberal a love
beget in a good heart, but much thankfulness for apprehension of much mercy?
how David in the sense of mercy reaching to the pardon of his sins, melts
into the praises of God; see Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. etc. And the Apostle Paul
considering what a weight of corruption did still oppress him, whereof he
expected to be fully eased, concludes his comfort with thanks unto God in
Jesus Christ. Romans 7.25.
And remembering what a bloody persecutor, and an extreme waster of the Church
he had been formerly; 1. Tim. 1.12.
yea what an enemy unto God, what a blasphemer of his name: he breaks with
veheme^ce into the praises of God for his happy change, But I thank him who
has counted me faithful and put me in his service: 14.
and, the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward me.

The fourth is a sound and sincere heart, hating and in whose spirit is no
guile: namely, to hide and foster any sin, of which guile he there directly
speaks.

The fifth note or companion is a tender affection forgive one another, even as
God for Christ's sake forgave us. Ephesians. 4.32.
The example is set down, Luke 6.36. Be merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, but he forgiueth all, and freely, is the first in forgiveness, and
perfectly; he forgiueth and forgets too. The form of our petition of mercy
is, forgive us, as we forgive, etc. Thou would have God to forgive thee all,
and forget all, and to make thy wrongs against him as though they had never
been, go then and do so to thy brother, otherwise the threatening will meet
thee, Iam. 2.13. Judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy.

Use. 1. All this doctrine concerning this Article shows, that there is no
other means in the world to be free from sin, but by Gods free remission of
it. Whence it is that remission of sin is called the covering of sin, in
that the faith of the heart lays hold on Christ and his righteousness, Psalm.
32.2.
who is our propitiatory covering us and our sins against the two tables, as
the propitiatory covered the arc, in which those tables were: without which
cover, every sinner is next to the devil, and his Angels the most vile, and
loathsome creature in the eyes of God. This use must the rather be thought of;
because neither the Papists nor yet the common and carnal Protestant yield
consent unto it. The Papist, he believes that many sins are venial and
properly no sins: Neither* Papist nor common Protestant yields to this
doctrine of free reon of sin.
among which he reckons concupiscence (which indeed is the mother sin of
all) and these need no remission. He holds also that men redeemed by Christ,
and having received the first grace of God, are now fitted to merit by their
works remission of their sins. And further, he thinks that because no man
knows whether he have works enough to please God, no man can know that his
sins are remitted. All which with many more assertions like to these, are most
blasphemous heresies against this most comfortable article of free remission of
sins through belief in the name of the Son of God: which (so long as thus
they hold them) cut themselves off from the remission of their sins by
Christ, and consequently from the grace of life. But the common Protestant also
contenteth himself with simple defenses against his sin, like Adams cover
and garment of figgeleaues which will scarce hold the sewing. Some will hide
their sins from men's eyes, and then all is safe: others strive to forget them,
and having choked the voice of their conscience, they lie them down securely,
and never think to hear of them any more. Others cover gross and foul
sins, such as are ignorance of God, contempt of his word, hardness of heart,
hatred of the light, and all irreligion, with an outward civil life, and an
honest conversation as it seems to be; not thinking that God sees many a
wicked heart through a civil life. Others will go beyond the former in
acknowledging themselves sinners, Lutum lauant luto, ignem extinguunt lignorum
strue.
and will make some show of making up their peace; but it is with some
ceremony, or bodily exercise, they will fast, and pray, and give some alms,
or some money to good uses when they die: but as for the grace of faith, which
should be as a soul to quicken these actions, they never knew what that meant.
But howsoever most men are carried headlong with such strong delusions as
these; let no man that would not deceive himself wilfully, think in any such
course to meet with sound peace: nothing but the blood of Jesus his Son that
cleanses from all sin. In the garment of our elder brother only, we can
carry away the blessing: and our text teaches us, that remission of sins
stands not in the doing of any thing, but in the receiving of it at the hands
of Christ, by so many as believe in his name.

Use. 2. Is this so worthy a grace of so excellent use and sweetness through
the whole life, All diligence must be given to make our pardon of sin sure to
our selves
then it stands every man in hand to labor, and give all diligence to make
sure unto himself, the pardon of his own sins. But lamentable it is to note
the general carelessness of men in a matter of such moment and consequence as
this is. And surely it will prove the great condemnation of the world, that
whereas the whole lives of men are thought too short, and all their time too
little to be eaten up in worldly cares, which break their sleep, their
strength, and often their brains, yea and their very hearts: only the last
day of all, and their dying day is scarcely devoted to this care of seeking
remission of sin, and the way to life everlasting. See we not how busy and
earnest most men are in the infinite encumbrances of the world, whilst this
one thing is the only thing neglected? May we not observe how sure men devise
by learned counsel at their great charge, to make to themselves their deeds,
leases, bonds and other instruments and assurances of the things of this life,
who in all their lives scarce ever dreamed of this assurance? Oh how wilfully
herein do men forsake their own mercy, how carelessly do they cast out of
their hands, the only comfort of their life and death? Whosoever therefore
thou art that have hitherto despised so great salvation, that have set light by
Gods gracious invitings to repentance, and that have frowardly rejected his
kindest offers of mercy; now at length begin to take up shame in thy face, and
sorrow into thy heart: in earnest accuse the security of thy soul, the
deadness of thy spirit, the hardness of thy heart, the unthankfulness of thy
whole life: say with thy self, Ah my folly, that have neglected my mercy so
long: alas, how have I hated instruction? how unkindly have I dealt with so
loving and patient a God: I see now that it is high time to look to the maine
business of my life, to make up my peace with God, to get my pardon sealed: I
will hie me to the throne of grace, I will henceforth lay hold of life
eternal: I see now that there is one thing necessary, and that is the good
part which I will choose, and which shall never be taken from me.

Now we come to the second point propounded (which is the last of this worthy
sermon) namely, what is the condition of every one that has attained this
excellent grace of remission of sins: and that is to be a blessed and happy
man: for such a one has part in Christ, Whosoever has attained remissi- of
his sins is an happy man.
and with him of forgiveness of sins; in which David, Psalm. 32.1. places
blessedness. Quest. But how can this man be a blessed man, seeing he is
compassed with a body of sin and death, and subject unto infinite
afflictions, then whom no man is in this life more miserable, no sort of men
more perplexed inwardly with sense of sin, none more outwardly disgraced for
well doing. Answ. There be three degrees of blessedness. 1. In this life,
Degrees of blessedness.
when God brings his children into the kingdom happiness by way of
eminency, the two former are certain forerunners, and he that has attained
the first, has also assurance of the last, and must needs be a blessed man,
not only in time to come, but even for the present, whether we respect his
outward estate or inward. For his outward estate, Gods blessing never fails
him, but affoardeth him all good things, and that in due season, and in due
measure: his riches are often not great, but ever precious: and his little
shall nourish him, and make him as well liking as the water and pulse did the
Jewish children in Chaldaea. The same providence which watches to supply all
his good, keeps him from all evil; it pitcheth the Angels round about him to
guard his life; let him be persecuted, he is not forsaken; his losses become
his gain; his sickness is his physic; his heart is cheared even in trouble,
which makes that part of his life comfortable; his soul is bound up in the
bundle of life with God; death shall not come before he can bid it heartily
welcome: yea, let violent death come, it shall not be to him deadly: slain he
may be, but not overcome: victory attends him, and blessedness every where
abides him. But all this is the least part of his blessedness: for if we
look yet a little more inwardly into him, we shall see the boundless extent
of his happiness far more large: whether we respect the spiritual misery
he has escaped; or else the spiritual good which with the pardon of his
sins he has attained: for on the one hand, he has escaped the heavy
wrath of God due to sin; and so is discharged of an infinite debt, healed of a
most deadly poison, and pardoned from a fearful sentence of eternal death
and perdition ready to be executed upon him: and on the other, he has
obtained a plentiful redemption; he has purchased the pearl, received
Christ with his merits and graces, such as are wisdom, faith, hope: whence
issue our peace and joy of heart which is heaven before heaven (for in these
stand the kingdom of God) and the comfort of a good conscience which is a
continual feast. By all which it appears that he is no small gainer that
has got his part in Gods mercy reaching to the remission of his sins.

Use. 1. Open thine eyes and see the happiness of the Saints.
We are here admonished to open our eyes that we may more clearly see and
grow in love with the felicity of the Saints, which the most see not, because
1. it is inward; the glory of the spouse is like her head and husbands glory,
she is all glorious within. 2. because of their infirmities and frailties,
which wicked eyes altogether gaze upon. 3. because of their afflictions
wherewith they are continually exercised. If the tower of Siloam fall on any of
them, they are thenceforth greater sinners then all other men: holy Job because
he was afflicted, cannot avoid the note of an hypocrit even among his own
friends and visiters. And no marvel if the members look thus black when the
sun looks upon them; seeing their head Christ himself was rejected,
because they saw and judged him to be plagued and smitten of God: Isa. 53.4.
But we must look beyond all these as the Lord himself does, who in his
judgment goes beyond the outside, and pronounces sentence according to the
grace which himself works within. Let us imitate our Lord Jesus who
notwithstanding all the infirmities, yea and deformities of his Church,
pronounces of her, that she is all fair, and no spot is in her, not because
there are none, but) because all are covered, and none are reckoned and imputed
unto her: yea let us remember that the pure and holy spirit of God is contented
notwithstanding much blackenesse, to take up his lodging in those hearts where
he finds reigning sin dispossessed. Now how far are they from the mind
and judgment of this blessed Father, Son, and Spirit; who have nimble eyes
to spy out every infirmity of Gods children to blase them: nay rather then
they will not accuse and slander them, can of themselves coin, raise up, and
impute unto them that, whereof they are most innocent. Assuredly these are of
near kindred to the devil, who is the accuser of the brethren. And surely
were Christ on earth again, even this most innocent lamb of God should not
want accusers, wherein are so many of Cains constitution, The glory of God in
his children turned into shame.
who hate their brethren, because their works are good; and so many sons of
men, who seek to turn the glory of God in his children into shame. Alas,
religion is at a low ebb already, and not so reckoned of as it should be by
the forwardest, and yet so malicious is the devil in his instruments, as
unless this smoking flax also be quenched, we can see nor hear of any hope
or treaty of peace: the beauty of Gods people goes disgraced under titles of
niceness, preciseness, purity, holy brotherhood, and the like. To go
ordinarily to sermons, is to be a sermon-munger: not to swear, is the next
way for a man not to be trusted: and except a man be as black and deformed as
either the devil is or can make him, by drinking, swearing, gaming,
sabbath-breaking, and casting off all care of civil honesty as well as
godliness, he may sit alone well enough, he has a great many neighbors that
care but a little for his company. What can make it more evidently appear,
that numbers there are in this age who never knew, and without Gods infinite
mercy in their timely conversion, are never like to know what the
blessedness of remission of sin means, neither in others, nor yet in
themselves.

Use. 2. A strong mo^tiue to hold on in weldoing.
Let no man be discouraged in the pure ways of God, but walk on without
weariness or faintness: seeing that (whatsoever the blind world may deem to
the contrary) thou, who art a believer in the name of Christ, have
blessedness between thy hands, for thy sins are remitted, thou must go in
peace. And this happiness by the grace wherein thou stand, is surer then
that of nature which Adam had in his innocence: that was lost because it was
in his own keeping; this is seated in the unchangeable favor of God, by whose
mighty power thou shall be preserved to the full fruition of it. Get faith in
thy heart, and thou shall clearly behold thy happiness, if all the world
should set it self to make thee miserable. Get faith into thy soul, and thou
shall think him only happy whom God so esteems, although it be the misery
of the world to place happiness only in misery. Get assurance of faith, to
claspe the sure promise and word of God, and thou shall possess in misery
felicity, in sorrow joy, in trouble peace, in nothing all things, and in death
it self life eternal.

FINIS.
A SHORT ALPHABETICALL TABLE TO LEAD THE Reader more easily into the chief
things contained in this Exposition.
A Basement of Christ, is the Christians advancement. 145 A bundle of Popish
blasphemies. 333 Account must be given to God of all things done by us, and
received of us. 269 Administration of Judgment laid upon the Son for sundry
reasons. 253 Afflictions though lingering, no sign of Gods hatred. 203
Agreement of the life of the Saints upon earth, with the life of the Saints in
heaven. 187 All diligence must be given to make our pardon of sin sure unto
ourselves. 359 Anointing of three sorts of persons, what it signified. 73
Antiquity of the Gospel, and of our religon. 48 Apostles peculiar witnesses of
Christ, and why. 217 A proof by induction that all the Prophets bear witness
unto Christ. 288 Attendants and companions of faith, 4. 309 A strong motive to
hold on in weldoing. 365
B
Baptism often put for doctrine. 60 Believers are fellow servants under one
Lord. 58 Believers may know they have faith by four marks. 306 Believers may
and must know the pardon of their own sins. 345 Benefits flowing from
remission of sin, 4. 339 Better to go to heaven alone, then to hell with
company. 351
C
CAre of Christians must be to suffer as Christians. 135 Care must be had of
our receipts and expenses, because we must be counteable for them. 273 Chief
duty of every Christian whilst he is in this world. 337 Children of God
delayed often, but not denied in their suits. 200 Christ acknowledged our Lord
by 4. practices. 54 Christ already come, proved. 70 Christ his life not
monastical. 93 Christ preached to the Israelites two ways. 43 Christ first
preached to the children of Israel for 3. reasons. 44 Christ Lord of all, two
ways. 50 Christ both a Lord and a servant, how. 51 Christ is not a Jesus but
to whom he is a Lord. 53 Christ no sooner received gifts and calling but did
good with them for our example. 81 Christ seasonably preached after John's
baptism, that is, John's doctrine of repentance. 65 Christ proved the only
Messiah, because he was Jesus of Nazareth. 69 Christ his dietie proved by his
glorious resurrection. 158 Christ by dying offers, and by rising applies his
one only sacrifice. 162 Christ went about doing good two ways. 82 Christ sent
of his Father, and came not before he was sent. 70 Christ his righteousness
notably witnessed. 127 Christ his two natures lively set out. 128 Christ
reputed an arch-traytor in his life and death. 137 Christ submitted to the
lowest estate of death, reasons 5. 151 Christ the Lamb slain from the
beginning, how. 163 Christ has powerfully trodden Satan under his feet, and
under our feet, how. 114 Christ rose early in the morning, and what we learn
thence. 198 Christ in respect of himself neeedeth not any witnesses, and yet
he uses them. 218 Christ must be the matter of all our preaching. 247
Christians must partake of Christ's anointing. 77 Christians must become Kings,
priests, and Prophets. 78, etc. Christians must imitate Christ in doing good.
95 Chosen witnesses of Christ, who. 214 Comfort of the godly, who meet with
strange entertainment in the world, where they are strangers. 32 Comfort that
Christ is stronger then all. 124 Common Protestant believes not the Article of
free remission of sins. 358 Communication in sin sundry ways, but all to
be avoided. 132 Companions of remission of sins. 353 Consent of the Church to
any doctrine to be required and received with five several cautions. 291
Conditions of reconciliation two. 178 Consideration of the last judgment, a
ground of the godlies patience. 265 Consolations from Christ's resurrection. 180
Consolation of Gods children that their Savior shall be their judge. 255
Consolation issuing from pardon of sin. 244 Cross of Christ an honorable
chariot of our triumph. 143 Crosses some more smart, and durable, why. 204
D
DAnger of sin. 338 David's sin and punishment both forgiven, though the
child must die. 330 Death of Christ after a special manner infamous. 138 Death
of Christ has more power in it then all the lives of men and Angels. 142 Death
of Christ a destroier of death and all destroyers. 164 Death though it remain
after sin is pardoned, both the fault and punishment is notwithstanding
removed. 333 Degrees of blessedness. 36^ Devil not cast out but by Christ's
power. 115 Differences between Christian and worldly peace. 40 Differences
between Christ's anointing and all other. 73 Difference between Christ's
miracles, and miracles of the Prophets and Apostles. 87 Difference between the
miracles of the Prophets and Apostles, and those wonders wrought by Satan in
three things. 89 Difference between the life of the natural and regenerate
man in matters both civil, religious. 184 Difference between Civil and
Ecclesiastical power. 222 Difference between the kingdom of Christ and
Antichrist. 223 Divinity of Scripture proved. 46
ENemies even spiritual, not only foiled by Christ, but made after a sort
freindly. 175 Essential properties of faith 3. 308 Evangelists all large in
the Article of Christ his resurrection, Why. 155 Every thing must be esteemed
in the measure and degree of the goodness of it. 348 Examination of heavenly
life. 192
F
FAith, what it is. 296 Faith is not of all, reas. 297 Faith never lost, reas.
4. 298 Faith commends every thing. 305 Faith of most not rightly qualified.
317 Faith seateth it self in an humbled soul. 307 Faith in the resurrection,
an hard point. 228 Faithful are seasonably remembered of God, at least on the
third day. 205 Fame of Christ begun in Galily, Why. 61 And why after John's
preaching. 64 Fear of God what, and wherein it consists. 20 Fearers of God
must be accepted of us. ^3 Few men see the necessity of preaching, Why. 243
Five deadly enemies foiled by Christ: 1. sin. 2. death. 3. hell. 4. the
devil. 5. the world. 169 Five excellent fruits of saving faith. 300 Five sorts
of men all boast of faith, and yet all of them want it. 318 Freedom by Christ.
57 Fruits of faith, four. 311 Fruits of Christ's death reduced to two heads.
146 Force of consent in doctrine, wherein it stands. 293
G
GAlily of the Gentiles, why so called. 62 Glory of the last judgment
described. 261 Glory of God in his children turned into shame. 364 God no
accepter of persons, why. 10 Gods providence ouerruleth every special event
with the special circumstances. 68 God was with Christ how, and how with his
servants. 112 Gods wisdom and power most seen in choosing the most weak
things. 223 God only properly forgiueth sins, why. 326 God forgiueth sins
not only properly but perfectly: that is, both the guilt, and punishment. 329
Godly must enquire of the truth of doctrine delivered by the Scriptures. 220
Godly enter not into the judgment, how. 258 Godly must lift up their heads in
expectation of the day of their redemption 276 Godly who here have all hard
sentences pass against them, shall have justice at the last day. 265 Godly
must address themselves to the judgment day, two ways. 277 Godly life must
not be shunned for the crosses that attend it 350 Graces in the soul of Christ
after his resurrection were incomprehensible by all creatures, but in respect
of God finite, as the soul it self is. 168 Guilt of sin is wholly abolished
in believers, although not the whole corruption of it. 171
H
Happiness how it stands in remission of sins. 361 Hearers how to know
they have heard aright. 249 Heavenly life discerned by the notes of it. 183
Helps to attain the grace of remission of sins. 351 Hope is faiths
handmaid. 310 How the Lord of life could be subdued of death. 126 How God can
be just in punishing Christ an innocent, and letting the guilty go free. 128
How an infinite justice could be satisfied by so short a death. ibid How the
Jews are said to put Christ to death, seeing they had no power to do it. 129
How Christ's crucifying crucifieth the lusts of Christians. 147 How Christ can
be said to rise again, seeing neither his deity, nor the soul of his
humanity did. 152 How Christ is said to rise, seeing God the Father, and the
holy Ghost are said also to raise him. 156 How Christ has slain our sin, which
yet is so stirring in the best. 170 How believers may know they are risen with
Christ. 183 How the Apostles were furnished to their witness. 216 How Christ
could eat and drink after he rose again, seeing he rose not to natural
life. 226 How preaching could be Christ's ordinance, being so long before his
incarnation. 232 How Christ is ordained judge, seeing the Father and the holy
Ghost judge as well as he. 252 How Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to his
father. 254 Humiliation of Christ must humble Christians, and how. 144
I
Jesus of Nazaret, why so called. 67 In Gods judgment we must stand naked. 19
In all spiritual captivity hasten to Christ. 116 In cases of sorcerie what to
do. 117 In all divine things we must lean on a sure ground. 218 In reading
the Prophets, we must still be led to Christ. 295 Ingratitude of the Jews most
extreme. 133 Joshua in many things a singular type of Christ. 168 Judging of
our selves stands in 4. things. 281
L
LAw of perfect righteousness is the charter of heaven. 190 Life of faith,
wherein. 302 Lets which hinder men from seeking the remission of their sins.
345 Love of God expressed in three things. 312 Love of men wherein chiefly
discerned. 313 Love and thankfulness to God attends the remission of sins.
355 Lowest degrees of murder condemned as murder. 130
M
MAgistra^s must not accept of persons. 14 Malice of the wicked against the
godly never wants matter to work upon. 1^4 Many men bodily possessed by the
devil in Christ's time, above all other times before or since, why. 100 Manner
of Christ's resurrection in 3. things. 165 Map of humane frailty in Peter. 7
Means by which quick and dead shall be presented before the last judgment.
257 Means to increase the stock of faith. 316 Men endure not their lusts to
be pricked in the ministry, and much less crucified 149 Minister must be
careful to remove what may hinder his doctrine. 9 Ministers must expect Gods
calling as Christ did. 71 Ministers must urge themselves to diligent preaching,
why. 241 Miracles of Christ had a threefold use. 86 Motion of sin in the
regenerate is in letting the life of it go. 172 Motives to the practice of
Righteousness. 30
Necessity of preaching euinced by sundry reasons. ^36 Necessity of remission
of sins in 3 points. 337 Neither the person nor any of the offices of Christ,
could suffer him long to abide under the power of death. 160 New miracles not
needful to confirm old doctrine. 94 No less sin to sin by others as by
our selves. 131 No need of a dumb or blind ministry. 242 No man can avoid
the last judgment, unless his power be above Christ's. 260 No man can be too
precise, seeing the judgment shall be so precise and strict. 275 None capable
of Christ's office, because none is so anointed as he. 75 No peace by Moses.
39
O
Objections against preaching answered. 244 Objections against special faith
answered. 340 One way only to salvation. 49 Opening the mouth what it means
^ Open the eyes to see the happiness of the saints. 363 Offenses are of
sundry sorts. 326 Ordinary ministers must be believed as Apostles, while they
teach things heard and seen by the Apostles. 220 Ordinary Pastors now called
by Christ, though he be now in heaven. 234 Outward things cannot bring into
Gods acceptance. 18
P
Pattern of special grace in Peter. 8 Peace, what by it usually meant. 36
Peace by Christ with God, man, creatures, how. 37 Peace wanting, how to obtain
it. 42 Peace of conscience flows from remission of sin. 339 Person, what it
means. 10 Phrase of quick and dead, what it means. 257 Plain preaching of
Christ wherein it stands. 249 Popery a novelty. 48 Popery turns the
doctrine of Christ crucified into crucifixes. 150 Popish doctrine teaches not
true faith to this day. 299 Popish doctrine assenteth not to the article of
free remission of sins. 357 Preaching, the ordinance of Christ. 231 Preaching
of Christ, wherein it stands. 248 Privilege of a Godly man, what it is. 31
Promises of God all accomplished in due season. 199 Prophetical office of
Christ. 83 Public persons must give accounts for themselves and others in the
judgment day. 268
Q
QValities of Christ's raised body are not divine properties, they beautify,
but not deifie it. 166
R
REasons against seeking to witches. 120 Reasons why it was necessary Christ
should rise again. 159 Reasons why God delayeth to answer his children. 201
Reasons why Christ must so manifest his resurrection. 207 Reasons why the
Apostles were specially commanded to teach the doctrine of the last judgment.
250 Reasons to grow up in the strength of faith. 323 Religion what, and wherein
it stands. 21 Remembrance of judgment to come a notablemeanes to further
godliness. 251 Remission of sins, what. 325 Remission of sins how received.
355 Resurrection of Christ not only remooueth evils, but procures all our
good, as in 5. instances, 177 Right and possession of eternal life issues
from remission of sins. 340 Righteousness of the Judge, and last judgment
described. 264
S
Salvation assured believers from Christ's resurrection. 179 Saints in heaven
wholly called from three things, and the Saints in earth in part from the same.
187 Saints in heaven enjoy five things, which the Saints in earth do also in
part. 189 Satan's Tyranny over the souls of men more fearful then that he
exercises over their bodies. 104 Scriptures ascribe that often to the
instruments, which belongs to God the principal efficient, why. 321 Sermons
which plainest teach Christ are the best. 249 Sin set out in the most ugly
visage of it. 141 Sins carried never so secretly shall come into a clear
light. 272 Sins compared to debts. 328 Sorcerie of sundry kinds condemned.
117 Spiritual possession very common, proved at large by sundry instances
107 Strictness of the last judgment laid open. 268 Sure grounds that God
loves a man. 349
T
TEmptations of sundry sorts foiled by holding the Article of remission of
sins. 342 Tender affection to forgive our brethren, a good sign that God
has forgiven us. 356 The tyranny of Satan over those whom he bodily
possesses, discovered five ways. 101 The touchstone of trial of our words
and deeds is the word of God. 267 Three actions of faith helping forward the
free confession of it. 315 Thoughts must be judged of as well as our works.
271 To believe in the name of Christ, what. 336 Two things especially hinder
the care of the last judgment. 277 Truth of faith as much to be labored for
as salvation it self. 321
V
Virtue of Christ's death applied two ways. 143 Unbelievers damned already
how, and why. 322 Unregenerate men have all the mad properties of mad or
possessed persons proved. 104 Use of Christ's crucifying at large. 140
W
Why God suffers the devil to possess the bodies of men in all ages; four
reasons. 99 Why God suffers the devil so to tyrannize, abuse, and torture
them whom he possesses: reas. 4. 102 Why God permits a power of curing to
them of whom we may not seek cure. 122 Why the wicked prevail against Christ,
who had prevailed against the Devils themselves. 127 Why Christ was rather to
be hanged on a tree, then to die by any other kind of death: reas. 4. 136 Why
Christ must die in Jerusalem the theater of the world. 139 Why Christ would
still veil his glory after his resurrection. 167 Why Christ rose no sooner,
nor would defer his rising again no longer then the third day. 195 Why
Christ would not show himself to all the people after that he rose again.
218 Why Christ chose such mean men for his witnesses. 221 Why the Apostle
infers so many testimonies together concerning Christ. 285 Whosoever would
have his works and words abide the trial of the last day, must try them
before hand. 265 Wicked men shall be judged by him, against whom all their
villainies have been committed. 255 Wicked men already judged five ways. 259
Wisdom of God in every thing to be subscribed unto. 213 Witches, and all
seekers to them condemned. 120 Witnesses of Christ's resurrection of sundry
sorts. 213 Witness of the Apostles to be believed as infallible. 208 Word
preached, what use it has both to the unconverted, and converted. 236 Word
preached opposed by the devil and all wicked ones, and therefore is from God.
239 Working righteousness, what, and wherein. 25 The manner of it in four
things. 28
Good Reader the faults escaped in printing are some, but neither many nor much
marring the sense, I will therefore refer either the passing by, or amending
them to thy own courtesy.


