THE ABORTIVE OF AN IDLE HOVRE: OR A CENTVRIE OF EPIGRAMS.

AND A MOTTO UPON THE CREED. By Sr T. VV.

Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim.
LONDON Imprinted by T. D. 1620.

Vinum, and Vinegrum.
I Neither hang out Bush nor Sign, t'inuite
The comers by to taste, what Wine I sell:
It Is new, but hard, the pallat to delight:
Yet I have often heard some others tell,
That I have Wine, some much more sweet then other:
Believe them not, for they may be deceau'd,
It Were better taste thy self, then trust an other:
I pass not if thou taste, or taste not, so I leau't:
It Is that I made my self, it was never bought,
Many pay dear, for that is exceeding naught*
THE Abortiue of an idle Hour.
Ad Lectorem. Epigr. 1. Apologia pro Libello.
THe Epigrams which you shall read
Are some good, Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plura, Quae legis
hic: aliter non fit Auite liber: Ep. Mar.
most part naught,
Indifferent some; or else indeed
A book, no book is thought.
In Hermaphroditos Anglicanos. Ep. 2.
THe Virginibus Tyrijs mos est gestare pharetram. Virg.
Tyrian maids in shooting took great pride,
And always wore their quiver by their fide;
Our Britain brutes, or rather Monster-dames,
Whose necks are compassed with hells yellowe flames,
I must tell troth, though I be shent for blabbing,
They were Steeletto's, for their prid's in stabbing.
In Drusum. Ep. 3.
When Drusus waits upon St. George his day,
He prays his friends not to molest him then,
For then he is not his own man, does he say,
He Is so imployd, as other Lordings men;
The man's so far for being then his own,
That Drusus and his clothes alike are known.
In Leuem. Ep. 4.
LEuis through much experience understands*
Women have cause to fancy falling -- bands.
In Monoculum. Ep. 5.
WE deem them crafty, which with one eye look;
But I dare take my oath upon -- no book,
Monoculus did nere deceive his brother,
He Would see with two eyes, if he had another.
In Lenonem. Ep. 6.
LEno protests it is not past four years,
Since shoe-tie-roses were in estimation;
And he was one that had the first he swears,
It Is like; for he loves still to be in fashion.
But for his credit and the time, I Will add,
He eight years since a pair of Non Rosae mundae,
Roses had.
In Leuem. Ep. 7.
I Will not, Two negatiues make an affirmative.
no, and that is as much as I,
This phrase cost Leuis her Virginity.
In Littletonicos. Ep. 8.
AN ancient tenure Cornage is ye know,
And heretofore has bin of more esteem:
Now horns in every place so common grow,
That men ridiculous this Tenure deem;
But Inns-of-Court-men should not Cornage scorn, It summons them to dinner

For they are much behoulding to the Horn.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 9.
THraso is loath, that his well-wishing friends
Should see his courses, or know what he spends;
But when to borrow need does urge him, then
He stands not on it, Nouerint vniuersi.
Be It known unto all men.
In Alum. Ep. 19.
ALLus protests, that he can drink no wine,
He loves it not, it will make his headpeece light;
With ale or beer (says he) I Will rather dine,
Than hurt my stomach, or my wits afright.
At wine his lips shall not so much as smacke,
But you may daily make him drunk with sack.
In Quercium. Ep. 11.
QVercius turns over many Physic books,
But does not practice, yet on water looks;
I have not heard his physic ere saved any,
But once I heard, he would have poysond many.
In Lucifugum. Ep. 12.
LVcifugus was with a Ghost so haunted,
That he thought every place to be enchaunted;
He could no sooner move him to one place,
But still his Ghost had got before his face.
Lucifugus owed money to his host
This was his night and day molesting G.
De simulachro Thomae Bodlei equitis aurati, Bibliothecae Oxoniensi dicato. Ep.
13.
HEre may you see though Bodley but in part,
Apollo's image and Lysippus art.
To wish for more then part of him were vain,
For all the earth cannot the Anima.
whole contain.
In Orbicularem figuram mundi. Ep. 14.
THe world is round, we know, that live therein,
It Is round in compass, and it is round in sin.
In Magnasum. Ep. 15.
MAgnasus is a man of worthy race,
His nose stands like a Screene before his face;
Much worship did he lose of the last Queen,
Because he could not for his nose be seen.
I hear he has of late received some grace,
His Nose it seems, was in some other place.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 16.
THraso looks big, and mak's his cheeks seem ten,
As if he would outface an host of men:
The flesh, the devil, and the world, I know
He cannot conquer, though he puffs so.
In Dronum. Ep. 17.
Where ever Dronus sups, or dines, or walks,
He thinks on Dolon, and on Dolon talks;
He Is much indebted unto him, he says;
And so think I, but debt is taken two ways.
In debt to him says he? I know he is bound,
Not for his love, but it is for many a pound.
In Hergusum. Ep, 18.
DRunken Hergusus is known every where,
Al spendthrifts know him, such as love good beer
Cuckolds, Pandars, and perjured drabs can tell,
He Is strange to none, not scant to them in hell;
Who knows him not? Nosce teipsu(...)
if he be strange to one,
It Is to himself, himself he never has known.
In Litorem. Ep. 19.
LItoris holds him for a simple swain,
That get's not forty pounds a year by's wits;
But he (me thinks) makes small use of his brain,
His shifts are bad, nor dainty are his bits;
Yet those, to whom the man is better known,
Affirm he uses all he has, that is --.
In Hergusum. Ep. 20.
HErgusus, I had almost quite forgot
To ask thee why of late thou art so hot;
I will not blame thy liver, nor thy heart,
Thy heat proceeds from some inferior part.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 21.
THraso protests his neighbors goods to covet,
Is sin so vile, no crime may be above it;
To wish his wife, he swears, mauger the Devil
Can be no sin; for, she is his greatest evil.
In Biberium. Ep. 22.
BEcause I said Biberius was discreet,
In that he used few words when we did meet,
One fell a laughing, and this jest did break,
Biberius drinks until he cannot speak.
De Insignibus Oxoniensium. Ep. 23.
I Never did behold since I was borne,
An Ox or Bull whose head had not one horn:
The Citizens of Oxforde had of yore
A Bull that scant had half a horn, before
The learned Tribe, which indecorum scorns,
Out of their love gave them a pair of HORNS.
In Britannicas Amazones. Ep. 24.
THey say a new Plantation is intended,
Near or about the Amazonian river,
But sure that mannish race is now quite ended;
O that great Jove of all good gifts the giver,
Would move King James once more to store that clyme,
With the Mall-cut-purses of our bad time.
De Cord and Lingua. Ep. 25.
THe tongue was once a servant to the heart, Non loquitur os secundum cor.

And what it gave she freely did impart;
But now Hypocrisy is grown so strong,
She makes the heart a servant to the tongue.
To his worthy friend Captain Butler, Governor of Bermuda, or the Summer
Islands. Ep. 26.
I Marueil I, what mischiefs or what evils
Has made men call your Isles the Isles of Devils,
Is It for the perilous By reason of Rocks, the entrance into those Islands is
very dangeous.
Rocks, or for the In the beginning of that plantation, great store of hoggs
were found there.
Swine,
In whom our Lord the Legion did confine?
What ere it be, let us hear no more complaints*
So govern you, they may be Isles of Saints.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 27.
Think not amiss of Thraso in your hearts,
Because he brags, and sets forth his good parts,
For I have known some backward to reveal
That which they lost, because they did conceal.
In Leuem. Ep. 28.
LEuis was troubled with a jealous man,
Which long perplex't the silly woman's mind,
But taking heart, she studies all she can
For's jealous humor remedy to find:
She so contrived, that through a little chinke
He saw that done, which erst he did but think.
In Mortem. Ep. 29.
DEath, where is thy sting? I hope thou art taken down,
I fear thee not in City, Court, nor Town;
Thou need'st not boast thou rob'st men of their breath,
For he that conquered Hell did conquer Death.
In Quercium. Ep. 30.
QVercius queasie stomach feeds on muttons,
Great eaters sin (says he) and terms them glutons;
To thrust himself out of the count of sinners,
One leg of mutton serves him minc't ten dinners.
De Luna. Ep. 31.
Women from Luna's custom much do stray,
She makes horns monthly, but they every day.
In Lenam. Ep. 32.
LEna was once of gallants much esteemed,
But now she is as one unworthy deemed,
By those of whom she has bin often used,
She is contemned, scoft at, and abused;
The reason's this; All men affect and wish
To have the youngest flesh and ouldest fish,
In Tergusum. Ep. 33.
HOmer did drink, and Homer could not see,
But Homer drunk not out his eyes, like --
In Littletonicum quendam. Ep. 34.
THe morrow next after an Ember Fast,
Litoris brags of his last nights repast;
Partrich and Pheasant, tut, with him's no dish;
I think so to, where is neither flesh nor fish:
He always keeps his bed, when he sups best,
But Morpheus still is master of the feast.
In Alum. Ep. 35.
INe're did wish thee well, thou said to day,
Now therefore Allus mark what I shall say:
I wish thy nose for ever may look red,
For, when it is pale (I fear) thou will be dead.
In Ebriosum Ep. 36.
FIe man, says she; but I tell mistress Ann,
Her drunken husband is no drunken man;
For, those whose wits are overcome with drink,
Are void of reason, such are beasts I think.
In Petraeam. Ep. 37.
WHo says Petraea has no abstinence?
Those that say so, have but a little sense,
For most men know, it is evident and plain
That none from Church does more then she abstain.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 38.
THraso I think does near of anger dream,
Although his Collar seems to be extreme.
In Lexum. Ep. 39.
When Sword and Buckler was in estimation,
Lexus says, then a man might have some play;
But since this noble fight grew out of fashion,
A boy might kill a man in any fraye:
Lexus in honor of this old defense,
Hacks many a One end of a Sur-loin of Beife called the buckler piece, by
reason of a large flat bone in that part.
Buckler in an other sense.
In Lizam. Ep. 40.
LIza does nothing well, her sister says
But this proceeds from envy, I can tell,
For which I must her sister much disprayse;
Since many know that Liza drinks well.
In Curuum. Ep. 41.
When Curuus first Siluanus daughter saw,
Her heat of youth his frostie blood did thaw;
Which so inflamd the aged man's desire,
That he never stood on portion with her Sire;
Nor was there cause, the match was not so bad,
For with his wife enough (God knows) he had.
In Ventrosum. Ep. 42.
FOr trees an p^nt-houses I do not care,
As long as you (Ventrosus) presentare,
For in the greatest show're and storms I tell ye,
I wish not better shelter then your belly.
In Litorem. Ep. 43.
Lie on Litoris, do, hear's none controules,
Thou may as freely lie here, as in Poules;
But now my small friend, that the less men say,
The more they write against thee every day.
De Anglis. Ep. 44.
IT seems the English men are Caniballs,
For they eat Fools, and fools we know are men;
Such as eat men have bitter barbarous galls,
The English have so, it should follow then.
Resolutio.
But I Will resolve this doubt equivocal
Some men are Fools, some fools are men, not A vvhitmeat made of Cream and
Rice, called of some a Ricemos, of others a Fool.
all.
In Magnasum. Ep. 45.
Thou Art vain Magnasus for to be so proud,
Because so many, where thou come, give place,
And most of those are of the vulgar crowd,
Yet were they Lords I think, it were noe great grace:
For one of better understanding knows,
They give not place to thee, but to thy Nose.
In Thomansium Long. Ep. 46.
Thou Art very fitly named Thomansius Long,
For with thy name does well accord thy nature;
Long ere thou will do good, or right a wrong,
Long in thy lyeing, likewise long in stature,
Thou Art long in all, in Nature, stature, Name,
But thou come short of virtue, and good fame.
De Musis. Ep. 47.
YE reverend Poets, now but earth and clay,
And ye the gloryes of this present age,
Vouchsafe me leave with due respect to say,
Ye seemd to flatter in your sacred rage,
Faining the Muses to be women, when
Reason approues them rather to be men;
Those Nine, in men are but a nine-fould skill,
Which for the head is the supreamest part
Do there inhabit, as upon a hill,
Well named Parnassus, or the house of Art;
There Is scant nine women wise; men nine times nine,
Then reason will, they should be masculine.
In Piscatorem quendam. Ep. 48.
OStendam piscem, quoth a learned Clarcke,
That scornd to use his mother tongue in schools;
A right wise scholar forthwith got a Barcke,
And out he goes with all his angling tools;
His guide pointing to Heaven, ere they went far,
Cried Ecce piscem, angle for the star.
De Oto. Ep. 49.
Otus a Maid both far and near has sought,
But cannot come, where he dares swear is one;
I tell him Maids are common to be bought,
If they be common then, says he, they are none.
It Is true and false: But I mistook the dish,
Otus meant flesh, and I meant Maids the fish.
In Thrasonem. Ep. 50.
THraso giu's out, he is riding out of town,
Yet still I meet him ietting in his gown;
Which would have made me thought it but a brag,
Had I not known he kept a running Nagg:
But if to speak my conscience I were bidden,
He rides not half so often, as he is ridden.
In Britannicam Amazonem. Ep. 51.
GOd save you Captain. Oh I have mistook,
Excuse me Lady; when I first did look
Upon your broad-brymd hat* and flaunting feather,
Those martial ensigns met in you together,
Made me suppose a Captain you had been;
Your sex like men I near before have seen.
In Lizam. Ep. 52.
Cross me not Liza, Tarlton cut off all his skirts because none should sit
upon them.
ne'ther be so perte
For if thou do, I Will sit upon thy skerte.
Thou know I know thy nimble fingers joints,
Then hold thy tongue, and stand not on thy Poynted round.
points.
In Leuem. Ep. 53.
TH'Italians say, Give me your wenches fat,
To make them fair, we will quickly find a mean,
They Will have them fat and fair; but wot you what,
Thou takst such pains, that thou art carrion lean.
In Quosdam Punctualisticos. * Punctuallists
Ep. 54.
I Will tell a secret, if you will not mock it,
Some keep a Calendar worn in their pockit,
To note their days of buisnes and delights:
Others do bear about a Roll of knights,
So punctual are they; Yet to their disgrace,
They have mistaken both their Day, and Place.
In quendam Tobacciferum. Ep. 55.
When men are dry, they use to call for drink,
And so they wet their arrid parts, I think,
My husband bibs, and drink does ever cry,
Yet his drink does not moysten, but does dry.
De Nihil aliud est, secundum Philosophos, quam albi coloris apparentia, quae
fit ob intetionem astrorum luminis, quae, vbi circulus apparet, densissima sunt
and numerosissima. Est via sublimis, caelo manifesta sereno, Lactea nomen
habet* candore notabilis ipso: Ovid.
Galaxia sieve Lactea via. Ep. 56.
PHilosophers and Poets do agree,
A white or milkye way Quaere de hoc.
in heaven to be:
It Is well their judgments there so much do mark,
For on the earth the ways of men are dark.
In Drusam. Ep. 57.
DRusa loves powdring, but she hates salt;
At first this humor seems very strange,
Like his who loves beer, yet hates malt;
But Drusa's woman-like, constant in change.
Which maks me hope, that in her daintiest fare.
She may love salt, and hate her powdered hair.
In Capistra foeminea. Ep. 58.
TRadition says the Mair's of Oxforde wore,
A Rope about their necks Ropes on or about the head was a sign of submission.
in time of yore
But now for decency of later years,
In the Rop's place each Mai'r a Ribbin wears;
This fashion women use, which maks me doubt,
When that came in with them, 1. Kings 20. 3^
their Ropes went out.
Ad seipsum. Ep. 59.
NOr pine, nor pranck, in poverty or wealth;
Nor curious be, nor careless of thy health;
To others do as they should do to thee;
Love th'actiue life, yet not too busy be.
Maturely ponder, ear thou do propounde,
Prepare thy mind to want, and to abound:
I give my self this Counsel, to indeere
Me to my self, since to my self most near.
In Corbum. Ep. 60.
COrbus will not, persuade him what I can,
The world should take him for a Gentleman;
His reason's this; because men should not deem,
That he is such, as he does never seem.
Ad laudem cuiusdam faeminae Ep. 61. virtute praecellentis. --
MEn say thou art crooked and exceeding black,
My eye observes not any thing you lack,
And I esteem thee as a precious Jewel,
In thee is that giu's my affection fuel;
I love thee much, what faults so ere men find,
Because I know thou have a beuteous mind.
In Lenonem. Ep. 62.
GOod laws there be, and Proclamations made
To force the abstinence from flesh in Lent;
But Leno's appetite is so vnstaide,
Flesh he must have, though after he repent;
I wonder how he keeps worms from his mawe,
They say his flesh is lean, and fresh, and raw.
In quendam -- Ep. 63.
HOnest Sir John does to his neighbors cry,
Forsake the world, and learn the way to dye;
If this be wholesome counsel he does give,
Why then makes he himself such shift to live?
In Assinium. Ep. 64.
ASsinius weeps still, for he fears to dye,
As who should say, tears did produce his days;
Nay laugh not, till you know his reason why,
Perhaps it is such, that it will merit praise;
Singing (says he) portends death to the Swan;
Why may it not presage the like to man?
Allusio ad praecedens. Ep. 65.
THis may be true; For were for joy or sorrow,
The Player*
Singer sung over night, and died next morrow.
In Mopsam. Ep. 66.
When Mopsa me a Nose-gaye pray's to buy,
I do not guess her meaning suddenly;
Her Nose so gay is, that I often suppose,
She would not sell her flowers, but her Nose.
In Galbum. Ep. 67.
GAlbus, when thou were young, I knew thee fair,
But you are Sunburned since that time, you say;
That burnt you are, you shall not need to swear,
For none that knows thee will the same denaye.
But many doubt, though you have closely hid it,
That it was not Phoebus, but it was Phebe did it.
In Cornutum. Ep. 68.
Until Cornutus gazed in a glass, * That which the eye sees not the heart
never rues*

He little thought that he a Monster was:
But when he saw the truth, he cried out then,
Women have power to metamorphose men.
In Assinium. Ep. 69.
TEll me Assinius, how it comes to pass,
That thou do hold in such contempt an Ass;
Knew'st thou as much as I, I Would undertake,
Thou Would love an Ass better for thine own sake. * Similis similem petit.

De Chinensibus. Ep. 70.
THe men of China say (who are so wise)
And all the world, according to their proverb.
We see with one eye, they with double eyes;
Suppose they err not: yet a Christian man
Sees more with one eye, then with two they can.
Ad Lectorem intelligentem. Ep. 71.
REaders too common, and too many be,
He Is termed a Reader, can read A.B.C.
But I Will not call for such a Readers aid, * Duplexest hic sensus.

For then poor rymes, you were but ill apayde;
I only crave protection from his hands, * Arsnonhabet inimicum praeter
ignorantem.

That carps noe more, then what he understands.
Apologia pro seipso. Ep. 72.
I Pra'y fair Ladies pard'ne my forward youth,
If I have slaunder'd you in telling truth;
You shall noe more me thus offensive find;
But if you mend not, in a worser kind.
In Zabidium. Ep. 73.
I Love thee not Zabidius, Non amore Zabidi, nec possum dicere quare;

Nor can I stay so long
To tell thee, why I hate thee thus,
Thy breath does smell so strong. Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te* Mart.

In Litorem. Ep. 74.
IF I against Litoris ought have writ,
I shall not need to fear his reading it;
My youth has seldom so much in his slopp
To buy my Book, were in a Brokers shopp.
Ad Libellum. Ep. 75.
IF Philomusus read you, my rude Rymes,
You may have hope to outliue present times;
According to the sentence he shall give,
Or look you must to die, or look to live.
In Lenonem. Ep. 76.
It Is a great sign, that Leno's stomack's hot,
Because he is noted to love Lemons so:
But of this reason some approves not,
Who better do his constitution know:
For they affirm, his Lemons got by theft,
And those are cast-ones Priests Lemons.
, such as Priests have left.
De quatuor Terminis militaribus. Ep. 77.
IF Soldiers may obtain four Terms of war,
Muskets shall be the Pleaders, Pikes the Bar;
And since our Terms are rare, get we but one,
Mars shall eat flesh, Justinian pick the bone.
In quendam Richardum. Ep. 78*
DIck went to Dunmowe for a The old custom was, that whosoever repented not
within a year after their marriage, they might go to Dunmowe for a flitche of
Bacon, and have it upon demand.
Bacon flitch,
And claimed the custom there: But one replide,
Although I know you (Sir) exceeding rich,
And well may pay; you shall not be denide,
So you will fetch your wife, for then I vow
You shall bear hence two sides of a fat Sow.
In Rodulphum. Ep. 79.
ROdulphus frets, that he is rank't no higher,
Because (says he) his Title is Esquier;
Of the first Not Esquire by honor of blood.
magnitude he is not, may be
Some Pippin-Squire, or one of low degree.
In Aucipem. Ep. 80.
YE harmles birds, the Fowler now does watch ye,
Take heed his charming music does not catch ye;
Happy were ye, and most secure from wrong,
If that a Fistula dulce canit, volucres dum decipit Auceps.
Fistula were in his tongue.
In quosdam Panedentes. Ep. 81.
YE Rau'nous Eat-breads, had you chaunc't to live,
When Christ the Loafes did to the hung'ry give;
You eat bread so, that some profanely thought,
That Miracle had then been never wrought.
In Lenonem. Ep. 82.
THe Doves will dwell in habitations clean,
They thrive not, Aspicis vt veniant ad candida tecta Columbae.
nor delight in any other:
But thou have got a habit so obsceane;
(Which thou deriu'st neither from Sire nor mother)
Thou dwell'st in Houses (and delight'st therein),
Such as are nastie with the stench of sin.
In Floram. Ep. 83.
FLora was sick; they say she is now amended,
But wants weight her sickness so impaird her;
That weight she wants shall be condiscended,
She Is now so light, that honest men discard her.
If she be well, judge those that have more skill,
In my opinion she is verry ill.
Ad Dominam Sapientiam. Ep. 84.
EVer young Lady, ever glorious fair,
It Is strange the sons of men no more do court thee*
Youth, beauty, honor, wealth, uncertain are
A month they vex, if one day they disport thee;
How talpishe-blind are those, who do not see,
They nothing have (Dame Wisdom) wanting thee?
In quosdam non Ignotos. Ep. 85.
TH'antipathy of nature in these men,
Deserve an observation with my pen:
Two things they love, green Leeks and tosted Cheese,
But Hemp they hate, and when they see it, they sneese.
In non Decimantes. Ep. 86.
SOme thieves are Pirates.
water-Ratts, someway-purs-takers,
Some Canters are, and other some House-breakers;
There Is many sorts of theft, many of thieves,
The greatest Sacrilegio^^ De fures.
those, keep that the Church releeues.
De Naui submersa. Ep. 87.
THe Poast brings news a Ship is suncke hard by, At north fleet March 1619.
goeing out to the East Indies

Laden with goods, worth threescore thousand pounds;
It Were rude in me, to give the Poast the lie,
Yet grant me leave to show, I have some grounds,
He talks of Goods, Christo in nauicula (quamuis dormiente) non perierunt. Mar.
4. 38.
if one * Good were therein
She had not suncke, but see the weight of sin!
In Cornutum. Ep. 88.
THe time has been, thou weart a sucking Calfe,
And then thy mother daily used to bear thee;
But when thou were a weanling, half in half,
Thy weight increased, and then thy Sire did rear thee;
But now thou art grown an Ox, I know not one
Can bear thy Horns; thou art so monstrous grown.
Ad Floram. Ep. 89.
THe use of Masks I cannot but commend,
To keep the beauty from the scorching Sun;
But Flora I would know, what you intend,
Whether you fear the Moon, when day is done;
For I have heard, that duly every night
You wear a Mask, to smooth, but not to white.
De suffocatione Matricis. Ep. 90.
BElla is much afflicted with the Mother,
No Physic can her mind's content restore;
A contrary disease troubles her brother,
Of some the Father Dolor patris
tearmd; which lies so sore
Upon his heart, and thence not to be driven
Till he may say, the Father is in heaven.
In Leuem. Ep. 91.
It Is white and red that most delights the eye,
That cheek's adored, where those two colors lie;
But thou look green as leeks, or greenest glass,
Which hue in thee, confirms all flesh is grass.
Green cures green, conceive me in a word.
For thee nought's better then a Green-goose --
Ad Senatores Land. Ep. 92.
Grave Senators, add to your Roy'l Exchange, (pleasure
One You may call it Northstreete.
window more, through which your eyes with
From thence may see your Feildes, and level range
Of your young Plants; oh take not so much leisure
For a good work, which had been done (some say)
Long since, had not a Quaere de hoc.
Style stood in the way.
De quodam iocoso. Ep. 93.
A Merry Greek set up a Si quis, late,
To signify a stranger come to town,
Who could great Noses, and their heat abate;
His lodging, such an Inn, the day set down,
The hugest Noses thither made repair,
But Leech found none, they made mine host to stare.
Of the Trees and Walks in Moore-Fieldes. Ep. 94.
YE upright Formalists, Think upon Midletons water.
and grauelld walks,
Of you the Spaniard, Dutch, Italian talks;
So talk they of your Citty's great Infectour,
Old More-Ditch and condemn the works directour
That More-Ditch is not less Ditch, or more water,
To cleanse the filth of those, The Cutthroates of Whitecrosse-street (...)
that catle slaughter.
In Vulpinum. Ep. 95.
VVlpinus twice was sick, twice made his will,
(With no intent, that then should be his last)
Gave all to those, who bore him no good will,
Which well he knew, but policy forecast:
That hope of gain did gain those men respect,
Whom all the world would otherwise neglect.
In Potatores. Ep. 96.
YE gusling drunkards, I do much admire,
Your throats wear not, nor that your arms do tire
In swallowing drink, and lifting double Iuggs,
Which fright my senses, as the sight of buggs;
O Guttur-Laine, how many sorts of drink,
Run poast through thee, as water down a sincke?
In temporis profusores. Ep. 97.
THe world is full of prodigal expenders,
The borrowers are more then are the lenders;
Those Prodigalls commit the highest crime,
Who wast their lives in vain expense of time.
In quendam morbum equinum. Ep. 98.
THe'rs one disease in country and in London
Has men and horses ye, and women undone;
There cannot sure a more contagious thing come
Then this disease that spreads over all the Kingdom;
I dare not nam't least Prides pyes in their passions
Chatter against me. Oh horses! oh the Fashions!
In quosdam Tubicinatores. Ep. 99.
YE roaring beggars, tell me what you mean,
To spend each Christmas so much wind, to gleane
Gratuities from men. O come not near
Where I abode, or whisper in my ear;
Be sure your tongues with modesty be tipped,
And then I Will tell you, beggars must be whipped.
In Zoilum. Ep. 100.
MY Book is short says Zoilus, What then?
I wish it short, and sweet to other men.
Or thus. Ep. 77.
IF Soldiers may obtain four Terms of war,
Muskets shall be the Pleaders, Pikes the Bar,
For black Bags, Bandeleers, Iackets for Gowns,
Angels our fees, we will take no more cracked Crowns.
FINIS.
Libellus.
IF any ask me now, whose book I am,
I cannot answer without signs of shame;
For he that owns me, very often says,
I am the worst of all the books he has,
And which more grieves me, calls me triuiall rymes,
Th'vntimely issue of his idle times.
A MOTTO UPON THE CREED. Nullum simile est idem. Arist

KIng David's Psalm. 14. 1.
fool in paths of Athists trod,
Denying him whom -- I believe in God,
Nay more ye Athists know (although it spite ye)
I Will ever trust in -- The Father Almighty: * 2 Samuel 24. 13

Nor fear I pestilence, nor sword, nor dearth,
Confessing him -- Maker of Heaven and earth. * Romans 8. 27.

I'ts thou O Lord, the hearts of men that tr'yst,
Thou know my faith in thee -- And Jesus Christ, * 1 Corin. 16. 13.

Mediat my sins (or else I am undone)
Sweet Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
with God, thou art -- His only Son,
All men O God, thy mercy must record,
Who made us, slaves to sin, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
free by -- Our Lord;
Which with a Mat. 1. 16.
bitter welcome was received
Into this World, * Mat. 1. 20.
O Christ -- Who was conceived
Not by the Carnal act of man, but most
Miraculously -- By the Holy Ghost: * Mat. 26. 48.

Nor stayed God here, nor did his mercy vary,
Christ was for us -- Borne of the Virgin Marie:
When he consummated each work and wonder,
Most innocent, for us -- He suffered under
The accursed Jews, through Judas that false mate,
And the constrained doom of -- Pontius Mat. 26. 48.
Pilate:
And more for us was buffited, Mat. 27. 24. 28.
enui'd,
Reuil'd, * 67.
disdained, and last -- Was crucified:
35.
Joseph of Arimathea then (inured
To works of mercy) begged his body -- Dead, * Mat. 27. 58.
and buried:
The Lord of life; would all our sins had ended,
And been engrau'd with him, when -- He descended
(As we believe, and this our Creed does tell)
Into the grave, or pit, or -- Into hell:
Psalm. 68. 18.
Captivity led captive, * (...)
Death in chain
And for us men -- The third day rose again
And by his resurrection from the bed
Of souls deceal'd, * Mat. 27. 63. 28. 6.
raised mankind -- From the dead:
And rotten works of sin, talked with the Eleu'n Heb 9. 14.

Gave them a chardge -- Ascended into heaven: Romans 6. 2.

But not as man, * Mat. 28. 9.
who out of sight forgets
Their suits, Mar. 16. 14.
and wants are absent, still -- He sets
Close by our God his heavenly father, and
For sinners interceads -- On the right hand
Of majesty incessantly, * Mat. 26. 64.
and rather
Then Saints and Angels, begs -- Of God the father
Forgiu'nesse of all sins, it is he can right ye
O sinful sons of men, even he the -- Almighty:
Who then would Ephesians. 4. 30
greiue him? who so sottish he
To say he is not in heaven -- From thence shall be
The second time (till when he will not budge)
Descend from heaven his Throne, and -- Come to judge
With Mat. 25. 34. 41.
Ite or Venite such as led
Liu's good or ill -- Both the quick and the dead.
And though he is now in heaven, we must not grieve in,
His corp'rall absence; now do -- I believe in
The Com'forter his spirit John 14. 16.
against whom an host
Is weak, * Romans 8. 2.
so powerful is -- The holy Ghost:
Satan shall never leave me in the lurch
Whilst I am branch of -- The Catholic Church:
Let Christians learn to live in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13
peace and union,
In zeal to imitate -- The Communion
Of heavens rich Citizens, where is noe complaints
Noriarrs of Angels, Cherubs nor -- Of Saints:
There Is love, and bliss, and Heb. 12. 14.
peace with so much eu'nesse,
That they never one another ask -- Forgiveness
Then let us not speak, but do Mat. 34. 46.
the deeds that wins
The love of God, and the full pard'ne -- Of sins:
So when we dye, or greiue, there is a refection,
Life after death, joy by -- The resurrection
Nor shall we then, though low does lie the head,
Be ranck't among the number -- Of the dead:
This is a comfort sweet, and never wasting,
To be assured of -- The life everlasting;
These. 5. 17.
Prayers may do much, therefore let Priest and lay men,
For this great blessing knit up all with -- Amen.
FINIS.

