A MOTHERS TEARS OVER HER SEDVCED SON: Or A dissuasiue from Idolatry, penned
in way of a Dialogue, by occasion of a late letter from the son now at Doway,
to his mother: Which is also printed with the letter, and is fully set down in
the sons part, for the substance, though with some addition in form.

Hearken unto me, that the Lord may hearken unto thee. Judges. 9. 7.

Imprinted 1627.

A MOTHERS EPISTLE to her Child.
CHILD.
THere are two books that go under a mothers name; A Mothers Blessing; A
Mothers Legacy: now thou see a Mothers Tears. And this last contains all.
In this a sorrowful Mother weeps for her Child, laments for her Child, and
cannot be comforted, because he is not: Call it a Mothers Tears. In this a
sorrowful Mother pleades for her Child, begs for her Child, prays for her
Child: That the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, would incline his
heart to fear the God of his Fathers, according to the pattern of wholesome
words, call it, A Mothers Blessing. And because thy Mother, almost worn out
with years and tears, is now lying down in sorrow, and not likely to see thy
face, unless thou will hasten; she bequeathes this unto thee as her last will
and Testament. Call it a Mothers Legacy.

Now Child, I think fit to satisfy thee in two things, both touching the
Impression of this book. The first shall give the reason of it: the second
shall (I hope) put away the offense thou may take at it. To the first I have
this to say, that finding most things (as I thought) coutcht in thy letter,
which have and may draw, and hold, the unstable minds of nouices, who have not
laid the first principles right, I could not, whether for want of wit, or too
much propensitie to talk (both if thou will, it is no great impeachment to a
woman) coutch my answer within the scantling of a letter. Whence it happened,
that a friend desiring a Copy, took a readier way for 500, then he could with
his pen transcribe one, and so printed it beyond the seas. And before any of
them came to my hands, diverse were dispersed, being first taken at the Custom
house, then shrifted for Papists, after dismissed by a large indulgence: Whence
the books came to me just in the very manner as a Papist returns from his
confessor. The book had its pardon: It Is true; and his outside was as fair
as Pilates hands, but the inside was in statu quo prius as foul as before. The
truth is, the book had so many faults, as that it was not fit to pass with
them. That put me upon some second thoughts, which made the book much bigger;
and now it is free for any hand. The white it aims a^, is thy return, which
if it hit not, yet I hope it will keep some from going to thee. I know not,
said a wise man, whether I shall profitt him, I do admonish; but this I know,
If I warn many, one or another will receive instruction. Spread thine hand,
and let the seed fall, some may fall in good ground; Sen. Epist. 29. Let thy
hook always hang, It is a Proverb; that may bite, thou look not for, in a
time thou think not of. Cast thy Nets; So is that, though thou take not a
Salmon, thou may a Trout; suppose it be a less fish, it will be welcome.
If I cannot catch men, I can be contented to catch boys, yea Children: I am a
debtor to them. If any thing come: why should I sacrifice to my nett? If
nothing, and so my night labor be lost: I know the reason. The Lord teach his
professed Fishers to cast their netts on the right side of the boat, that they
may find: Sure this is the time, the waters are troubled. And so much for the
first, wherein I desire to give full satisfaction, so do I in the second;
which follows.

If thou shall say, thy renting from us will be known now. Alas Child, if that
could have been helped, thy mother would have put to both her shoulders. Yea
but this will make it more notorious. I cannot tell y^; but be it so; then also
it will make thy return the more gracious. And the more shall take notice of
thy departing from us, the more will praise God for thy return unto us: so
that this will be no more thy disgrace, then was that letter of Paul to
Philemon, a disgrace to Onesimus, only let thy return be like his, who
departed for a season, that he might be received for ever. But say what can be
said, this is certain, he that is truly turned, little esteems his own
grace: so God may have the glory. I find the Saints boasting of their
infirmities, blazing their faults, none more; I was a Publican, so Matthew: I
was a Persecutor, so Paul: But sparing in setting forth their excellencies,
their abilities; if it must be done as sometimes it must, that God may have the
glory; it shall be done in the third person; The Disciple whom Christ loved: So
John of himself, Ioh. 13. 23. I knew a man; whether in the body* or out of
the body. I cannot tell etc. So Paul of himself, 2 Cor. 12. 2. And why so?
God must be exalted, man must be laid low. I add, and I conclude with it,
when it shall please God to reveal his Son unto thee, thou will not then
consult with flesh and blood. Gal. 1. 16* So much to the Child.

Something to thee Reader, at large: the bait is laid for thee too: for I go a
fishing. This book concerns that particular relation thou stand'st in, as a
parent, or as a child, or both. Thou see a Mothers Tears; thou see also
a Child has caused them. Art thou a Child? then hear the Instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother; why should thou cause thy
Parents Tears? Thy Mother has groaned for thee already, make her not groan
again: How can thou behold A Mothers Tears? Art thou a Parent? Thy child is
a doubtful commodity: There is a peradventure in all things good and evil
under the Sun, that may befall him, except one. It is borne, perhaps it may
grow up, perhaps not, and so on, perhaps so, perhaps not. Thou can not say,
perhaps it may die, perhaps not; that is as certain, as other things are
uncertain: if it do grow up like the flower, it shall be cut down like the
grass: no peradventure there. But in all things, else there is nothing thou
can look on, that is subject to more hazard. It may miscarry for want of thy
care, so may it notwithstanding all thy care. See what a barren piece of mould
thou have let unto him! It brings forth nothing of it self but briars and
thorns; and do what thou can do, they will shut forth. That thou may
make it happily fruitful; thou must to planting; thou must to watering; so
much thou art bound to do, for thou art his debtor; more thou can not do,
thou art but a man: weeds come up of themselves, good corn not so: flesh is
propagated, not spirit. Thou can but speak to the ear, by all thy planting,
by all thy wat'ring; it is God that boares it, so giving your increase. Thou
can not add to the stature, the one or the other: yet let me thrust in one
thing by the way; I find obedience pre'st upon the parent in many places, as a
special means to in^aile a blessing upon the child; And it shall be well with
thee. Is that all? No. And with thy seed after thee. A strong motive to
obedience. But still here is a brittle Bark, and it must pass through a
tempestuous sea; every little gale tosseth it, a greater indangers it. Pray,
that grace (a commodity thou can not stoo in him) may set him upright, and
keep him so. I say, pray, as Paul in another case, often and again, that the
keeper of Israel would so steer him off the Rocks, where there will be ship
wrack, as that he may not cause his Parents Tears: they will be bitter ones;
for I can tell in experience, that one Child is unto the Parents as the two
basketts of Figgs to the Pallet: when good, very good, then sweet, very sweet:
he is their Isaac, the Parents joy. When bad, very bad; then bitter, very
bitter: he is a Benoni, all their sorrow: hence A Mothers Tears. Believe it
Reader, a Child is a kind of a thing lapt up together like a pretty bundle,
thou may call it a bundle of Cares, but that is to general: There are three
things wrapped closely in it; one, as thou may be, thou shall feel before thou
see it, and that is Labor or Sorrow, the other comes to thy hand presently,
and sticks to it like bird-lime, thou can not shake thy hands off it; and
that is Care. The other, which is Comfort, thou may meet with, but thou
know not when, and being found, it may slip from thee, thou know not how
soon; but in place of it, thou shall be sure to feel the first again perhaps
in more extremity. God give thee comfort in thine. Now say as much for me:
And thee thine again.

THE AVTHOR TO THE Christian Reader.
THis Book has yet a further Reference unto thee, then what the Mother has
told: For that it concerns that High Relation also, thou stand in toward
God, to whom thou owe honor, because thou call him Father: And fear,
because thou cal'st him Lord: in whom all Relations meet, as lines in their
Center; and from whom they receive both light, motion, and direction. For be it
thou art a Governor, thou must command in the Lord. Be it thou art a servant,
(so is a Son too under age;) thou must obey in the Lord. And herein the more
or less Idolatrous thou art, the more or less faulty. Now if thou shall say,
the Case is well with thee, for thou art no Idolator, my Answer is, thy heart
may deceive thee, and surely does. Indeed I am persuaded of thee, that, if thou
have not shut thine eyes against the clear light, thou art not such a Child in
years or understanding (Be it thon art not fit for strong meat,) but that thou
do loath and detest Idolatry in the generallity, and maine tenants of the
same.

As first, that the Mystical Body the Church, which is least in sight, should
have an Head on earth, so visible, as a Tripple Crown will make it.

Secondly, that a Supreme power should be given to him, and to others, a
power so subordinate, as that they, though the Lords anointed on earth, (I do
not read the Popes are so) should be but fit to kiss his holiness feet,
when as an unmannerly dog strained courtesy, and bit his toes. He, no doubt,
without whose providence the least sparrow falls not, correcting such
exorbitant pride by a contemptible, though serviceable Creature.

Thirdly, That he who has his foundation in Clay, what ever, they who give
titles to men, account of him, should be planted so high above his Predecessor
Peter, (so some would have it) as that the shot, whereby Peter was hit, cannot
reach his Successor.

Fourthly, That he should keep a fair for Indulgences, and pardons,
Excommunications, Bulls and Curses, and I know not what: As if he had so much
interest in God, as to make him pardon man for his profit: Or as if Balak had
so much power in Balaam, that he could make him curse, where God will bless:
follow not thou the counsel of Balaam, to mix thy self with strangers, and
to follow their works, so drawing a Curse on thy self, and Balaam though he
be upon his Ass, and forward on the way, shall not hurt thee.

Fifthly, That the constitutions of the Popes and Cardinals, are of divine
Authority, when as thou may give more credit to an old wives tale.

Sixthly, That the word, which is the mighty power of God unto salvation, and
is profitable to teach, to instruct, and to reprove, that the man of God may be
perfect, should, notwithstanding the necessity and excellency of it, be locked
up in an unknown tongue, when as, besides what thou have well observed from
Paul's words, 1. Cor. 14. Thou art verily persuaded that thy shepherd takes
more felicity with his Dog, then in hearing him pray or prophecy, whose
language he understands not. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 19. cap. 7.

Seventhly, That the Virgin mother may command the Son, whereas she rejoices
in God her Savior. And that the Saints, may be invocated, as Intercessors,
though not as Mediators, whereas there is but one that sits to make
intercession for us, even he that sits at the right hand of his Father. This
and much more, thou call gross Idolatry, a darkness, which may be felt,
and is, by all such, as are not blinded, with ignorance, as it were by
proscription: who professing themselves to be wise, are become fools, and
having changed the truth of God into a lie, are now delivered up unto strong
delusions, even to believe lies. And thus much, for that, I am verily persuaded
of thee; my hope reaches yet further concerning thee: That whereas thou have
so often read of the Jews, so often reproved for their Fasts, their Prayers,
their Alms; excellent things in themselves; thou have thence concluded, that
works avail nothing, unless they proceed from a touched and religious
heart; unless they do not in name only agree, but are in truth answerable to
our profession: for that God is pleased with truth, not with ceremony; with
substance, not with form; with mercy, rather then sacrifice; with obedience,
rather then the fat of Lambs; with cutting off the right eye and arm, not
with casting away the baggs. And all this, considering what the Lord says in
the first of Malachi: In every place shall be offered unto me, a pure offering;
but cursed be the deceaver, that has in his flock a male, and offers unto
the Lord a corrupt thing: offer it unto the Governor: will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? I am a great King, says the Lord, and my name is
terrible.

Again (which is a consequent from the former, and may be for explication)
whereas thou read of dead works, and a dead Faith, which like her that lived
in pleasure, have but a name only; thou have thence concluded, that it is not
the bare doing of any thing, that brings the doer into acceptance with God:
But that there is some more inward thing, that witnesses to the worker, that
he is in Christ, in whom his person is sanctified, and through whom the action
is accepted. And this also, considering what Christ says, As the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except
ye abide in me. Ioh. 15. 4. Considering also what the Apostle says; By faith
Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Caine: But without faith it is
impossible to please him. Heb. 11. 2. and 6. which consideration, if it has
put thee upon the pursuit after faith, whereby thou art fastened to Christ as
closse as the branch to the Vine; It is impossible thy works should be dead.

Again (which is still for explication) whereas thou have read in one place a
plain reproof for holding down the head like a Bullrush; and in another, a
plain command: But thou when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face;
that is, seem least, when thou do most; thou have thence concluded, that
God is pleased with sincerity of life and manners, not with a monastical
severe seeming habit; With a broken and contrite heart; not with strange
expressions of humiliation, set forth in a poor and austere life of many
orders amongst the Priests in their sundry acts of penance, wherein they deal
with themselves Bedlam-like; or like Baals Priests. And this, considering God
says, rent your hearts, and not your garments; I add for explication, nor your
skins neither, the skin is the outward garment of the soul: As they might
not under the Law, so may not we under the Gospel, disfigure our selves in
mourning. Zachariah foretelling the mourning that shall be by those one whom
the power of grace and supplications is poured, expressed it by two lively
comparisons; their mourning shall be like his, whose coal is put out, who has
lost his only son: It shall be like that mourning, which was for good
Josiah: that was an extreme mourning. Now how should this be performed? The
experience of Sions mourners can tell you this, for there is the same spirit in
them, as in the text. They shall mourn, every family apart, and their wives
apart. I know outward expressions of this sorrow, may be, nay are, and will be;
it is hard to bite in that sorrow, nor is it expedient: yet the direction must
be followed; but thou when thou fastest anoint thy head. Matthew. 6. For close
hereof, I add this. The outward gesture has then a comely posture, when a
touched heart commands it. An hearty sorrow is seen in the face. It is true:
Deprendas animi tormenta, deprendas et gaudia: sumit utrumque inde habitum
facies. The inwardnesse of the grief, and the outward expression of the same
even in sight, may be as near as John and Peter in their race, but still the
first is more intense, more lasting; it outrunnes the second.

Again, and lastly, when thou art commanded to beware in giving alms, that
thou be not thine own trumpet: Corrupt nature is much pleased with that
music: And that upon thy prayers thou must shut the doors; that is, do all
in secret, before him, who sees in secret, but rewards openly: thou have thence
concluded, that it is most ordinary for a man truly religious, to do the
works of a sincere Christian, and yet not to be seen or marked, for fear of
applause from others, and ticklings from his own heart, which he would not
have to be his reward; and therefore would not give the least advantage that
way. And then, as thou will not disalow public acts of charity, or rashly
judge their miscarriage (for who art thou, that dare judge another work
outwardly good, though, through the frailty of humane nature, there is great
hazard of miscarriage) so nor dare thou consure a man for his not so frequent
working, or not working at all to thy knowledge: And this, for that the proper
seat of Religion is the heart, which indeed always setts the hand, and mouth
on work, opening both, but yet most times so secretly, that the left hand
cannot know what the right hand does. By this thou perceiuest what a fair hope
is conceived of thee. First I will tell thee why; then thou shall know also,
that thou art not yet quitted from Idolatry. Why? The Lord has given his word
unto Jacob, and his statutes to Israel. He has not dealt so with other
nations, nor have the Heathen knowledge of his law. The word of God, the will
of God, the law of God, the testimonies of God, David calls them his
counselors also: he saw wonders in them, they made him wiser then the
ancient, then his teachers. This word of God I say, is set before thee, mauger
the malice of Devil, and Pope, translated into thy mother tongue: It is,
notwithstanding the neglect of such a jewel, the loathing of such Manna,
rained down round about thy tents: nor so only, it is committed unto thee at
this day; if thou will reach forth thine hand, thou may open it; if thou will open thine eyes, thou may read it: It is a sealed book indeed, but to
none, but such, whose contempt has closed the eye, who have hated iustruction:
So then, God is not wanting unto thee, and I hope that thou have not been
wanting to thy self, thou have not neglected so great salvation. There is the
reason of my hope, that thou have seen by this clear light, and discovered
too, that the senses of some Papists are stupid, and their ignorance monstrous,
and thou have prayed for them: Lord lighten their eyes, else they sleep in
death: Now look home: search thine own tent, turn up the furniture too; for
thy heart will keep her I dolls as closse as Rachell did, when thou may
think thy self as clear of them, as Jacob his tents. For surely thou may
be confident herein; that since every sin is founded upon a kind of Idolatry,
this sin of Idolatry is not poured out of thy heart, as water out of a
bottle, but as milk: therefore is there a great tincture left behind. And
certainly thou may say of this sin, as the Apostle concerning death; the
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death: So the last sin that shall be
destroyed in thy heart shall be Idolatry: I mean, the Idolizing of the
creature, something wrought by thee, or something wrought in thee: It being the
highest pitch, and upmost peg in Christianity: (Yet so high m^st thou be
wound, notwithstanding thy weight pressing down) to come before the Lord with
the Syrians protestation. Deuteronomy. 27. And then to say in his and David's
acknowledgement; it is the same; of thine own hand have I given back unto
thee, for who has first given to the Lord? And with Paul, yet not I, but the
grace of God which is in me: And with the Church, the Lord has given me
dominion over the strong; Judge. 5. 13. The Lord has wrought all my works for
me: and so to hang on God as the finisher and perfecter of what he has begun,
yet in an assured confidence of this very thing, that he, who has begun a
good work, will perform it til the day of Jesus Christ: Phil. 1. 6. I know, I
have transgressed the bounds of an Epistle, which must not fill the hand, I
know not also, whether the gate and the house are proportionable: I mean, the
Epistle and the Book: I am sure they are both to big. Let not that trouble
thee, it was neither thy labor nor thy cost, why should thou complain? It
falls out in matters of this nature, as in building: this room is not light
enough, nor is that large enough, the third would have some addition: by that
time all is done, the pains cost and building far exceedes the Idea or first
proportion: so here: It is true, he that would say all, must needs say too
much, yet I beseech thee spare thy Censure this once, I will never venture it
again; nor had I now unless there had been a cause, what have I now done? is
there not a cause? I leave thee now to the power of his Grace, who can build
further; we have a barren mould, though the Lord has had long patience, how
soon he will come to require fruit, we know not: Pray, we, that he would
husband us yet one year by his servants and give unto us the springs of water,
the upper and the nether springs, then cause his winds to blow upon it, so
shall we have a goodly portion. Pray we, that he would open our mouths wide,
and then fill them as with marrow and fatnes, so shall we fare well.

A LETTER WRITTEN FROM DOWAY 6 OF MARCH 1627. UNTO HIS MOTHER.
DEAR MOTHER, It is not the first time since my departure that I have writ
unto you, neither shall it be the last. Nature will find a way to vent her
duty were she never so hard oppressed. Out of sight is not out of mind, for were
you but as mindful of your self, as I am of you, I doubt not but by the
effects, you should find me a dutiful Son. But as the blind who see not
themselves, think all others not to see them likewise, so you forgetting your
self, think me forgetful of you to. God knows before whom one day I am to
give an account, of my duty toward you, how that there passes not a day, or
night either, when you and yours take your rest, wherein there is not
intercession made for you. If I knew what else in this my state a Child's
natural obligation could effect, in the behalf of a Mother; I would with what
endeavor I could accomplish it. But alas Dear Mother, when your request is
unreasonable, nay unnatural, as the forsaking my Religion, Gods Church, his
truth, nay himself, it stands not with the duty of a Son any way to yield in
the least to so unjust demands of a Mother. O that your desires were but of
that nature (of that good Mother we read of in the Maccabees was.) who did
encourage her Children to suffer even to death for God. I doubt not but God
would so strengthen me with his grace, that you should find my duty as ready
to obey, as your piety would be willing to command: Though it be not common
for a Son to teach his Mother, but rather to follow her in what she should
direct him, yet when parents misled from the way of truth, shall without
knowledge, command what is contrary to Gods will, and their Childrens
conscience. It may be, nay it is the part of a dutiful Son, to remember that
their command is amiss, and cannot be followed. All I here now do is no
more; I do but inform you that the happiness you wish me is not true and
real happiness. That not longer I now, but your own soul might be the
object of your thoughts: That you would from henceforth no longer be a stranger
from the truth. But submit your self to her, who as a loving Mother would
receive and embrace you, with all affection within the arms of verity; first
be instructed by her, Dear Mother, and then shall you learn to govern and
guide your own Children in things that are good. And then I am sure they will
be ruled and guided by you. And this is all should I do less, I should
think with the Apostle that I were far worse then an Infidel. For how can I
behold wolves which pray not for you, but prey upon you, and hold my tongue.
Where were my duty? I perceiving you tossed up and down in the waves of heresy,
as you are, and your self ready to suffer shipwreck, and I not so much as
offering you my hand to draw you into the Arc. Which of all those blind
guides, that now pervert your soul, will affirm, that the foundation on which
your salvation purchased so dearly by the blood of your Savior, and on which
your faith is built, is unfallable. If fallable, why do you hazard your
salvation purchased so dearly by the blood of your Savior, upon sand Dear
Mother, I as a poor Child of your own bowels, as upon my bended knees, in
all duty of a Son, do desire you consider your own declining age, and tho
last judgment; (and if you do not now here in time) work a prevention of
that fearful sentence, which otherwise must pass upon you, (that so you may
avoid the wrath to come) endeavor somewhat to examine, whether all be true
your false prophets preach unto you, or at least whether they practice what
they preach: First try, and then trust. And because your capacity cannot master
a better argument, then to examine the lives of your professors of your own
sect. There begin See first whether your new upstart ministers do not like
stage players trickt up in their neat apparel only, and barely act, and
talk, and practice nothing; they will tell you of Christ's passion, his
poverty, his want, his hunger and thirst, his humility, his patience, his
labor and travel, his ignominy, in being apprehended, scourged, spit on, in
bearing his cross: they will also tell you of the Apostles poverty, their
sufferings, their wrongs and afflictions, but who is he, either of your
Ministry or Laity, will follow your Savior in these his passions, who is there
among you, that in your selves allow either of fasting, or watching, or
voluntary poverty, or good works, or afflicting your selves for Gods sake: to
be despised, to forsake the world, and live for ever austerely in penance for
sins; they can commend these things in Christ and his Apostles; and yet forbid
to be practiced by themselves. They will tell you that our Savior paid the
price for us, whereby we are become heirs of God, co-heires with Christ, and
being heirs, we shall inherit, though we suffer nothing. For Christ both
suffered and satisfied for us; but they will not see what follows. For where
the Apostle calls us heirs of God etc. he adds immediately, if ye suffer
together with him; signifying that we are heirs with Christ, upon condition,
that we suffer with him, to the end we may be glorified with him; for we are
not freed by our Saviors passion from suffering, but the more invited, or
rather obliged thereunto; witness our Savior himself, he that will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me; But
contrary if you will but look into Gods Church, you shall not only find Christ
spoken of, but truly followed. You shall see those, whose only joy is in
afflictions for Christ's sake, whose song is that of the Apostle, God forbid I
should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of Christ. Who have forsaken
all, and given their whole estate to maintain the poor, and so committed
themselves to the providence of God: we have not those who barely commend
virtues in our Savior, but follow them in deed; also they are such that talk
little, fast hard, pray much, suffer continually, they are in want, and that
willingly, to help others: Poor they are in means, but poorer in spirit; and
theirs only is the Kingdom of heaven. I will add no more, lest I should
seem rather to preach you a sermon, then to write you a Letter. Dear Mother,
see and be acquainted with those, who both of this faith and life amongst you,
I am sure their good ways will better inform you in this kind then my
Letters. And that you may be the surer satisfied, let the travells of any of my
brethren make trial, and let them not doubt, but that they may be as safe, and
as well for their calling, and travel here, as in England. I live in Doway a
half weeks journey from you, trust my brotherly love toward them for their
safety, at one of the English houses in Doway you shall find me; I could
rather wish to see any of my brethren at Doway, but I pray you if you will not
take so hard a journey for my sake, at least let me hear from you. Direct
your Letters to one M. Wetwood^ house in Doway, who is an English Gentleman
What I have written unto you Dear Mother, is likewise written to my poor
brethren, and sisters, whom with your self. I commend in my most earnest
prayers, unto the safe protection of God almighty, who I hope has brought me
hither, to provide for your poor deceived souls. In our Lord and Savior
farewell, be mindful of your selves, that your souls perish not in that
heavy day of the Lord.

MOTHER. THy letter came to my hands (my dear Child) like Joseph's
party-colored coat, to his father Jacob, in many things there holds much
proportion. This is my Sons coat (says the good old man;) a wicked beast has
devoured him: Joseph is surely torn in pieces. I cannot say so altogether; but
this is my Sons letter, does your poor aged Mother say, I know it is; the
great beast has set his mark upon him, and appointed him for the ptey; I
shall be robbed of my Son Oh! I shall be robbed of my Son. At the best the
Ismalites have carried him into Egypt, a place of gross Idolatry, where he is;
for his lettet tells me it left him at Doway, and there must mine find him.

What there my Son? Now let her, who is acquainted with the dear name of a
Child, say, whether there holds not much proportion, between Jacobs sorrow and
mine, I go down to the grave mourning, I shall lie down in sorrow. Your old
Father, and as full of griefs as years, since thou wentest away, is not, and
thou art not, and I am a poor distressed Mother, thus has the Lord showen me
much bitterness. These things are against me, even all these; but I am robbed
of my Child: That, that hastens to bring my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave: oh come again my dear Child, come again; that I may see thy face with
comfort once more before I make my bed in the dark, (it is now almost night
with me) and I shall be seen no more. O return my Son: return my Son, my
Son.


SON. My Mother thinks me unmindfull of her now, whereas indeed, she is
unmindfull of her self: herein like a blind man, who because he sees not
himself, thinks another sees him not also: I discern my Mother as plainly
as Elisha the two Spies, quite out of the way to the place she intends.


MOTHER. O Child; he, that thinks he sees another best, most commonly
discernes himself worst: There may be a great mistake about this business of
seeing. We find one, who, in fear, took shadows for men: Judge. 9. 36. and it
tells thee, the very outward sense may be so mistaken: We read of another, who
suddenly lost ger sight, yet could not be persuaded but she could see well; the
house was dark, the windows shut, there was no want in her eyes sure. But
this was a fool you will say, and indeed she was accounted no better then
Seneca's wives fool, Epist. 50: And yet her Master could say, the fool had
many fellows, when he little suspected himself one of the number, for do but
turn the sense inward, and it shall appear to be an easy and ordinary thing
to be deceaved therein; because a light may be in a man, and that light may
be darkness. The Jews thought they could see well; they blind? it was not a
thing to be questioned: And yet they had no more certainty of it, then Sisera's
mother had of her sons welfare, Judge. 5. she stayed not until a good Ahimaaz
brought her news; nor scarce, while her Ladies could answer her, though they
were so wise in their Generation, as to flatter her, who would flatter her
self; yea, says the text, she returned answer to her self: therein lay the
deceit. You may make it the Emblem of the grand Imposture (I mean not the
Pope, or his mystery of Iniquity, though our burning and shining light has
called it so, he must come an Ace lower) I mean the Imposture of that, which
is deceitful above all things: Ier. 17. 9 There is a spirit in a man, which
will tell him all is well, and so carves forth a prey presently, and to a man's
self as good a part as Sisera had: And here is the misery of it; all this may
be but in conceit, as an hungry man dreams he is eating. But the Lord weighs
the spirit^s, says the wise man, Proverbs. 16. 2. therefore the counsel is
good, which follows: Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall
be established. For as in a man's own strength, no man shall be strong; so nor
by his own testimony, justified. Let a man then look out, and wait with
long patience, till a good Ahimaaz bring him news, for then it is certain:
and if he be long, and the soul weary, yet teturne not answer to thy self.
The Jews did fo, and thereby were they more grossly deceived, then was the
poor fool, or Lady mother: both which will appear in their Question, and in
Christ's Answer to the same: Are we blind also? As if they had said, we are
not; Because ye say we see, ye will answer your selves; therefore your
sin remains. Take it thus; A right and true convincement and acknowledgment
of the Spirit of blindness, which was over their eyes, of that veil that was
over their hearts, had been a direct and ready way, to have had the one cured,
and the other drawn away; but that false conceit of seeing, took away all
possibility of curing; That fancy of health and soundness, hindered all the
benefitts that might have been taken from the great Physician: Observe it good
child, and take this with it. Saul was taught according to the perfect manner,
of the Law of the Fathers, and therein unblamable, zealous toward God, as we
hope ye are all this day: Act. 22. Yet all this while, he had Scales before his
eyes, and that it might appear, he was all the former time blind, he received
his sight after. Now read what the seeing man says Philip. the 3. throughout
the chapter, and if thou can, eat it, It will be like the honey which
Jonathan ^. Sam. 14. 17. tasted on the end of his rod, thine eyes will be
enlightened with it; but then mark this by the way, thou must be as faint as
Jonathan was: for he that is full dispiseth the honey comb. Eat it then if
thou can. Certainly that Chapter thou now read is the very language of
Canaan; It does and ever shall as plainly difference the seeing Paul's now,
from dark Saules once, as the pronouncing of Sibboleth did the Ephramite, from
the Giliadite; say now Shiboboleth and the Ephramite said Sibboleth, Judge. ^2.
6. he could not frame to pronounce it right. The resemblance lies thus: This
man is now a seeing Paul; and he would over that great gulf, which is between
God and man: bid him pronounce Christ then: he can frame to pronounce it right;
Christ sincere, Christ perfect, Christ entyre, Christ without adding to him,
Christ without detracting from him, Christ the Son of the living God, only
Christ, he accounts of Christ now the chiefest of ten thousand. He has none in
heaven but Him, none upon earth he desires besides him. Psalm. 73. 25. All
things in comparison, are but as dung. O the excellency of Christ Jesus his
Lord! O the power of his Resurrection! that, only that! He has suffered the
loss of all for that. He puts no confidence in the flesh, he knows not Christ
that way, the flesh quickneth not; his confidence is in Him, who rayseth the
dead. His own righteousness is a menstrous cloth, oh he would not be found in
that, but in that righteousness, which is of God by faith.

He has not as yet attained to a fullness, but forgetting those things which
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, he presses
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
this is the seeing Paul indeed; he will over. Here is another man, and over he
would go too, for it is for his life: But is he not a Saul? nay: his scales are
gone, he says he sees well. He must be put to his book now, this Scripture
must try him; whether he can Pronounce Christ, Christ entire, Christ perfect:
see, he cannot frame to pronounce it right, Save me Savouresse, Redeem me
Redeemeresse; it is well he says it in a barbarous language (for so is Latin
and Greek; yea the Holy tongue too unto me and thee, if we understand it not:)
I say it is well he says it in the Latin, for it sounds ill in English, Save
me Savouresse; this is not to pronounce Christ sure. Why? the woman's primative
fruit for their godly valor, is called a man Child, Reu. 12. 6. And can it be
that he should expect any help of salvation from a She, the weaker Sex: if the
saved be a man Child, the Saving is more then a man, he and he only who is the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Hear further what he says to the Saints: for in his humbleness of mind, he
will not presume to go to Christ immediately; o^ that were a bold thing, before
he has obtained of the Mother to command the Son, and some Saints to help
too: and yet I never knew a man speed better, then when he preferred his
petition himself: but he knows a more mannerly way; Intercede for me thou He
Saint; Promote my cause thou She Saint: this is not a man Child; sure, he
does not pronounce Christ right, for he detracts from him by adding to him.

Again, does this man esteem all things as dung? Add to what has been
said; his caruing his dumb Image: would he put so much cost upon dung? Why? he
has not only the persons of men in admiration, because of their gold Rings,
and goodly apparel; but very stocks and blocks; when he has respect to the
stock that has some cost upon it, and says, stand thou here for a devout
memory, and representation of the Church Triumphant; and says to his fellow
block, because poor, and like it self, lie thou here for my footstool. Judge
now in your self, is he not partial? I cannot conceive how a Papist, can be
actually a member of the true Church, which has the Moon under her feet. I
do not, nor dare I state the question; but if he be, he has committed a
solecisme in nature, for he has put an Image above the Moon, I am sure, it is
above his feet, and that is the very way to put it above the Sun too. Ah
foolish man! Thou art going to offer up the Calves of thy lips, to him, who
measures the heavens with a Spanne, and holds the winds in his fist, before
whom the nations are but as a drop of a Bucket: Isa. 40. To what will thou
resemble him now? there is nothing can stand betwixt the living and the dead,
but he that can stay the wrath that is gone forth. And how can thou resemble
him? he is an Emanuell, God with man, those two natures are inseparable, God
has joined them together, accursed is that man that does separate them. His
work is an abomination, his Idol a lie. It were a gross superstition to fix
thy outward eye upon any thing in the time of this thy service; yet it is more
tolerable to set before thee a flower, that is Gods Workmanship, the Image is
man's: more tolerable to look upon the Sun, the Moon, the Stars; they are
the works of Gods fingers; the Image is the work of a despicable man. Away
with the Image then; it is nothing, it is an abomination, it is dung, and fix
thine eyes upon him, whose office is, to stand between the living and the
dead: He thou prayest unto is a Spirit, thou must worship him in spirit and in
truth

Again, does he put no confidence in the flesh? What means then his knowing
of Christ, after the flesh? his will worship? all his carnal services?

Does he renounce his own righteousness? is it as filthy rags? What means
then his meritts? his satisfaction? his work of supererrogation.

Does he, forgetting those things which are behind, reaching forth unto those
things which are before, press toward the mark, that he may apprehend that
for which he was apprehended of Christ Jesus? What means then his fancy of
perfection in this life? This man cannot frame to pronunce Christ aright; yet
scales are before his eyes: let him look to it. It will prove as deadly as
Sibboleth to the Ephramite; then they took him and slew him at the passage of
Jordan, Iud. 12.

I have been long about this; yet I know no parent will blame me: The Mother
has been looking into her Child's Eye, and she fears it will be lost: now you
know the Eye is to this little body, as the Sun to the great; the light of
the body is the eye; if that be dark, the body lives in a continued night;
then if there be any remedy, the Mother bestirres her self: how much more
then, if the inward eye be in danger; for when that is dark, how great is
that darkness? A man knows not where he shall fall. O the Mother would fame
have that clear; because the love of an outward sense may be supplied, by the
strength of another; but if the light within a man be darkness, what can
recompense that loss? I cannot then leave my Child's eye thus, the counsel is
behind; so is the eye salve: thou shall find them both, if, of what has been
said, thou shall make this use: Trust not, my sweet Child, thine own eye, it
will present unto thee shadows for substances; that is one gross mistake:
for what is the shadow to the substance? no more then is the Chafe to the
Wheat: It will tell thee it sees clearly, when it is not only dim and dark,
but quite put out; that is another: and can there be a greater? Go then, my
dear Child, in the sense of this thy blindness (for thou art blind also,
there is no question of it) to him, that is the Light; the effect of whose
coming is, that they which see not, (to wit in the conscience of their own
blindness) might see; and that they which see might be made blind, Ioh. 9. Go
I say unto him, it is not my counsel only, and say; Son of David have mercy
upon me, that I may receive my sight: and be instant with him; give him no
rest, till he make darkness light before thee, and crooked things straight,
Till he bid the Prisoners come forth, and say to the blind, receive sight.
Isai. 42. 16. Then and not till then shall thine eyes be cleared, then and not
till then shall thy tongue be loosed, then and not till then shall thou frame
to pronounce Christ right.


SON. God knows, (before whom I am our day to give an account of my duty
toward you) that there passes not a day, or night, either when you and yours
take your rest, wherein there is not intercession made for you.


MOTHER. And do thou beg us of the Lord (my sweet child? Now the Lord
unfold thy understanding, he cure thy zeal: he add knowledge to it; he can
do it. But all this while thou have not fulfilled my joy; I rejoiced greatly
that I found of my children walkeing in the truth, as we have received a
commandment of the Father; they are John's words to to the elect Lady. v. 4.
Hear what he w^^ts to Gaius. I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and
testified of the Truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the Truth. I
have no greater joy then to hear, that my children walk in the truth.
Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren and to
strangers.

I restrain this now to the matter in hand, prayer, though whatsoever a man
does, that he does it faithfully, Crowns the worker, and the work; thou do
pray for thy Mother and her children, do it faithfully my dear child.

Faithfully in respect of those things that must be requested.

Faithfully, in respect of that heart, by which this Sacrifice must be
presented.

Faithfully, in respect of him to whom only it must be directed. Psalm. 65. 2.

Faithfully, in respect of that mediation through whom only it must be
accepted.

So pray on and beg us of the Lord. Behold he prays. Acts 9. 11, It is the
spirits testimony of Paul after he had left Gamaliels feet, and his own
righteousness, and had attained to the knowledge of Christ, and to the power of
his Resurrection; then, behold he prays: it yeldes a notable consideration:
no question, Saul had prayed long and often, while he satt at Gamaliels feet:
yet, as if his prayers then, had been rather an houling then praying, the spirit
gives this testimony of him after the light had shined unto him, behold he
prays, then, and not till then. Pray thus and pray on, so begging us of the
Lord. I should have no greater Joy, then to hear that my child walks in truth.
Beloved child, thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to thy Mother and
her children. Oh what joy were here! do this and thou fulfillest my joy and
thy own, for else thy labor of love will be lost, thy watching lost, thy
prayers lost, thy self lost, all lost; look to thy self then, (it is John's
caveat,) that thou loose not the things that thou have wrought, but that thou
receiuest a full reward. In the mean time, the Mother will pray for the child
too; that his love may abound yet more and more, how? In knowledge and in all
judgment, Philip. 1. 9. then shall we love both in the flesh, and in the Lord*
Phil. 16.


SON. What more to do in this my state I know not, when my Mother is misled
from the way of truth without knowledge, and I must obey her but in the Lord,
in this thing then I must be excused, and she must be plainly told, that it
stands not with the duty of a son, to yield the least to so unjust demands
of a Mother, yet that she may know how duetifull a Son she has, and how
courageous for the witnessing of that which he professes, were it with his
own blood. Oh! that the commands were of the same nature, with hers in the
Maccabees, who did encourage her children to suffer even to the death, surely I
should be as ready to obey, as she to command, but alas my Mothers commands
are unreasonable, nay unnatural, tending to the forsaking my Religion, Gods
Church, his truth, himself.


MOTHER. And is it so my Son? an unreasonable request indeed, and unnatural. O
but hearken my Child, and if it be so, let thine own Mother be hated: O
hearken my Child I beseech thee, even by the throws of thy first birth
hearken, and the Lord give thee an open ear, while the true Mother pleads with
the Harlot for her Son, and he that is wiser then Solomon be judge betwixt
us, even he be judge. He ease me of my adversary, even he ease me of my
adversary, who vexes me very sore, and makes me go heavily all the day,
troubling me and breaking my heart. The Lord look on the trouble of his
handmaid, and remember her, and give her, her Son again, as I have desired,
and to my power labored to give him to the Lord again, all the days of his
life, by keeping his Religion, his Church, his Truth: and rather then to
forsake these or any of these, to lie in the fetters, until the iron enter
into his soul, and after to give up his breath in the flame; to resist even
unto blood. O my Child consider, it is neither the chain, if not Paul's, nor
the prison if not Silaces, nor the flame if not Bradford's, that makes the
Martyr: indeed Child it is not. But is it Paul's chain? no reason the bearer
should be ashamed; A Prisoner in the Lord? sure there is great cause of
rejoicing. At the stake for a good cause? now there is cause of singing, of
clapping the hands.

But the body may be given to the fire (my Child) and love may be wanting, 1
Cor. 13, the cross may be taken up, yet not Christ's, nor he followed: The body
may be stripped, and whip't, pinc'ht, nay almost starved, and yet who required
these things at your hands? But let the cause be such as these Saints were*
and then let the sufferers glory; for to such is it given not only to believe,
but also to suffer for the name of the Lord Jesus, Phillip. 1. 29. And now let
the Harlot speak, for I know she told thee what thou should say; what
could I have done unto my Son, that I have not done, for his better keeping
of these, even all these? Yet would I not seem a proud Iusticiarie; for how
few are those Hannah's, who give their children back to the Lord, who present
them first in the Temple, who breed their children as they ought; as they are
bound to do: as the Grandmother Lois, and the Mother Eunice bred Timothy? I
cannot say, I did: in how many things might I fail? I know in many. But let
the Harlot accuse me. Child, can thou speak nothing for thy Mother? my good
Child speak, I know thou can. Whereunto has the dear affection of thy
parents tended? whitherto all their care, cost, their pains, their prayers,
their fears, their hopes? Their hopes! here it was indeed, here it was, I
think, I know we offended; for surely we doted upon thee Child, forgive as
that wrong: We thought thee our possession, the son of our right hand, the
staff on which our old age might lean: But how often do parents hopes deceive
them? how soon may a hopeful blossom die in the bud* a forward spring be
nipped with a coldwind, or a sharp frost? Do not parents, I pray you, do not
dote upon your children, or think of them above what is meet. There are many
months yet unto your harvest, and a little time makes great alteration. I tell
you parents, and I tell you weeping; our extraordinary expectations on earthly
things, ordinarily disappoints us; sometimes our ordinary, but that does less
trouble us. Mark this I pray you, it falls out many times, that a beloved
Rachel proves barren, and hated Lea fruitful. It falls out so with me, and I
am sure I was not the first, neither can I be the last, we have so many doters:
my possession is become ^^^ity, my Benjamin a Bennons, the Lord has knapt my
staff asunder. But why should my adversary boast against me; I think he will
not, least his Rachell also prove barren: so the Lord can make him or her, when
we bottom our selves upon them, or set our affection on them too much, but
come, what would the Harlot say?


HARLOT. Why? he sucked in herisie with his very milk, and his stronger meat
was mingled with it. And when you sent him to the fountain, and as you thought
to the spring head, you were quite mistaken, for they are but bitter waters,
unclean and muddie.


MOTHER. Mistaken indeed I was, and much deceived, for had not the fountain
been impure, or had not the Beasts foot mudded i^, I had not been robbed of
my Child, nor at this time been pleading for him. But there was a bad herb
in the good pottage; a dead fly in the sweet ointment; a subtle Serpent in
the pleasant garden. Thus we Parents drunk with our own hopes, little
foresee our Childrens danger; how soon they may fall upon a shelfe, and there
make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and all. A Parent art thou?
when will thy doubts, thy fears have an end? And now what shall I say to thee
my adversary? I must not, I dare not, give thee reviling words, but the Lord
rebuke thee; even he rebuke thee, and be judge betwixt us, whether in that way
which thou call heresy, we do not worship the God of our fathers
believing, etc.


HARLOT. What? and not to submit to our holy Church? not come within her arms
for instruction? What is this but to be as a Dove without the Arc, to be
tossed up and down upon the waves of herefies, still ready to suffer
shipwreck, let your Son then have your hand Moth^r, who so piously reaches
forth his, whereby to draw you into our Arc.


MOTHER. I thank my good Child knowing his simple heart, and tender child like
affection: for I bear him witness, that he has a zeal, though not according
to knowledge, the time of his ignorance O Lord remember not; and find out a
time to take away the scales, and be merciful to all such as sin not of
malicious wickedness.

Now my good Child, consider with me, that there was a Dove, which was out of
the Arc, but found the way to it, and rested in it. that was a wise Dove sure,
it had an heart. That was a true Arc sure, that could keep from drowning.

There was a Dove, (o! be not ignorant of it) a silly seduced Dove, Hos. 7. 11
without an heart; and that got into an Arc of its own framing, which held
during the calm; but when the winds rose, and the floods of great waters came,
the workman could not defend the work, nor the work the workman, both
perished together. This is spoken by an Allegory.

This wise Dove is every soul, that is incorporated into that house, whose
builder and founder is Christ; or, which as a spiritual stone is rooted into
that building, whose foundation is that chief corner stone, elect and
precious: and he that believes in him, shall not be confounded: 1. Pet. 2. 6.
By this silly seduced Dove, we all know who was meant, even Ephraim, and by
Ephraim, that brave and stomackfull tribe, is meant Israel, revolting Israel,
backsliding Israel. And what had Ephraim done? he followed Ieroboams
Commandment concerning the Calves, which the workmen made, therefore it was
not God: and this Calfe cast him off. What did Ephraim then? He showed his
wound to Egypt, and his sickness to Ashur. Did they cure him? No: they were
Physicians of no value, for he was afterward among the Nations, as a vessel
wherein was no pleasure. Ephraim is at this day a spectacle of a smoking wrath
from a jealous God, (jealousy is the rage of a man) against all those, whose
Religion is exercised in false worship; whereas true Religion will endure no
mixture nor partner. He was carried away we know not whither: his place knew
him no more, where he was buried we cannot tell, where he dyed; and what killed
him, the text clears, A brave Tribe once, till strangers had devoured his
strength, was knock on the head by a rotten piece of wood, whereunto he came
for shelter as to an Arc, for when Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted
himself in Israel, but when he of-in Baall he died. Hos. 13. 1. All this is
written for our instruction, and it teaches us, not to leave the snow of
Lebanon, which comes from the rock of the field: not to walk after our own
devices, or the imaginations of our evil hearts: not to stumble in our ways,
from the ancient path, to walk in a path, in a way not cast up; which will
make a Land desolate and a perpetual ^issing, Ier. 18. not to forsake the
fountain of living waters, to hew out broken Cesternes that will hold no
water. Ier. 2. Not to say to the wood awake, which though the maker has
carved, and now worshippeth his work; for there is no more difference between
bowing when it is before an Image, and worship that Image, then is betwixt
bending the knee, and bowing the knee, is no whit better then the other wood,
whereof one part has warmed him; the other part roasted his meat; the other
baked his bread: Isaiah. 44. This of the Prophet, does aptly and necessarily
put me in mind of a speech, which might have a very useful consideration; It
is this: Put a thing from its end, whereunto it was ordained for the use of
man, and you arm it against your self. Further; the more subject this
Creature was to thee, and in thy power to use it so or so; the more strongly
will it fight against thee in its kind, when thou shall put it out of its
place, and abuse it. This will hold us a little I hope usefully. I am upon
Ephraims sin, which put him upon record for a silly seduced Dove; and my
labor is to make the punishment thereof as seasonably useful to a poor
seduced Child, as I may: The consideration of that speech will put me upon
silly things, as stocks and stones, which being put out of their place, did
mightily fight against Ephraim. But because the wounds that these filly abused
things do give, are more inward, and not so obvious to the eye; we will not
meddle with them yet: we will first be dealing with other more noble things,
which put out of their place, do more evidently hurt the outward man, which is
in sight: And I begin with that which is the Crown of a man, his reason: It is
an useful thing; ask at Bedlam else; look within the doors, hear the
hooting, and clampering of chains: (oh that we could prize blessings while we
have them, and use them with thanks!) It will teach thee too, that being out
of its place, it is strongly armed against thee. Thy will, an useful thing,
put it out of its place, it will carry thee like a ship in a boystrous storm.
Anger, useful too, but let it have power over thee, it will teach thee to act
the Madman. Fear, put it from its proper object, it will make thee like a Roe
before the hunter, like a leaf shaken in a tempest etc. Come we to that
wherewith the Lord has graced the outward man: Thy sight, an excellent thing,
ask ye dark man else: Thy hearing, ask the deaf: Thy speech, ask the dumb:
(why are not blessings prised till they be lost.) Put these, or any of these
from their proper end, they are strongly armed against thee. I could say as
much of thy strength, a great mercy: ask him, whose staff cannot make him
stand steady: Abuse it, it is strong against thee. Come we to that which
sustaineth the outward man. Meat, an useful thing: Ask him else, for whom
nothing is provided: him who staggers as he goes, for want of due nourishment.
Drink, an useful thing: Ask him, whose tongue cleaves to his mouth: or
enquire of those Nobles, who were sent for water, and returned empty, Ier. 14.
3. Such there were once, and there may be such again; prize the creature, and
abuse it not. Now put these creatures out of their use, which is to refresh,
and strengthen thy body, and behold them fighting against thee but in a
different manner; the one fights more fairly and civilly; so that another
besides thy self, cannot know what hurts thee, for who can tell, when I have
eaten too much, or what pincheth me. The other more unmannerly and
boysterously. For when a man in a wantonness, shall show himself strong in
abusing his drink, being therein worse then a Swine; because the on has
reason, the other a soul pro salo but to keep his body sweet: This creature
will return it is abuse upon this man in its right kind; It will use him also
worse then a swine. And this before two witnesses, from whom of any thing in
the world, a man would hide his shame, before the great Sun, and the little
boys. Mark what will follow, the one shall declare to the world, that there
lies a man, who lived a Swine, in as clear a light of the Gospel, as that
was a sunshine: The other knavishly I confess, shall give a plauditie to the
creature shamefully foyling his Lord and Master.

Mark the equity of this; we put the Glutton and Drunkard together; there is
nothing, no not a piece of wood, which is more subject to man, then meat and
drink is: They had them in their power as the worke-man the wood, who might
make a ladle of it, as well as a Saint, they might have sent, both the one and
the other unto the poor, who would be glad to find work for their hands that
their hands might find work for their mouths. But these two are too full, to
remember the empty. That fatt morsel, so shall that beer be turned down
into their stomachs like a dish of water into Thames, when it is high tide; and
so they fall into the power of the creature: and the more they put forth their
strength in the abusing of it, being in their power; the more will it put forth
its strength in returning their abuse, now that they are in the power of it.

It will nor be lost labor Reader, if thou shall, according to those helps
the Lord has given thee, consideratly look over all that wherewith thy little
world is beautified; and then that, wherewith the Great-world is beautified for
the use of the little, see how orderly the greater serves the lesser, and the
less it self, in the whole Bulk, then in the several parcels of the same.
Then again consider these, either in the one, or in the other disordered and
put out of course by man's rebellion against God, whereby they rebel against
thee. This if thou shall do, thy song will be of mercy and judgment, and to the
Lord thou will sing; whom, as thou wi^t praise always, so also will thou fear
always. The use of the creature is always before thee, that is matter of
praise. Thy sin will soon turn it against thee, that is matter of fear.

Now I am to deal with silly and contemptible things, because I would make the
sin and punishment of Ephraim, a silly Dove, seasonably useful to a silly
seduced Child: whereby I shall show, how the more silly and contemptible a thing
is, and the more in man's power, the more strongly is it armed against a man,
when he shall subject himself to it. I begin with wood; the Prophet tells us
the use of it. But now in that thou have taken a chip of that block, wherewith
thou have warmed thy self, and made an Idol of it; thou have put the wood out
of its place, and use, whereto it was ordained: now it is armed against thee,
and will make thee stumble and fall upon thy knees; then, having thee at that
advantage, it will slay thee: For thou have put upon it that sweet name, which
is a sweet savor to the Saints, and their Crown of rejoicing, not
communicable to a Creature; and now, that will turn thy glory into a lie.

I could say as much of gold and silver, how it was armed against Israel, when
it was turned into a Calfe Exodus 32. The like might be said of Jewels, and
other like ornaments, which being clapped together into an Ephod, were a snare
unto Gideon, and to his house, Judge. 8. 27. This will appear in the sequel. I
will here ask her, who has the heart of a Mother; whether the Mother and her
house have not cause to mourn; in that my Child (for though he be rented from
me, yet is he a parcel of my house) has set up the abomination of desolation,
where it ought not? when the wicked are exalted, yet they are men; we know
what follows: how much more then, when stocks and stones? I shall read him
the danger in Ephraims punishment, which I have set down before in the
general, but now I will take it in pieces, that therewith I may make it plain
to my child, how that abused piece of wood had diverse times greivously wounded
Ephrahim, so giving him fair warnings. You shall find that Deborah in her
thanks giving for their deliverances is mindful to set down upon Record, that
which had so inthralled Israel, which she does very shortly, but pithily. They
chose new Gods: then was war in the gates, Judges 5. 9. When? then. I hope it
will make my child tremble. It seems by the text, that Idolatry and war, kept
a kind of Equipage little distance betwixt them: yet thou must not understand
it so. For sin ever setts forth before punishment, and many times gets start
of it, that a man would think it had quite outrun the punishment: yet after
punishment comes slowly, but surely. It cannot be better expre'st then to tell
you it dogs a man: For look how a man follows a thief, whom he means to
attach suddenly; he lets him go on, you know the manner, so he may take him at
the greatest advantage, perhaps at his supper, perhaps in his bed, whence he
must be rattled up: so punishment here; Ephraim had lodged Idolatry within, and
it was fallen asleep; by this time, war was in the Gate, Idolatry must be
rattled up, with the noise of the pransing horses, and iumping Charetts.

But could not Ephraim put back the enemy? It seems no: his defense was gone:
his Idols had disarmed him, and left him naked: was there a shield or spear
found, among the forty thousand in Israel? There is a place in the second of
Isaiah pararell with the former, but much more terrible; you may call it the
Burden of Idolatry. I will sharpen it upon the Child, and bring it to a double
point. If it enter, it will first learn thee, whenever thy secure heart
shall ask Iehorams question; Is it peace? to give Iehues answer: what peace,
so long as thy whoredoms, and Iezabells witchcrafts are so many? 2 King. 9.
2^. Secondly, it shall take thee off from resting upon the Arm of flesh; so
that thou shall say with the true Israel, we will not ride upon horses, nor
shall Ashur save us: Riches shall not be my strong tower, nor ought else, but
that name only, whereunto the righteous run, and they are safe, Prover. 18.
10. we read the words. The Land is full of silver and gold; no end of their
treasure. So the sinnewes of war were perfect. The Land is full of horses. A
vain thing indeed, if we shall think to deliver our selves by them, but use
the horse, and rest upon God; and it is a notable help. See how the Lord of
Hosts describes his Horse: Job. 39. 19. Neither is there any end of their
Charetts. A mighty strength, they laid all wast as they went. We read forward,
and we find another fullness yet, that emptied all this: Their Land also is
full of Idols. These lay in Ephraims stomach politic, as some raw and
disagreeing bitts in the stomach natural, amongst much good meat: they were
hastily taken, and unadvisedly swallowed; and up they must, and the good meat
with them: for the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.


SON. I know unto what my Mother tends apace; I must needs here crave pardon,
and interrupt you. For you would bring Ephraims sin upon us, as Peter Christ's
blood upon the Jews, and so make us liable to a Judgment, the hearing whereof
would make the ear tingle, You may be pleased therefore to remember, that in a
late letter, I profess to take Doctor Carier for my guide, who in his letter
yet speaks; and tells me and you thus much, that we can wash our hands from
Ephraims Idolatry well enough: For though we use Images, yet we abhor
Idolatry; and admonish the people to take heed thereof Sec. 12.


MOTHER. I meddle with no man's person: Paul would be followed, but as he
followed Christ: thou did not consider that. Thy letter with Doctor Cariers
three reasons, is answered; but to the thing now in hand. To allow Images for
religious use, and then to admonish the people to beware, is with the Mad man,
to cast firebrands about the house, and then to bid the standers by look to
their shins. Pro. 26. 18. let the wood ly under the pot, it is the place for
it: to what use serves it in the time of prayer, but to make the mind as
sensual as the Image, which should be quire drawn from the senses. Call ye
this a serving God in Spirit?


SON. Yes for mark my Leaders words, we use them but as a devout
representation of the Church Triumphant; which is fit to be made; in the time
and place of prayer.


MOTHER. I say nothing of the Church Triumphant, or of that proportion, which
is betwixt the the representation and the thing represented, turn we to Deuteronomy.
4. 15. Take good heed (for ye saw no manner of Image) lest ye corrupt your
selves, and make the representation of any figure. See here: ye saw no Image,
ye shall make the representation of no figure: we do use Images, as a
representation. What call ye this, but with a whores forehead, to walk in the
stubbornness of your own hearts: ye shall not, yet ye will do contrary to
the express charge of God: therefore as theirs, so your services are accounted
no better, then sacrificing to Devils, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. Whosoever walks contrary
to Gods revealed will, shall find the Scripture an adversary, and contrary to
his way in every page. Agree then with thy adversary while thou art in the
way: For ye can no more wash your hands from Isreal's sin, then their following
generation could theirs from innocent blood. Therefore that thou may be
pricked in thy heart, I return to the second of Isaiah, where we find the
burden of Idolatry; The mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles
himself, therefore forgive them not: wherefore? they bowed, they humbled.
Mark it; the judgment is tied to bowing and humbling.

Forgive them not! had thy Mother some rhetoricks now, what could she do with
it? Elocution thrice repeated, could do no good here: This is a judgment
beyond expression. It is the utmost of all Judgments. Why? The horse may
trample out the brains of a man, and stamp his body to pieces; yet there is
hope in that death. The Canon may dash the body like a snow ball thrown
against the wall; yet there is hope in that death. The sword may be made fat
with the blood of the slain; there may be wailing in all streets, and crying
out in all high ways, Alas, Alas: yet there may be hope all this while; for
these things fall alike to all, and no man knows love or hatred. But forgive
them not. What think you?

A man might here enquire, and with sobriety too, why the Prophets tongue was
thus steeled against the people: he seemed more then a Son of thunder, his
words were swords even bitter words. Lord forgive them not! on would have
thought, that he should have stood in the gap, and have said, Lord forgive
them. Yea, but the Prophet that has a dream may tell a dream. Ierm. 23: but
he that has the word, he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. Isaiah 2. 1: must
speak the word faithfully: and when the people shall ask, what is the burden
of Lord? the Prophet must answer, I will even forsake you, says the Lord.
Iere. 23. 33.

Consider we now: here is an heavy judgment, and can the exalting of a piece of
wood procure such a punishment? Consider we again, that silly man would not
be compared to a block: and that jealousy is, the rage of a man. he will not
spare in the day of vengeance, Prove. 6. 34. Consider also, that the name of the
Lord is dreadful, he will be sanctified of all that come near him, for he
is a consuming fire. This puts us upon David's words, let us call for his
spirit: my flesh trembles for dread of thee; and I fear for thy Judgments:
Psalm. 119. 120.

But if thy heart continue yet stiff, thou have made thy self liable to
Belshazzars sin, which brought destruction upon him like a whirlwind: The
Lord has done thus and thus to Ephraim, and thou have not humbled thy heart,
though thou knew all this: But have praised the gods of silver, and gold,
and wood, etc. and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, thou have not glorified: Dan. 5. 22. Good Child consider it; and since I
cannot give thee my right hand of fellowship, yet the Mother and Child would
feign be together, they would not a few miles should part them, much less
such a gulf; let us, before thy hand be plucked back, seriously debate this
thing, by what has been said, by what shall be said; which is safest, which
surest; my coming over unto thee, or thy coming over unto us, that if it may
be: we may be together, here, and hereafter for ever with the Lord.

Attend then further to what I have learned from Paul's planting, and Apollos
watering, God giving the increase: we acknowledge but one Church, firm and
steadfast as the foundation of the everlasting Hills; compared to Noah's Ark, as
in many respects; so also for this; because as out of that there was nothing
but death, so out of this there can be no salvation: And therefore as Noah
having Gods special order for the matter and form of it, had also his
invisible hand to guide it: So likewise has this Church that watchman of
Israel, for its Pilot; therefore, though it be in continual dangerin, yet
shall it be preserved from the raging waves of this sea, and be safely brought
to the haven, where it would be. And for its more sure direction, this keeper
of Israel has appointed at a most certain and infallible oracle, whereunto
all the Prophetts and Apostles give witness; and thereunto it does give
diligent heed, and firm assent; because the Authority and testimony thereof is
always the same; being grounded upon Gods unchangeable verity. As for the
Popes succeeding Peter, the Church finds not the truth of it in her
Genealogies; and it may be as doubtful, as the succession of Peter's Cock,
whose Pedigree notwithstanding (they say) has been lineally drawn from
generation to generation, and it is Cock-sure. But yet call your Pope what you
will, John or Ioane, (you know it was doubtful once) yet is he of the same
mould with Peter, and may err as he did: whereupon Paul resisted him to the
face, for he was to be blamed, Gal. 2. 11. And therefore whatsoever he says,
challenges no other then an humane consent unto it: for if all the men in the
world, (not immediately directed, as were extraordinary Prophets and Apostles,
in whom the spirit spoke and testified by them,) should consent in one; as
they, notwithstanding their multitude were but men, though many? so were their
testimony but humane: It was not then of old time, that they asked council of
your holy Father, and so ended the matter; but search the Scriptures, they
testify of me. There is our oracle; hearken to what they say. The Church of
the living God, (I call it neither ours nor yours, but blessed is the man that
has his name written therein) is the pillar and ground of truth; no
foundation whereon the building must rely, but as it is built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, in whom all the building coupled together, grows to a holy
Temple in the Lord: Ephesians. 2. 20.


HARLOT. Why? But all this while you are but upon the sand, no true foundation,
nor infallibility of supporting. Will you have a Sons soul, hazarded upon
sand:


MOTHER. Hazard my child's soul Harlot? Oh precious thing! O rich Jewel! an
inestimable treasure! it is amidst the things of the world, like David among
the people; worth ten thousand of them, and much more; of all the things in
the world (my dear child) run not the hazard of that. Hazard a foot thou
may, and yet thou will not, thou have another, a leg, thou have another; an
hand, thou have an other; an arm, thou have an other: an eye, thou have an
other. Here are no pairs, loose one and loose all. O invaluable loss, and
unrecoverable! the redemption thereof must cease for ever. What would not a
parent now do, to put a child's soul out of hazard? Then hear me my Son,
Son of my bowels harken; Is that soul in danger, that is in the Arc, made
by Gods own appointment both for the matter and manner, directed to him by
that morning Starr, from which it has a certain course. Listen my child,
child of my bowels listen; Is that cornerstone a sandy foundation? can the
weight of men and Angels press it? can the gates of hell remove it? Indeed, if
that stone fall upon thee or me, we are crushed in pieces, Math. 21. 44. So are
we if we fall upon it, heedlesly, carelessly, presumptuously: but come unto it
in the whole obedience of thy heart, stick, cleave unto it, as Ruth to Naomie,
be not entreated to leave it, or to depart from it, and thou can not miscary.
Harken my Son, Son of my bowels harken, can the blowing of the wind, can
the beating of the storm, remove that house which the wise builder, has
founded upon a Rock? Thou do my Son believe Christ's words, I know, thou
do believe them. Then harken my Son this once, Son of my bowels harken.
He that lays a foundation diggeth deep, certainly so did this wise builder,
beyond all humane traditions; here was no settling: Beyond all will worship; a
counterfeite ground: Beyond all satisfaction of his own, this was not solid:
Beyond the intercession of Saints and Angels; this was not safe: Beyond the
righteousness of his best works: here he would feign stay, but it would not
hold the weight: still he diggs further, for the soul that seeks the Lord,
is not satisfied, until he find him. Where have ye laid my Lord (says Mary)
let me find him, or all is nothing. He digges deeper, even as he that
seeks a treasure, or as a thirsty man after a spring of water: or like those
three mighty, he will through the whole host of the Philistimes, but he will
digg through those sandy bottomes, and get to the rock. And now upon it he is,
and by it supported, and from it refreshed, for behold here is strength to hold
him up; here are waters, living waters; to comfort him, for this rock is
Christ: It is good being here, here will he set up his rest; here will he
abide for ever: If the Rock fail not, he cannot fail: blessed is the man
that has this foundation: thrice blessed is he that has this water to drink:
he will ever dig it in broken pits. Can the rain or hail fall now upon this
man, as upon a wilderness? to whom that man (for so Christ the Rock is
called, and observe the number) will be as a hiding place from the wind, and as
a refuge from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land. Isa. 32. 1, 2. Now the rain may fall, and
the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon this house, and behold it
stands, for it is grounded upon a rock. Matthew. 7. 25. See a mount Sion now,
which stands for ever, and the blast of the mighty shall be as a storm against
the wall. Oh my child: though my eyes be shutt up, yet am I, as it were in
Balaams rapture; who can rell the strength of this man? for as the Rock is,
such is his strength, as the strength of an Unicorn, no poison shall hurt him,
no sorcery shall make against him, he has a refuge from the storm; a shadow
from the heat, a strength in distress, what can daunt this man now, can evil
tidings whereof the world is full, and are to be expected daily, like Jobs
messengers. No: then being well able to judge of the times, his heart would be
shaken like a leaf^ with the wind: but he is no re^d, whose foundation is mire
and dirt: The Lord i^ his confidence: Proverb. 3. 24. He has laid himself
down in peace, and takes his rest; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord:
Psalm. 112. Can the judgment when it does come, quail him? No: for of all the
hours of the day, he was inquisitive with his beloved, where he should rest
at noone: he knew that would be an hot time. His beloved told him; and ever
since he rests assured; that the nature of the judgment, be it what it will
be, shall be changed; it shall give but a gentle correction, a fatherly
chastisement, a sower sweet, meat shall come forth of the eater: Judges. 14. 14.

What will the King of fears do? What? lay him upon his earth sure; and there
it will keep him, till the graves give up their dead: But now it is sense,
that goes no further. The body returns to its earth: the soul to him that
gave it. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but
thanks be to God, who has given us victory through Jesus Christ. So then
this mighty King, (who has with stood his power) will do the very same to this
man, which the Angel did to Paul and Silas, and as Pharaoh to Joseph: It will
open to him the Prison doors, knock off his fetters, take off his Prison
clothes. Let those fear, to whom Christ is not both in life and death
advantage. This man cannot fear, but rejoice rather: For though the grave for
a time must be his house, and the worms his companions: Yet putting death on
the one side, and immortality on the other: worms on the one side, and
Angels on the other: Rottenness on the one side, and Christ Jesus on the
other: he is bold, and loves rather to remove; and so for ever to be with the
Lord, where he shall toil no more, he shall weep no more, he shall sigh no
more, he shall hunger no more, he shall thirst no more. R^st is come: all
tears are wiped away: his Sun shall no more go down, neither shall the
Moon withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be his everlasting light, and the
days of his mourning shall be ended: Isaiah 60. 20. Who can tell the joys of
this Jacob, or number the fourth part of the comforts of this Israel? The sure
mercies of David are his: The word of God his for his instruction: The
righteousness of God his for his justification: Gods spirit his for his
sanctification: Gods power his for his protection: Gods glory his for his
happiness: All things are his* he is Christ's, and Christ is Gods: 1 Cor. 3.
23. Let my strength be as this man's strength, and my last end shall be like his.

Oh but why does Balaam wish and sit still the while? Judge with thy self,
whether such comforts can be drawn with ease. This is a work, not an easy
one: Why is there a price in the hand of a fool, and he has no heart unto it?
Prove. 17. 16. Digg man, digg deep, deeper yet; to it again: thou must through
all these sandy bottomes. Why? judge within your self, whether any thing but
only the rock, the rock only can hold a building thus steadfast, that the
world, nay the gates of hell cannot prevail against it? Oh to it again; there
must be a low foundation, on which so glorious a building must be rooted,
built, and stablished, that must stand like mount Sion fast for evermore. Then
yet deeper, and faint not, forasmuch as you know, your labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

Dear Child; I as an affectionate Mother to my own bowels, by my sorrows in
thy first birth, by those since, wherewith I travel with thee, till Christ be
formed in thee, by that solemn vow, thou made to God in Baptism; by that
strong bond of nature, and dear name of a Mother, I do desire thee, nay she
that might command, does beseech thee, if there be any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort in love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of
mercies, to consider, by what has been said, and the Lord make it profitable,
whether my requests that thou would return, be unreasonable or unnatural,
whether my reasons for it, are any way dangerous or hazardous; or rather
whether the one be not pious, the other safe and certain: directing thee unto
that Church, which is guided by a certain course; it may float, it cannot
sink; setting thee upon a sure foundation; it may shake, it cannot fall; no
more then the cornerstone, which cannot be removed: Entreating thee to put
away those lies, which are in thy right hand: all those Idols which cannot
help: all those sparks with which you may compass your self, and yet lie
down in sorrow, Isai. 50. 11. persuading thee to put away all those vanities,
(they are too long to name) which weighed in the balance, will be found too
light; and also to digg to the Rock which cannot fail. Oh my Child consider!
It is not for any of your good works, that you are condemned; yet I know thou will consider, that there are many circumstances, belonging to every action,
from which the work ever receives its true estimat. Thou may hear somewhat
more of this anon, because thou do not walk uprightly, according to the
truth and purity of the Gospel. I would drive this nail to the head now:
consider whether your rock be as our rock; even our enemies being judges:
what will become of their gods? their rock in which they trusted? let them
rise up and help you, and be your protection: Deuteronomy. 31. ver. 31. and 37. etc.
But see my child, this rock is he, which I have pointed out unto thee, and
there is none with him, only Christ; only Christ. Can here be hazard my
Child? can here be danger? can thou thirst at the fountain* can thou sink
upon the rock? In thine own righteousness thou mai'st, the intercessions of
Saints and Angels may deceive thee. Baall may be busied, peradventure he may
be sleeping. Abraham may be ignorant of thee; and Israel may not acknowledge
thee.

I say but it may be, though the Scripture puts it out of all question; for
albeit the Saints in heaven do in general remember their fellows, whose
warfare is not yet accomplished, and so perform that never failing act of
charity, to pray for them; as they far divided on earth, do one for another:
yet particularly they know not our hearts, nor the desires, nor sighs, nor
groans of our hearts: for thou only (says Solomon) know, the hearts of the
Children of men. 2 Chro. 6. 30. thou only, therefore not Abraham, not Israel. Yet
I say, but that it may be, that thou may see plainly, how at the best here is
a venture, here ^s a hazard: but he that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor
sleeps: and this is he which I point out unto thee: there can be no hazard
here; this rock is a mighty redeemer: he will sustain thee alone; he must
have no helper: whom will thou join with him, whose name is everlasting? I
tell thee this for the sum of all: there is nothing though never so lovely in
thine eyes, which can make thee the righteousness of God, but that which was made
sin for thee. Tell me then, were any of these things crucified for thee? how
long shall vain thoughts which separate from God, lodge within thee? return
then my Son, return; or in case thou do halt between two opinions,
surely the Lord the jealous God, who will not give his honor to another, nor
suffer Dagon to stand by him, will have this controversy against thee; and
what Saint or Angel shall plead for thee? thou have committed two great
evils, thou have forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed thy self
out Cisterns, broken Cisternes, that can hold no water. Return then my Son,
return; for why should thou be as a Cake half baked, neither hott ^or
cold, almost a Christian: Thou must ^^ke straight steppse, and cast off that
which kings on so fast, lest that which is halting be turned out of the way.
The Lord calls for thy heart, give it him my Son, and follow him wholly, or
else thou shall nev^r with Caleb and Ioshuah, come into that good Land. O^ my
bowels do yerne upon my Son! the Harlot shall rather have him, then I will
have him divided. Come away from her, Son, come away.


SON. Ye have wolves amongst you, who pray not for you but prey upon you.
Besides, the lives of your Ministers and professors, are very scandalous; you
have but the carcass of the Ministry amongst you, and you do not cover it,
with a seemly cloth. Do not the Ministers some of them, like stage players,
only an^ barely act and talk and practice nothing? They will tell you of
Christ's passion, his hunger, his thrist; so of the Apostles too: But which of
your Ministers or Laity will follow his Savior in those his passions? Who
amongst you do allow of fastings, or watching, or voluntary Poverty etc. Now
look upon ours, their practice will preach you a Sermon, they are rather doers
then talkers. They fast hard: pray much, suffer continually. By this their
practice, you may know their doctrine; there is your Sermon. Now I would you
could examine the doctrine of yours: but that's too high, look upon it in their
practice, that fits your capacity. Observe also the lives of your professors:
do they not walk in palpable darkness. whereas they would be accounted
children of the light: Are these the fruits of truth?


MOTHER. O! Child take heed thou do not seem to wound a holy profession,
through the vizard of it; but I have many things to say unto thee, some thing
to the Harlot too, they will come forth as in a throng, perhaps in no very good
order: I would scrue it together in as little room as I might. And first my
Son,, to excuse thee, I hope thou did not tell in Gath, nor publish in the
streets of Askelon, what thou did observe in our practice, if we had not
carried our wickedness in our forheads, my child would not have uncovered our
skirts. I know thou would preserve the creditt of thy own nest. But the
Harlot cannot but know these things, though never by thy relation, for they are
not practiced altogether in corners; but before Israel and before the Sun:
and they will be as openly punished, for God has a controversy for it, and woe
be to them by whom this offense comes. But stay Harlot I have many things
against thee too, first thou have told my poor child such an untruth, that
could have none for its Author but thy self; and did not the silly wretch
wink with the eye, (for he thinks he is bound to it, that thou may lead
him, not knowing thy footsteps lead to death, he could not be so grossly
deceived. Why would thou tell him that we have Wolves in England, preying
upon us? What if I should tell thee now that England breeds no wolves. But
grant that we have Wolves in sheep clothing, yet they seem rather sheep
then wolves, and indeed are rather deceivers then raveners; nay grant we have
as true wolves amongst us, as Herod was a Fox; Ravenous Wolves, such as would
rend in pieces the fairest of the flock, as truly I think we have such; Nay
grant they did gape at us with their mouths, as it will be granted, if one
day be written. Why then, thanks be to God, who did not deliver us, as a prey
unto their teeth. For Ravenous though they are, gaping though they were; yet
have they not sucked one drop of blood since Q. Maryes days, thus thou see
we have no wolves preying upon us.

Again, thou have helped my poor deluded Child, to put down one thing as
grossly, though not so apparently false, as the other; which he would never
have done, had thou not guided his pen with the one hand, and closed his eyes
with the other: For having set down Christ's Passion, in the general, and then
in the particulars of it; my Child asks, which now of all the ministry or
laity, will follow his Savior in these his passions? In these his passions!
why none sure. They cannot do it: But through his strength, by whom they can
do all things: they will follow their Savior, in his meekness, in his
patience, etc. they are enabled to do it, they are bound to do it, for they
have a precept, as well as a pattern: 1 Pet. 2. 22, 23. I would my Child had
observed so much, then could he have found no ground for all your superstitious
services. Ye do fast hard. [not one bit of flesh, no not an egg, what you
will else, for forty days together:] so ye follow Christ's. Ye pray much. [yee
will tumble over I know not how many Beads, sometimes a whole night together:]
so ye follow Christ. Suffer continually. [yee will cross your selves every
hour, whip your selves till the blood follow: we read not the like, but of
Baalls Priests: your whole life is a continual penance:] so ye follow
Christ. In want and that willingly. [All is cast upon the waters: some leave
not themselves so much as will bring them to harbor:] so ye follow Christ.

Well-worshippers! who required these things at your hands. I shall anon
inform my Child concerning ourdoctrine and practice, answerable thereunto; the
sincerity and truth whereof, will I hope plainly tell him, the vanity of
yours: yet I am speaking to thee, and now concerning our practice. Grant it be
scandalous; I remember what the Lord says to Edom; pleasing himself once in
the calamity of Judah: Thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother.
A tear on Edomes cheeks, would have beseem'd him better, then a smile on his
lips; for Judah was his brother. Let me use the same words to thee: thou
should not have looked on our day; call it our calamity, if thou will; for so
it is in effect, to good Joseph's, who see the practice, and he are the words
of their Brethren not good: And they bring them to their Father, and say, Lord
visit not these things upon them, for they know not what they do; and by this
means the Lords hand is stayed, though he is pressed as a cart with sheaves.
But yet Harlot, why do thou look on our day? Why? thou will say, we have
been taken in the very Act; have we so? We confess we should have walked
warily toward them that are without; but yet thou should have held thy hand
from taking up a stone against us, because the throwing of it does but
aggravate thy Judgment: thou have thy bill of divorce, and art sent away; but
God has been patient toward us, as appears this day.

Again, why should Catiline a very firebrand, accuse seditious persons? Be it
our practice be bad, very bad, be thou silent in it, and look homewards: for
may I not say to thee, as the Prophet upon another occasion: Are there not with
you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28. 20. What mean
else those 6000. infants heads, found in your Gregory's ponds? Act. Mon. p.
1954: whose fathers must needs be holy men, living so near the smoke of his
holiness kitchen. What means else that farewell which one of your own
proselites bids to Rome, when he came forth of her.

Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse: revertar:
Cum leno, meretrix, scurra, cinaedus ero.
Now farewell Rome, I have thee seen, It was enough to see:
I will return when as I mean, Bawd, Harlot, Knave, to be.
I could ask thee what means such? and such abominations? Such wherein thy
sister Sodom never exceeded thee, but what were this, but for the port to
prove it self fair by the kettles blackness? Or it were somewhat though not
altogether, like the reply of the Hebrew, reproved by Moses, for striking his
fellow. Thou killedst the Egyptian, what was that to the lestning of the
Hebrews falt? Let my heart ever look inward, and take a reproof as a
plaster. We deserve thy reproof even the spitting in our face, for we are
unclean. Your sins are no excuse for ours, nor ours for yours, we shall
each bear our own burden, punishment will find us both out, and in the day of
the Lords visitation, he will visit our sins upon us, let Baal plead for
Baall, and wickedness proceed from awicked man, let him defend it, it will
find him out at length, and in due time the foot shall slide. And it shall be
bitterness in the end, that the Priests, whether yours, or ours, have made the
Sacrifice to be abhorred, and for the professors too, that they have caused
the name of the Lord to be blasphemed, and his holy ways to be spoken against;
nay I tell thee, some of these ministers and professors too, that have thus
profaned the covenant, and dishonored that holy thing, they have taken upon
them, are made contemptible, and base before all the people. Oh that they were
wise, then would they understand; they would consider their latter end.

Now again to the^ my Child, (it is no matter how my words come forth for
their method, so none be lost, thy Mother has no Art:) And first, for thy
better information concerning our doctrine. Yet as an introduction thereunto,
because there is no end of writing; hear thy Mothers doctrine first: Call it
Salamons sums. Fear God, keep his Commandments. And consider this with it;
that these are Evangelicall precepts, which are not dead, like those of the
law, but lively in operation. Take this also with it, which thou find in
many places; The Lord gives his Spirit to them that obey him, and his secret is
with them, that fear him. Thus much to prepare thy care, it is the Lord that
must circumcise it, that must bor^ it. The doctrine follows. Love God with thy
whole heart, and thy neighbor as thy self; there is the Law and the
Prophetts, and in that the Churches doctrine, and thy lesson. Thou will say
with the young man; All this I do perform: Therefore thy Mother conceaves the
less hope. I would rather thou could have confe'st thy self an
unprofitable servant; that so thou might have been capable, of that which
follows; for thou have but half yet: Christ came into the world to save
sinners. There is the Gospel; And if in thy own apprehension, thou art one;
yea the chief of sinners, there is the comfort and only there. Thus thou have
the sum of the Law and the Gospel, take it together in Paul's words, 1. Tim.
4. 6. 2: 3: 4: 5. It teaches the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the doctrine which is according to godliness, and if any man
teach otherwise, he is proud knowing nothing and from such with draw thy self.
1. Tim, 6. so much for the general. Now more particularly thou shall see how
this doctrine arises out of the Scriptures, the ground of it, as the sap
soaketh out of the tree, and thence spreads it self into several branches;
then unites it self upon it is disciple man, to whom it is more particularly
made known by the inward work of Gods spirit.

The Doctrine is holy according to the Scriptures, avowing them to be a most
perfect rule, neither crooked any way, nor short in any thing requisite; which
must be received for the testimony of God, because we must set to our seal,
that he is true; and not for the testimony of the Church, which were to set to
our seal; that men were true: Thence concluding that there is one God, one
Christ, one Faith, one Church, one Baptism. That this one God is to be
worshipped purely as a spirit, in spirit and in truth; according to the three
substances, soberly, and wisely; according to all his Attributes, piously,
religiously. That Christ is to be rested upon wholly, by a precious faith
whereof God is the Author, God is the Finisher, (for it pleades not the power
of man's free will in spiritual things, against the free grace of God, who will
be admired in all that believe,) not immediately, when he gives the means,
but upon the conscionable use of the word and Sacraments, according to the
pattern, and primitive Institution, set apart for that end, and sanctified
thereunto, by which faith every soul gets union with, and interest in Jesus;
and hereby is only perfectly justified, both in respect of degrees and parts;
and sanctified also in respect of parts: and all this, not by perfection of the
instrument Faith, (that is a creature,) but of the object it apprehends,
Christ, and so may with a true, though palsy hand, receive and keep both
Christ and his benefits; which does evidence to the soul, now not walking by
sight, that he has union with the vine, and Communion with the branches having
now the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, even clean waters poured upon him, whereof
the outward element was more then a bare sign: And now being thus washed, thus
purged, he cannot be unprofitable, but bears much fruit, to the glory and
praise of him, who has called him out of darkness into his marvelous light;
and this fruit coming from a lively root, is lively also, evedencing
outwardly what the Spirit has sealed inwardly. So putting to silence the
mouths of wicked men; and his own mouth too from glorying in any thing, but
in him that raised the dead; who prevented him with grace, and follows him
with grace, thereby giving him assurance that he will perfect what i^ begun;
to him therefore is ascribed the glory, whose power was and i^ so graciously
manifested in weakness. Hence arises a Joy inexpr^^sible, yet till this
warfare be accomplished, many ways and diverse times interrupted, never quite
lost in the ground of it, (be walks by faith) but the fulness is reserved in
the heavens, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give him, for the praise
of the glory of his grace, according to the dispensation of his will, purposed
before all time, sealed unto him i^ time; and shall be perpetuated ^^to all
eternity.

This is a light (Child) though darkness apprehend it not, this is a good seed,
whereof i^ given thee but a little handful though tares be sown with it. This
is a Treasure, and what vessel is fit for it? yet it is but in an earthen one;
that the glory may be of God.


SON. What should you be meddling with the Scriptures, and the Churches
doctrine; rather according to sobriety, walk in un Implicit Faith, resigning
your self to the holy Church, and the holy Church to his Holiness I pray you,
what say you for your practice, your capacity may master that.


MOTHER. Take heed, the tongue is an unruly member, Search the Scriptures it an
indefinite iniunction, Timothy knew them of a Child, and by them was made wise
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 3. 15. the
neglect of them is the ground of error: ye err because ye know not the
Scriptures. It is our happiness that we have them; our sure instruction that
we read them; our condemnation if we seek for truth from any else, though he
who is translated into an Angel of light; nay, though an Angel from heaven
should bring it. We look unto the Scripture to seek counsel from them, as
from our Oracle, our Pillar, our Rule; but we resignelour ways to the Lord,
by whom our thoughts are established. And this shall aggravate your Judgment,
that whereas the Lord has written unto you the great things of his law, ye
have accounted them a light thing: And further, thy Mother is persuaded, that
so long as thou have neglect of such a treasure, and wilt hearken to the
traditions of men, thou will continue a fool, though thou should be braid
in a mortar.

Concerning our practice, I have something to say for it; something against it;
thou shall have it presently: First, I think it fit in the way, to remove some
strawes, (call them so comparatively) thy Mother would not have a straw lie in
her Sons way homewards a and herein I am the more wary; because it will
plainly appear, that thou have stumbled at a straw, and leap't over a block.
Consider then with me, that there may be some errors in points of doctrine,
not Fundamental; not trenching upon that only and alone sacrifice once
offered for sin; since which all sacrifices must cease, whether bloody, or
unbloody; which errors not fundamental, the fire may consume, yet the person
be saved.

Again, that there may be some faults in practice, and those foul ones too,
which Charity should help with both her shoulders: but if strength be wanting
that way, or the mantle too short, yet Charity has done it is part.

That all this may be, and is, I gather it thus. A wide door was opened: what
did follow then? many adversaries, says Paul: The Husbandman was sowing his
seed, where was the envious man? As near unto him a^ Satan was to the Priests
right hand, to resist him: Zech. 3. and he casts his hand as well as the
seedes-man, and perhaps faster too; because the seedes-man sleeps sometimes,
but the envious man is wakefull, and he bestir^ himself: In this place, he
throws a handful, and in that a handful (and yet it is a field still) and
the great Landlord says; let them grow up together until harvest, then they
shall be separated.

Now Child, that I may bring this to o^^ purpose, and thereby show thee, how
thou have stumbled at a straw, and loap'^ over a block, I return to the first
again, and say, that as there are certain principles of the doctrine of
Christ, and of faith, which must first be laid, and upon which other truths
are to be built: so must not the foundation be confounded with the wall, or
roof; nor light errors be made fundamental. From hence thou art to take this
into thy consideration, yet there is time, That the errors of the Antichristian
Church, whereunto thou art joined, as Ephraim to Idols, do trench upon the
carner-stone, elect and precious, than which none must lay any it be a
foundation; thus thou did leap over a block. Again, thou have separated
from us, (I hope but for a season, that we may receive thee for ever at the
ten Tribes (if I may compart small things with great) rented from Jerusalem,
the only true instituted Church in the world, which was then on individual,
and not many as now; and this by Idolatry; thus thou did leap over a block.

To the second, faults in practice, they are confe'st; I think the Harlot
heard me plead guilty. It was the best way sure, unless one could have proved,
that the envious man had done nothing. Be it granted then; yet what is the
Tares to the good soedes, what is the chafe to the wheat? Good seed is good
feed, for all the tares; wheat, wheat notwithstanding the Chafe. Be it, that
we have both of our Shepherds, and of their flock to, such whose walking is
no whit answerable to that it should be: Then the Scripture calls them Idols:
Zech. 11. 17. And we know, an Idol is nothing. What can be inferred thence?
what though an Idol has nothing but the superficies, and outmost proportion
of a man; it sees not, it hears not, it speaks not; It will not follow, that
therefore the living do not praise God. Though a lie be nothing, truth is
something. Thy questioning hereof puts me in mind of a strange speech, that was
uttered by one, whose conceit was stronger then his reason, and his love weaker
then either. He was once, as he thought, overreach't by a minister: well,
(said he) for this trick, I will never trust a black-coat again. A good Item,
to those of that Coat, that they walk circumspectly, as examples in word, in
conversation, in spirit, in faith, in purity: ^ Tim. 4. 12. Considering their
profession will take soil, as soon as their cloth; so that the one as much
requires a wakefull eye over it, as the other a brush; yet still offenses will
be taken. But let us examine the former speech: If so be that words make a
Commentary on the heart, as well as actions, (they say they do) and the one
bewrayes a man, as well as the other, then I can discern no difference,
between that man we now heard of, and this I am now telling you of; who very
wisely put his drink into a sive; and because the sive deceaved him, and let
his drink out, would not be persuaded afterward to trust his dish, no that
he would not. Think you as you please, of the one and the other: I am sure here
was an extreme. The dish would have held it, though the sieve did not.

I must not lay the blame upon all, because some walk not as they should do.
The faults of a counterfeit, must not cast dyrt into the face of a gracious
profession: no, nor may any man's faults though never so scandalous, bring
contempt upon the doctrine. As it was under the Law, so is it now under the
Gospel: Aarons Priesthood was holy, though Nadab and Abihu did that the Lord
commanded them not. The sacrifice holy, though Elies sons were wicked. That
the offering of the Lord was abhorred, was the peoples fault. Yet woe befell
them, who gave the offense, and it shall certainly overtake all such as go on
in their steps. But all this while there is no warrant for abhorring the
offering. There is a treasury in earthly vessels; the treasure sanctifies not
the vessel, nor the vessel pollutes the treasure: Moses Chair cannot make
the Scribe the holier; nor can the unholinesse of the Scribe pollute Moses
Doctrine: No man's sins should bring the service of God into dislike.


SON. Yea but you have been speaking of your doctrine, and you have I know not
how fitly, compared it to a treasure, and to wheat, and I know not what: this
makes against you; For we say, sow wheat, and reap wheat.


MOTHER. It is most true; For what a man sowes, that shall he reap: but you
know, the envious man sowed Tares; then by the same reason, there will be
tares too. As envious as the man is, he must have his crop.


SON. This does not satisfio me: we have read, that Truth is strongest, and
does prevail; it brings a power with it,


MOTHER. That it does, and thou may be sure of it. A greater power then is
this, to cast away ones goods, to thump ones self on the breast; to cross the
forehead; to lash one^ sides till the blood follow; to cast up ones prayers
with beads, in stead of counters; to abstain from eggs on Friday, and a
chicke on Saturday; and flesh for forty days together. Nay, (I am not wide if
I say) it brings a greater power, then that of your Popes keys, though it
cannot open Purgatory. But for thy information, which I specially intend, I
will plainly show thee what power this is, which truth brings with it, by two
resemblances: It is such a power, as Jacob gave his Father Laban, to search his
tents, for the Images which Rachell had stolen: she was desirous to keep
them, whether to play with them, or because they were her Fathers, I know not:
and Laban was desirous to have them; they were his gods, therefore of great
esteem. Search my tents (says Jacob) there is your power: I would give no way
to keep them upon any condition, if I knew of them; For Jacob knew not that
Rachell had stolen them: Genesis 31. 32. So then Rachell was too hard for them
both. The resemblance lies thus. Truth brings power with it to search the
heart, yea to sweep it and cleanse it too. And yet this crafty subtle Rachell
keeps some of the filth behind the door in a corner. And this to humble man;
who, if he knows nothing by himself, yet is he not thereby justified: He has
to do with him who is greater then the heart, whose eyes are as Crystal.
Selfe-puritie is a fancy, it will deceive a man like a broaken tooth, or a
leg out of joint: Behold, if we say we know it not, does not he that
pondereth the heart consider it etc? Prove. 24. 12. Who can understand his
errors? cleanse thou me from secret sai^^s, keep back thy servant, etc. Psalm.
19. Now mark how Hezechiah prayed: The good Lord pardon every one, that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary. That man who is as desirous to cleanse his
heart from Idols, as Jacob was to cleanse his tents: and can say with
Hezechiah: Remember how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart: 2 King. 20. that man may find comfort from Gods answering Hezechiahs
prayer; And the Lord hearkened to Hezechiah and healed the people: 2 Chro. 30.
18. 19. I should now show this power, which truth brings in a second
resemblance; but I cannot leave this scripture, there being something else in
it considerable, and pat for our purpose.

Rachell had stolen her Fathers gods; no question but she would keep them:
and what means uses she for that? she hides them under the furniture, then
sitts down closse upon them. This was a principal means first to wipe her
Fathers nose of them, and then to keep them above ground; for till she rose,
Jacob could not bury them under the Oak: we may sitly call this her
wilfulness. But wilfulness, though it be a kind of a reason, such as it is,
yet it has nothing to defend it self, we call it a madness rather; how then
did she defend her wilful sitting so closse in her Fathers presence, and upon
such precious things? For that she pleades custom. So now this Scripture has
afforded us two principal helps, by which you maintain Images at this day;
they are the very pillars, which keep them from falling to the ground. Ye
resolve to keep them, therefore you sit down closse upon them. This is a
strong Argument: this will is a tough and knottie thing. And yet that this
wilfulness may not be counted madness; ye plead custom from ancient days:
let ancient days speak. It is ordinary with you to say, you hope, your great
Grandfather is in heaven, yet he bowed before an Image. It is hard to prove
that, because there were seven thousand, who bowed not the knee before the
Image of Baall. But see here, though they cannot use a more Herculean Argument,
then wilfulness; yet if ye will ask for the old way, and enquire of ancient
days, (which I am sure would fail you) here is a Scripture would stand you in
stead, for it draws the Pedigree of Images, from more ancient days, then were
my Fathers: And we do grant your Church had a being long before Luther; and
that your strange gods are as ancient as the oak beyond Sechem: yet that you
may not thence conclude their lawfulness, they lay buried there; and
certainly, there is no true Jacob, but thinks them fittest under ground: But if
there be any one, who will say to the dead stock, stand up; he must uphold
them by wilfulnes, or by pleading custom, or both. Here I have been out of my
way, yet not from my purpose, I come to another resemblance, whereby that power
which truth brings with it, will appear also.

It is such a power, which Iosuah had to carry all before him; yet the men of
Gibeon were too wily for him: yet the Iebusite dwelt in the Land: The one made
their peace by working wilily: The other stood to it, having first had the
City in a kind of ancient possession, which is 12. points in the law: and so
rooted, and earthed himself in the Land, as you see Ivy does into a wall. I
remember one compare the body of sin unto Ivy in a wall: the Ivy does so
claspe the wall, as that it cannot be taken forth, till the wall be plucked
down; nor can that sin be purged, till the building be dissolved: The
Iebusite held out till David's time. But mark. the resemblance goes further:
The first were hewers of wood, and drawers of water, to all the Congregations.
Anger, hatred, fear, etc. All things work for the good of them that fear him:
and they who are others masters, are Isreal's servants. The other were as
goades in Isreal's sides, and as thorns in his eyes: so is the crucified body
of sin unto the true Israel; witness a true Israelite; who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?


SON. Yea but if truth bring but such a power with it, how is it there is
such foul practice?


MOTHER. The reason is plain, all men have not truth; nay sew have it. Truth
is a Jewel; it must be bought, it may not be sold. It must be bought at any
rate; rather part with all then miss of it: It must be sold at no rate; the
world and the glory of it cannot balance it. So then it being hardly bought,
and hardly kept; no marvel that all men have not truth.


SON. Yet I cannot see, how truth and such soul practice may stand together
any more, then light by darkness; God with Beliall.


MOTHER. They do not agree together; yet may they stand together; yet may they
be together: how? As the Israelite and Iebusite in one Land; as the wheat and
the tares stand in one field.

Now Child, that thou may make some use of this observation. Thou have been
looking on our practice; call it our carcass if thou will, because it has no
life in it: yet as dead as it is, it might yield some honey, if thou were wise.
I read of one, whose name is as a sweet ointment; that he never looked on such
an object, but he would say; Lord be merciful unto me. He knew the envious man
had done that thing; and who knows his depths? he knew a cunning Ioab had an
hand in it too, even that which is deceitful above all things; and who knows
his slights? to this man this carcass yielded honey. But if thou can not
make this use of it, as every one cannot; yet beware thou stand'st no longer
still looking on it, as they on Amasa's body. That may tell thee the danger: I
want strength to take it out of the way; nor can I find a cloth wide enough to
cover it. I counsel thee to hasten forward: Thy own corruption has got much
advantage, and more ground it getts continually; never more then when thou
stand looking at others: It has got a strong hold, nor is thy heart
faithful within thee, to cast this rebel out. Oh stand not still, but pursue
this enemy even to death; looking up to him, him only, whose strength is
perfected in weakness. Here is a difficult work, and the hardness of it
lies in this; the getting the consent of ones will, which is a stubborn
thing. And that cannot be said to be willing and pliable in deed, till it is
as content to fasten upon the means, as it is to enjoy the end. The soul of
the sluggard desires, and has naught. Prove. 13. 4. Hieromes translation of
that verse seemed very strange to me, but (I hope) it proved useful: I take it
rather as a comment, then a translation. He reads the words thus; vult et non
vult piger; The sluggard wills and he wills not. It implies a kind of
contradiction in the will, and that is strange; yet but seemingly, and there is
the use. For that man who desires and wills, how covetous soever he be, and yet
is not diligent, but turns on his bed, like the doote on his hinges; he getts
not forward; where he was, there he i^; that man in deed and in truth wills
not. Why? he is not diligent: therefore be not mistaken, he does not will the
end; for the desiring of the end in deed and in truth, implies the means in
sincerity. This saying, if there be a willing mind, rocks many asleep, and
keeps them as fast on their bed, as the door on its hinges. But diligence
must try whether there be a willing mind or no: if no diligence, no
willingness: thou can not think of a thing more considerable. Thou see
now what use I would have thee make of our practice; I would have thee mend
thine own practice, by looking on ours. So thou have my counsel; now thou
must hearken to my correction: these do well together, let parents mark that.

Thy report in thy letter is like the report brought to David upon the murder
of A^^^^: (A thing is increased by report, as a snow-ball by tumbling.) All the
Kings sout are slain. That was not so; only A^ was slain, whose lust and
drunkenness gave the cause, Absolon the hand. What one of all your ministry or
la^^y do allow of fasting, etc? Thou have an envlous eye, that can look on
nothing, but what the envious man has done: we have living bodies, as I shall
show thee anon.

Again, thou have in thy letter pronounced us unclean: my Child should have
used much wariness therein* the law of the hope^ tells thee so much: the
morrall whereof stands as a strong b^^ against rash censure. Thou will say,
thou have pronounced us unclean from the Priests mouth. I might question the
Priests order, yet I take not that advantage: tell the Priest, that every white
s^^b, or white spot, is not the plague of leprosy, though it be like it: when
the garments are washed, the man may be clean, and the Priest shall be
judged for his rash judgment. Ask him then, whether he has considered of
this sore, according to the proportion of time, seven days, yet seven days
more etc. All the places that ever I met with, or ever shall, which may be a
few amongst many, being put together, will not so stop the way against rash
judgment, as will this one; therefore admire the Scripture. The Priest tells
thee, he has considered accordingly, and that he finds the sore deep in the
flesh, nay in his head, the seat of life: therefore has he pronounced him
utterly unclean.

Now I could help thee to make this reply to your Priest: First we question
whether the person were so near him, as that he could discern his
uncleanness so plainly: then, if it be granted, he was; we conclude, that the
person received his uncleanness from the Priest: For it is a position amongst
us, that the priests breath is as infections a^ the plague; ^^d that Idolatry
is a spreading leprosy. But here would be much to do to bring the Priest to
confess the plague of his own hea^^ though it be a mean point in confession*
therefore I leave that, and I take the advantage only, which the law concerning
the Leper gives me, which is this: your Priest has pronounced him unclean,
and yet has not put him apart: This was against the saw then, and the morrall
of it now, which is of force. He is unclean says the law, he shall dwell
alone, without the Camp shall his habitation be. Levit. 13. 46. Then not in
the Camp: then he only unclean; not the whole Camp for his sake. What one
(says my Child, speaking from the Priests mouth) does allow of fasting ^re?
Alas to thy own prejudice thou have put the whole and the sick together. We
say not, but that there is a leprosy amongst us; we cannot think but there
are unclean persons in a whole land: yet we say it infecteth no farther then
it spreads, and it spreads not over all. Pitch is a defiling thing: who
will deny that? but they are children that will be pidling in it. What was
that to thee? what is that to me, if we touch it not? Coals will burn, he was
burned that denied it: they will not burn thee, unless thou take them in
thy bosom; nor me, unless I walk upon them. That which neither comes into
the mouth, nor goes forth of the mouth, cannot defile a man. We grant that we
have some wicked persons amongst us; call them sons of Bichri if thou will,
for they do not yield subjection to David. Would my Child for their sakes
swallow up the inheritance of the Lord? oh far be it, far of thy heart, as it
is from the power of thy hands, to destroy a peaceable and faithful mother in
Israel; who if she does not cast their heads over the wall, does not therefore
strengthen their hands, nothing less; she can but go to them who have not the
sword for naught, and wish that they were cut off that trouble her: and this
she does with grief too: for as she is a wise woman, and will do nothing
rashly; so she is a mother too, and does what she does tenderly: she is not
enjoined the temporal sword, but that which likes her better, even fair and
gentle persuasions, whereby to persuade obedience to David; and thus she
pearceth the hearts of men, by a two edged sword in her mouth. Consider this,
good Child, for it is the inseparable mark of a mother, as you shall hear
anon in due place.

Now hearken to what this wise woman says, (for as her actions, whereof anon,
so her words will bewray her to be a mother:) Concerning this evil practice
specially of her ministers, and all such as come near the Lord in the strong
bond or profession. The watchman of Ephraim was with my God, Hos. 9. 8. and is
he a snare? From the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all
the land, Ier. 23. Israel has played the harlot, and has the bill of
divorcement: and now does Judah sin? Comfort me, comfort me, for my strength
fails; mine eye breaks my heart; it powers forth rivers of tears. Why
woman? only Nadab and Abihu have corrupted their ways. Two are too many: they
are shepherds, and are they Idol shepherds? woe to them; the sword shall be
upon their Arm, and their right Eye Zacha. 11. 17. Now that Israel has her
bill of divorce, will Judah sin? This will be bitterness, much bitterness;
for hear what the Lord has said, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh
me, and before all the people, I will be glorified, Levit. 10. 3. Why then if
there be not a prevention in time, these Prophets shall be fed with wormwood,
and be made to drink the water of gall: A whirlewind of the Lord shall go
forth in fury, and shall fall grievouslly on the head of the wicked: Ier. 23.
Hearken Child, this wise woman is speaking still. She confesses that the
Priests mouth should preserve knowledge, and his lips teach many. The snuffers
were of gold, of beaten gold: they that are appointed to give light unto
others, should be burning and shining lights: Holiness becomes the Lords
house, and his Priests should for ever be clothed with righteousness; then
would the Saints shout for joy, for they do wish that all the congregation
were holy; Priest and people, every one of them. Yet was it rebellion in Korah
and his company to think them all so; and surely a great fault in thee, to be
as far wide in the contrary. What one of your ministers, or professors? say
thou, etc. Oh number not the godly with the wicked, it will not profit, wisdom
will be justified of her children, whose spot is not like your spot, Deuteronomy. 32.
I am taking up Balaams words: how will thou condemn, where the Lord has not
condemned? how will thou accuse, where the Lord has not accused? Nu. 23. We
have a people (my Son) whom thou may see from the tops of the Rocks,
from the Hills thou may behold them: Lo, this people shall dwell by
themselves, and shall not be counted among the Nations: Number. 23. 13. It is as
dangerous to call good evil, as evil good. We have a holy ministry amongst
us, we have a holy people, though their number be the fewest, but like to
little flocks of kidds. It must needs be so, how can it be otherwise? why
did thou not see them even now, a people upon the rocks, and upon the hills?
there must be sweat to get thither; and how loath are we to take pains? this
deep digging is a wearisome work, it is a sowing in tears. Good Child mark:
An outward form without the power, stays this man by the way, a lie another:
one man setts up Idols in his heart, and restes upon them: Another putts a
stumbling block before his eyes, and will not over: A Lion is in the way says
another, and he lies still, and turns like a door upon the hindges: An
army of the Philistimes will oppose me; I cannot through; the children of Anak
are there, I shall never get the land: thus case slaieth the fool, and vain
thoughts deceive, as if victory could be got by sleeping, or a crown with
case. But there is a Caleb and a Joshua too, who walk wholly with the Lord; and
through they get, notwithstanding all opposition. Thus there is a remnant, here
is a few, and not so few but Elias may discern them, for he is not alone. But
pray thou for the life and prosperity of these few, even for thy Mother and her
childrens sake; for by them it is, that thy fathers house, and thousands more
enjoy their safety, sitting under their vines and figgtrees; for these are the
Moseses that stand in the gap, to turn away the wrath of the Lord, lest it
should begin and make an end in one day. These are they who intercede for the
people, when the plague is begun, standing between the living and the dead.
These are they who are as often upon their knees, as the people in their sin.
These are the Michaa's, that will not daube with untempered mortar, and so
build a mudd wall; but deal plainly to turn away ruin from the King and
people, if they might be heard; though they were smitten on their cheeks, and
fed with the bread of affliction: But the souls of the Saints are in Gods
hands, when others go on and are punished; and others from chamber to chamber
when the scourge comes, yet shall not be hidd. These are the Amoses, who thus
in many corners lift up their hands and say; Oh Lord God, cease I beseech thee,
by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small Amos 7. This is the day of his
troubles, he lies now bleeding on the ground, almost fainting, strength
fails. The Syrians before, and the Philistimes behind, would devour him with
open mouth; But thy thoughts o Lord are too high for them: A brutish man
knows not; nor can fools understand this: The wicked is exalted, and the
righteous man is laid low: Psalm. 92. It is because the workers of iniquity
shall be destroyed for ever; but the borne of the righteous shall be exalted.
We know Jacob must be brought to the grave, that he may know whose hand must
bring him back again: he must receive the sentence of death within himself,
that he may not trust in himself, but in God that raises the dead. Then Jacob
is but in a trance, his life is whole within him. According to thy will we
help him with our prayers, and remember thee of thy promise, who have said,
that the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame; and
the house of Esau for stubble. Ob^d. 18. He that believes makes not have, be
limiteth not the holy one of Israel. The vision is for an appointed time, and
we wait: The rod of Ashur shall not still be upon the back of the righteous;
it is in the Lords hand: and when we shall turn to him that smites, we know
the rod must to the fire: for upon mount Sion there shall be deliverance, and
there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions. In the mean time, we know Jacob shall be hid in a secret place,
till these calamities be past; his head shall be covered, till the two tails
of this smoking firebrand be blown over: For the Lord has said it, who is
making up his Jewels, when his fire is in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

Thus my Son, we have of our ministers, that weep between the porch and
the Altar, and say, spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage to
reproach. Call them the great Kings Ambassadors; they know whose message they
have; and they deliver it faithfully. Then call them ^rs of the breach; they
stand in the gap. Shepherds; they strengthen the diseased, Ezec. 34. Watchmen;
they blow, though the Adders ^^r^s charmed. Thus they s^^ke not ours, but us,
who will most gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for our souls, though the
more they love, the less they are beloved: yet is the word as fire within
them, and knowing the terrors of the Lord, they will persuade men.

We have of our people too, that hold the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience. 1 Timothy 3. 9. So adorning that holy name by which they are called.
It is hard to speak of them a part, they are so like; being indeed but as a
one lump leavened with the same leaven: but as fellow branches, borne up by the
same root: only these last are as the lower bough's; the other as the upmost,
whose places set them as a City on an hill, that cannot be hid. Call them
Puritans if thou will, because they were unclean in their own eyes, they
sought for a righteousness of faith, whereby they are cleansed from their
filthiness. Call them Seperatists if thou will, they cannot run into the
same excess of riott. Call them stout and stiff fellows, for you can no more
make them bow before an Image, then you can make an Elephant bend, which they
say, the weight of a Castle with armed men in it will not do. Call them if
thou will, as thy Leader Doctor Carrier has done; Schismatic fellows,
Sons of Zervia, too hard for David. Cry out against them Athaliah-like;
Treason, Treason; so dealing with them, as a man with his dog, whom he would
have knocked on the head, he calls out, he is mad: they will by well-doing, put
to silence the malice of wicked men. How? they will pray for their King, bless
God for their King; persuade obedience to their King; accounting him the breath
of their nostrills. He is the Lords Anointed, let his soul be bound up in
the bundle of life; but let his enemies be slung out, as out of the middle of a
sling. Now my Son will use his tongue a little better, knowing whose tongue
would learn no manners before it was scorched, and then it called Abraham
Father. We will then find out other names for them, that thou may be
instructed by them: we will call them freely beloved; for they are justified by
faith freely by his grace Romans 3. 24. We will call them living men; as they
are planted into the likeness of Christ's death, so are they into the liknesse
of his resurrection. Call them new Creatures: old things are passed away, all
things are new. Call them Gods workmanship; thou have made us, not we our
selves, thou have wroght all our works for us* Call them holy; for they have
not defiled their garments: and it shall be their glory, and Crown of rejoicing.
Call them tree^ planted by the rivers of waters, which cannot care for the
years of drought, nor feel when the heat comes, neither cease from yielding
fruit. They are of the Lords plantation ever fat and well liking, as the dew
from the Lord, and the shewers upon the grass, tarrieth not for man, nor
waits for the sons of men. Me thinks I am again in Balaams rapture; how
goodly are thy tents O Jacob? and thy habitations O Israel? as the valleys are
they stretched forth, as Gardens by the river side; as the Alloe trees that the
Lord has planted; as the Cedars besides the waters. We have spoken of them a
part, and now they are together again, they cannot be parted, belonging both
to one head, and having fellowship one with another. We will now call them
mount Sion, for they stand fast for evermore: on them is deliverance, and in
them is holiness. We call them as the Churches primitive fruit was called: A
Man Child; for their faith, charity, patience, labor, godly valor. These are
they who count all things but loss, that they may win Christ; whom yet they
knew not after the flesh: much less the cross, much less the nails of it,
or any other relic. The Spirit quickneth; the flesh profits nothing. These
are they who go always bound in the Spirit, not knowing what things will
befall them; but they pass not, neither is their life dear unto them: For
they are ready not to be bound only, but also to suffer for the name of the
Lord Jesus. And yet (observe my Child) before they will go into the face of
persecution, they will have as sure a warrant as Jacob had to meet his brother
Esau: Lord which said unto me return, and I will deal well with thee Genesis
32. 9. And having this, nothing can be too dear for him, who has done so much
for them; neither goods, nor liberty, nor life: now into the face of this Esau
they go; and behold! to the admiration of the beholders, his stern face is
changed: the face of persecution is unto them now no other then the face of
God; and behold! in stead of blows kisses. This is as the healing of the
waters; and indeed, the waters of affliction are healed to the children of God,
and shall never prove deadly unto them; it is like Samsons riddle, and none but
the children of God can unfold it: only they with Samson can find swarms of
bees, and honey in the carcass of a Lion.


SON. It seems your men must be dealt with, as the Jews dealt with Simon of
Cyrene, who was Angariatus; so they must be compelled to bear the Cross. The
Lord loves a cheerful giver, I add too, and a cheerful sufferer; this free
will offering is an acceptable thing. Our men reading Christ's passion, see
warrant enough to disesteeme life, liberty, goods, and all. They will live in
austere penance for ever: Christ's life was a passion. They will be poor, and
that willingly; Christ was so: They will live pent up in a hole; Christ had not
whereon to lay his head. And all this they will do, before they be Anguriati
constrained unto it. Meritorious things sure! Thus you have, (as I may say)
the whole bundle of the sower herbs, wherewith we eat our Passover; the very
ingredients, which make up our austere penance, the souls medicine.


MOTHER. I might say of this medicine, as they of the pottage: Death is in the
pott, we cannot eat of it. But I leave the figure, and speak plainly; we
have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. It is a truth; A man ought to be
a martyr in affection. He must deny himself, and take up his cross daily:
And yet he must take his life, goods, and liberty from Gods hand, as Talents
entrusted to him, to use, to improve. Nor must he part with them, till they
stand in competition with the purity of the Gospel; and now that they do, he
has his warrant what to do, and his woe too, if he does it not: and to the
Saints, the choice is easy, neither are their lives dear unto them; it is
necessary say they (the truth of Christ constrayning them) that we go, not
that we should live. We shall loose our goods. No matter, we will take it
ioyefully, knowing we have in heaven an enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34. we
shall loose our liberty. No matter, the word of God is not bound, Christ has
set us free, we are free indeed.

Life is sweet, the other life is sweeter. But Death is bitter, the second
death is more bitter. Come prison, come death: all is advantage. The choice is
made; but still they have their warrant. Esau has a stern look, the true
Israel will go to meet him warrantably, and preparedly, they look to have
kisses from him. The Cross is a heavy thing: the Head fainted under it, much
more the member: therefore they will forecast the Cross at all times; they
will cast it in their way at no time: It shall meet the Saints as it did Simon
of Cyren, and as the Lion met Sampson in their way. They will not thrust
themselves into danger, as they will not cowardly avoid it. They will pray to
be delivered from the mouth of the Lion; but if the Beast will bend them or
break them: their breaking has and shall be like the breaking of a box of
precious ointment, it shall fill the whole house with a sweet perfume. And the
Beast shall be forced in spite of malice to yield them honey, which proves so
sweet, that they shall take pleasure in infirmity, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ his sake, whose power
is so upon them, that when they are weak, then are they strong. How sweet
shall the waters be, when the Lord has healed them? What pleasant fruit shall
grow from a bitter root, when the Lord has watered it, or has changed his
nature? Tribulation shall work patience; patience experience; experience hope;
and hope makes not ashamed: see what kisses are here.


SON. You have said something to our sufferings in geuer all; what say you to
the particulars; first to our austere penance: we are content to whip our
selves, because Christ was whipped by the Jews; and we think we have ground
for it, if not a direct precept: yea what clearing of your selves: there is
ground for our auricular confession: yea what indignation, yea what revenge, 2
Cor. 7. there is ground for our penance. There cannot be a greater token of
sorrow to repentance, then to take revenge of our body for the sin of our
souls. Again, we have pattern for it too; The Publican smote upon his
breast, Luke 18.


MOTHER. Truth is an excellent thing, if we have it not, yet we would have
some thing like it* Your letter does not mention Auricular confession,
therefore I will but touch upon it, because it goes before Penance. If you will
take the Apostles clearing for Confession, let Ezra and Nehemiah, and Daniell
expound it, in their three excellent chapters the 9 of their books, where you
have the form of clearing your Confession, where you must mark by the way,
that it was accompanied, with astonishment, with trembling. For that
indignation, and revenge, the Apostle speaks off, it cannot be meant of
whipping your selves. For what is a little smart of the body, a yery flea
biting, to make satisfaction for sin? when as the sin of the body, cannot
satisfy for the sin of the soul. For the Publicane smiting his breast, It
is a wonder to me, you dare come so near that Scripture, because the Pharesi^
is hard by, and meete^ you at every turn staring you in the face. It is true
the Publican smot his breast, he looked upon the ground too. Christ does not
deliver a general rule; but tells me and thee, the inseparable mark of a true
penitent; shame or loathing. He looked on the ground, acknowledging, that mercy
kept him from being beneath for his iniquity: he smott his breast so pleading
with his heart the mother of sin. Take it tohetger, and let indignation and
revenge be put to it too; the Prophet Ezech. comprehends all, and expound^ it
fully. They shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed
Cap. 6. ver. 9. They shall be on the mountains like Doves of the valleys, all
of them mourning every one for his iniquity: so cap. 7. ver. 16. They shall
remember their ways and be ashamed. so cap 16. ver. 61. And ye shall loath
your selves in your own sight: so cap 20. ver. 43. Whether this were not a
smart within the skin, let the indifferent Reader judge.

So then I conclude against you, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God. We have no precept for it, rather against it: rent your hearts, and not
your garmens. This shadow has devoured the substance: we have no pattern; for
Baalls Priests must not be our examples: we follow Paul, for he followed
Christ. Paul received from the Jews forty stripes save one; we read not, that
he gave himself one. Your heretics (you will have it so) were whipped by
Boner, as long as his breath would hold; we find not that they g^ve themselves
one stripe. A man may be too unmannerly bold with his body: Certainly the
Saints have a reverent esteem of it. It is the Cabinet of a rich Jewel: nor
is that all; it is the temple of the Holy Ghost. A temple made with hands we
know is of much esteem: The temple of the Holy Ghost much more. I find it used
by the Apostle, as a maine Argument against uncleanness: It may serve also as
a buckler, to keep off the blows. Are the bodies of the Saints the temples of
the holy Ghost? they dare not whip them, nor scorch them, nor pine them, these
are not the marks of the Lord Jesus: who required them at their hands? They
know that the sufferings of Christ must abound in them; if they look to have
the consolations abound through Christ: They know that they must hear about in
their bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be made
manifest in their bodies; knowing well that there is a false penance, and a
counterfeite Martyrdom: my sweet Child, they never were, nor never will be
their own tormentors. If their bodies must be whipped, they shall be delivered
up to be whipped, and a Bonner shall do it; but they will go away rejoicing.
If their bodies must be scorctht, a Terrill shall do it (unless our English
Mutius will in an holy indignation and revenge, burn that hand which had
subscribed, to that which would have destroyed the whole body and soul too.
But Rose Allen has an other fire within, even zeal to the truth, and this
burns so within her, that outwardly she feels but little pain. If they must
be pincht with hunger, a stony-harted keeper shall do it, whose charge is as
hard as he; but they have a meat, which the keeper knows not off. they live
not by bread alone, yet if the keeper be so kind as to give it them, they will
take it, for they will not hate their own flesh, but in due time and place
nourish it and cherish it was the husband the wife, and the Lord his Church:
these know not (my child) what to make of that for ever Austere living in
penance for sin. But they are very well acquainted with a sorrow for sin,
and affliction of soul, which is an inward thing, coming from an inward
principle, and this is such that it does make them with David, to forget to
eat their bread, or if they do remember it, to mingle it with weeping. Then
they be such as fast too and fast often, not resting upon it, as an essential
part of Gods worship, but as a notable help and preparation thereunto, fitting
them for that wherein they are abundant, prayer, joining that with it, knowing
that some sins will not be cast out without it. And thus they do for a time,
not defrauding themselves superstitiously in imitation of Christ, or of Moses
before, then they should go against the precept; and be found to neglect their
bodies, which must be cared for, yt they may be serviceable. They do, they must
somtims set aside their water, and use a little wine for their stomachs sake,
and their often infirmities. 1. Tim. 5. 23. Somtims a bitt of flesh on the
friday, and an egg on the saturday, to the pare, days and meats are pure; But
still respecting the main, that they be serviceable to God, and his Church,
whereunto they have ever so wakefull an eye, knowing well their season when to
keep under their bodies, and to bring them into subjection, least at any time
or by any means, they should be reproved. This they do frequently but by no
means resting on the outward act. That is but the carcass, but joining many
excellent works with it; breaking of their sins by repentance, that is a
principal thing, for now their work is accepted. Dealing their bread to the
hungry that is an other: fervent prayer that was in the first place and now it
comes again to be considered a part, that thou may know, that we have them
who pray too and pray much: but mark, upon all these, the door is shut,
knowing they have a God that sees in secret. These are they, who are frequent
and fervent in prayer, carried upon the wings of faith, without the help of
Saint or Angel, not by number but by weight, yet having the spirit but by
measure, they do not continue in prayer superstitiously. It is an easy matter
to count Beads: but that prayer which foyles Amalecke, is a laborions work;
for behold two men holding up Moses hands. O Lord, whose property it is, to
have thy hands stretched out still, strengthen the weak hands, that Amaleck
may not prevail. Thus they do pray, and that fervently, watching thereunto:
prayer is one of their weapons, and is unto them as Goliahs sword to David,
nothing like that. Like the worthiest of David's worthies; what difficulties
does it go through? what waters of comfort does it fetch? the time would fail
me; I leave it to a silent admiration. That soul on which the spirit of
prayer and supplication is powered, can tell, and only that; it is possible for
me and thee to admire that whereof we have no experience; I do so, and see I
am again in Balaams rapture. Behold here they rise up as a great Lion, and
lift up themselves as young Lions, they shall not lie down till they eat of
the prey, and drink the blood of the slain. This is Moses hand lift up,
Amaleck falls before it. No that it does not some will say; Amaleck prevails.
He does so, yet are the prayers of the Saints ascended up, and they are before
the throne, as the Lords remembrancers; how long Lord, how long, when will thou
hearken to the voice of our breathing? And these are heard, though the Lord be
not now come to answer them in all the peoples sight: here is the patience of
the Saints. In the mean time, their tears the other weapon shall be bottled;
for they have tears too: I say not all have, nor all at all times; it is
certain, there may be a weeping heart, when there is a dry eye; as there may
be and often is a wett eye, and a dry heart: all natures, all constitutions
are not alike, yet tears they have, some of them Ieremies vivers; some tears
to fill a bottle; some of them have tears to cover the place they pray in,
tears to water the couch. Mary's tears to wash with; tears to eat; tears
to drink* tears to sow with; tears to water with: they have their joy too,
but that as a cluster of grapes, in respect of the vintage; to refresh them
travailing through this wilderness: light is sown for the righteous, they kn^
they shall reap in due time, therefore they fai^ not.

Come now my sweet Child, set the pe^nance of your Augustine, or your Capucim
or Anchorite; call them what you will; an^ compare it with the penance of the
before mentioned, and like Dagon before the arc, it falls before it. I know
well you have much bodily exercise, you see many things, which have in deed a
show of wisdom, in voluntary religion, and humbleness of mind, and in not
sparing the body. But are not many things in great estimation among men, and
yet in the eyes of God and his Saints vile and contemptible, yea beggarly
rudiments; no more able to cast down the strong holds of sin, which are set
up in the heart of man, then a child with his pot-gun can batter a tower.

Come we to your voluntary poverty; a thing your letter tells me, thou do
much gaze upon, This casting away all, and then casting your selves upon Gods
providence: In want, and that willingly: oh it is a glorious thing!


SON. Yes, our great Master says so, Cardinal Bellarmine, he has Scripture
for it too, If thou will be perfect, go sell give to the poor. Math. 19. A
work of Supererogation: It will set a man on the right hand in the kingdom.
All this have I done. Have thou? now overtopt perfection, go sell, and give,
etc.

Again, mark what Peter says in the person of all the rest, (therefore the
Pope is Supreme head, Bellar: makes it follow, mark that by the way) we have
forsaken all, what shall we have therefore? Peter's expectation was large upon
that, so is ours. Now turn to the 2. and 4. of the Acts. there you shall find
that as many as possessed Lands, or houses sold them and laid the money at
Peter's seete, Put all this together, and we have first Counsel (Bellarm:
calls it so) to maintain voluntary poverty. Secondly, we have the practice
of the converts to cast away all: and Thirdly, we have it warranted from the
Apostles, to beg when we have done: who after they had forsaken all, lived
(says Bellarmine) vitam mendicantium, like our Monks, beggar-like.


MOTHER. Then you must mend your Coppie; It is voluntary beggerie. Here good
Reader thou see my child has urged Bellarmine: that book he read and such
like before the Scriptures, nay before he had laid the first principles, and so
was poisoned. Hence those tares: let them teach thee, to look unto the
Scriptures as thy Counselors: through Gods blessings upon it, they will make
thee wiser then was Bellarmine: In the mean time know, they are the Sovereign
Antidote against poison. Now thou shall hear a woeman contend with Bellarmine.
A book I never read, but a skillful Fisherman has fished out of that book,
something to my hand, which I shall set down for my child's instruction and
thee too, till thou find a better help. It is true: Bellarmine says, that
This, Go, sell, give etc- was not Christ's precept, but his Counsel: and that
not to the young man alone, but to all the faithful.

We will not contend about words; call it precept or counsel, (I confess
their is difference) It was specially directed to one, and it teaches all. I
pray you give me leave to paraphrase upon Christ's words though like a woeman.

Thou would get heaven by doing, and thou think thou art come to a nothing
more; what lack I yet? do thou understand the voice of words? They that
heard could not endure that which was commanded; and Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake. Hebr. 12. And yet would thou get heaven by doing? something
is behind that shall tell thee, thou art too forward, yea that nothing is yet
don. Thou have kept the Commandments: that shall be tried. What can thou do
for thy brother, whom thou have seen? can thou draw forth thy soul unto him?
I do not mean thy outward parting with thy goods. Can thou do it according
to the perfection of charity, which the Law requires? Nay can thou do it
according to that measure which the Gospel requires, if the cause of the
Gospel calls for it? Though thou bestowest all thy goods to feed the poor,
and have not Charity, it profits thee nothing. 1 Cor. 13. Thy money is thy
treasure man, thy heart is upon it. Thou must part with thy treasure, when thou
may keep thy money. Thy affections must be taken off; thou must bye as if
thou boughtedst not, thou must enjoy as if thou enioyedst not. This makes thee
sorrowful now. Thou art then exceeding faulty in the second table toward thy
brother, whom thou have seen: Thou art infinitely short in the second table
toward God, whom thou have not seen. Thus you see, ye Lord tried this young man
in that; which was his treasure indeed, for his heart was on it: he sorrowed,
for he had great possessions. The Lord feels the pulse of a man, and can make
him bleed in a right vain.

Now if you will conclude hence, that no man can be justified by the works of
the law, (which I take to be the genuine scope of the place) we consent, though
Bellarmin does not. That he who fails in the second table, must needs fail in
the first; we grant that too. We go further; if you will prove hence, that a
man must cast away his treasure: we grant that too, meaning that, what ever it
be, being a creature, on which the Heart is rivited. But if you will conclude
hence, that it is Christ's counsel not to the young man alone, but to all the
faithful; go cast away that civil right, which thou have to the talent given
thee to use; I will put thee to prove it out of Bellarmine; and when thou have
done, thou shall begin again, and prove it from the Scripture, else I will not
believe it: so much to the Counsel. To the practice of the Apostles I have
this to say: Christ had told them by occasion of this rich man's departing
sorrowful; It was hard for a rich man to enter into heaven: Impossible,
without a great measure of grace. Let none be grieved he is of low degree, if
he has a competencie: Adversity has slain a thousand, prosperity ten
thousand. This man though young was sorrowful to hear of parting with his
possessions; they lay too near his heart. Then answered Peter, we have
forsaken all, what shall we have therefore? What had they forsaken? A house,
and old netts, and friends too. As small as you may account it, all was
forsaken, for they left themselves nothing. And this all, might be great
matters; for a poor fisher man has slept as quietly in his boat, and upon
land in his thatcht house, as an Emperor in his palace; perhaps more quietly,
for great doors let in great cares. And this is a truth too: A man loves his
house, or what you will, not because it is a great one, but because it is his
own; and therefore may he be as loath to part with it, as a rich man with hi^
of hewn stone. We will grant that, the Apostles forsook All; and that they
had not done it, but that they knew, he that called them, would recompense the
loss, though Peter was too hasty. But if Bellarmine will conclude hence, that
a man may warrantably cast away his possessions, and then confine himself to a
Cloister; I shall never believe him: because this man has not a calling to it;
the Apostles had: Come follow me, This man mu'eth himself up in a hole; the
other were sent forth to publish the glad tidings of the Gospel, a great
work. Again, Christ called them; it was their best way to follow: there is no
danger in following Christ, what ever the way be; Christ is a sure guide: But
they could not follow him like snailes with their house on their heads, or with
the netts on their backs: The Scripture does not tell us, they left the
propriety they had in their house, or in their netts: if they did, they were
called to it, and the matter was not much; those netts were not to catch men:
we have not done with this Scripture yet. My Child quotes Bellarmine, and that
truly; who concludes, that the Apostles did live the life of beggars; therefore
the Monks do beg warrantably. I could say, it follows not; still urging the
Call, which makes a maine difference: the one were called, and must obey; the
other were not called, yet they will be in wants and that willingly. But I will
never grant that the Apostles begged, or lived a beggars life, it is much one;
yet we will see, from what premises Bellarmine concludes it: which are these.
The Apostles had forsaken all. The Apostles might provide neither gold, nor
silver, Matthew. 10. The Apostles did not work with their hands; therefore they
lived vitam mendicantium, in my English, a beggars life. I shall not meddle with
persons; the Cardinal in his book yet lives, yet speaks; but very
ignorantly, very unmannerly: therefore is he delivered into the hands of a
woman, who by the help of the Scripture, will confute Bellarmine. He speaks
ignorantly; for thou art to know, that he who brings his servants into
straights, knows well how to deliver his servants out of the straits: he
speaks uncivilly too, and upon that I will insist a little.

Their shall be no beggar in Israel after the flesh: and shall there be beggars
in Israel after the spirit? It is not probable. David had observed much in his
youth, so had he in his age: yet he never saw the Righteous forsaken nor his
seed begging their bread. Yea but David was a King you will say, the righteous
might go a begging for ought he knew, he was in his Palace: he little saw
the distresses of his subjects: yes sure, his ears were open to the cries of
his good people. Indeed his countenance expelled the wicked as the Sun the
mist, but his delight was with the Saints, with them that excelled in virtue;
he took good notice of them, and I will tell you how you may be sure of it.
David was a King, and David followed the Ewes great with young too. David run
from Cave to cave like a poor hunted Partrialge. Saul made him skip like a
flea, more then this, David did water his Coucth with tears too. This non
ignora mali, I was thus afflicted my self; It draws forth a man's soul to an
other; miseris succurrere disco; it will make a man ^atch at a poor man's
petition, and teach him not to send the Petitioner away sad. Thou shall respect
the stranger. Why? Thou wast a stranger in Egypt. What then? Thou know the
heart of a stranger. David's affliction board his ear. He hard the sighs and
groans of his poor, he knew the heart of the afflicted. It is certain,
David's experience was much more then a Cardinals, and you have heard what
David said. You are bound to believe him, before the whole Conclaue of the
Cardinals. Yet hear you the Cardinals Reasons. The Apostles work't not with
their hands; therefore they begged; It follows not, I know some who work not
with their hands, yet think it foul scorn to be called beggars. Yea, but the
Apostles might have no money in their purses, therefore they begged. It
follows not, my purse has often times ben empty, yet I thank God, I never
begged, I would much rather work with my hands, and I will presume, so would
the Apostles too, rather then they would have begged. The fowls of the air
shall teach this great scholar; they work not with their hands I am sure, for
they sow not, neither do they reap, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. I
ask were not the Apostles much better then they? They did dispense the Sacred
Oracles of God, can we think that God would suffer them to beg their bread?
The pretty Lillies shall teach him too; they toil not, yet Solomon then; nay
which is more, the Pope now, in all his glory, is not arrayed like on of them.
Then the Apostles begged not their clothing, nor their bread, O ye of little
wit.

Again, would Paul's hearers pluck out their eyes, to do Paul good, that is,
they would part with the dearest things? and can we think, that the Apostles
hearers would not draw forth a morsel of bread, or a dish of drink, to refresh
empty souls, unless they begged it? But it will be said, though I make the
best of it I can, yet the Apostles lived upon the liberality of others, which
is vita mendicantium, beggar-like. Pray you let us see how this follows: A man
is liberal to me, I accept it, therefore do I live beggar-like? It is, as I
have said, an uncivil conclusion. But let us examine, whether the Apostles did
live upon others liberality. I find not the Scripture says so: let me put in a
houswiues similitude; I have spun a pound of flax, I expect six pence for my
labor, I can scarce live on that; for you shall find that a poor bodies
labor is the cheapest commodity in the market: call you this liberality: I
say my work is worthy of my wages, if it were more. Gods Apostles (for they be
sent) do dispense unto us spiritual things: we let them partake of our
temporalls: what a matter is this; not so much as the six pence for flax.
Christ's words clear^ this; provide neither gold etc. So they may beg. No, For
the work man is worthy of his meat, Math. 10. 10. Then the Apostles will not
fear, but he that paid the Israelits for their burdens, and righted him who
served a long siedge, will see their wages paid, they shall not beg. Now if
any will yet take his warrant hence, that he may part with his possessions, and
then beg an Alms; I have no more to say to him from this text, Iubea miserum
esse libenter, which I English thus, let him be in want and in ignorance too
willingly.

I come now to Peter^ converts, to whom Christ had made his words good; I will
make you fishers of men. He caught as many men at a Sermon, as before he caught
Fishes: Christ's power was plain in the on, and in the other. Three thousand
were pricked in their hearts at on sermon. Men and brethren, what shall we do?
Certainly they thought, that if the Lord did forgive them, he did forgive
much; then they would love much. By this means, here was a spark of love
kindled. A spark is true fire; it will give a reflection, it will soon kindle
a flame.

This reflects upon the members; they shall have no want. For if a man, that
has this worlds goods, yet releeveth not his brother in want, how dwells the
love of God in that man? It will never be answered.

Then all sold their possessions, and parted to all as there was need. It is an
indefinit speech thinks Calvine, ordinary in the Scripture, under the form of
an universal. It is like that all did not part with their houses and Lands:
For of all the 3. thousand, only one is named (the other a counterfeit) as a
memorable example of liberality, Ioses having Land sold it. So far Calvin.
Ioses might keep his house for ought I know, and what was in his house, a wiser
body then my self cannot tell. But let it be granted, all sold their
possessions, yet they cannot make a rule of this, a Rule must be fitted to
circumstances of persons, time and place: Here was an extraordinary
liberality: here was an extraordinary occasion. Following generations should
speak of the one; so should they of the other. A box of Ointment of Spikenard*
very precious, may be powered forth at some times; and yet there was no waste. A
man may pour out a trifle, in comparison at another time, and yet there may be
much wast. Circumstances must guide me, or else I walk as a fool.

Again, grant All parted with their possessions; what poison can be sucked
thence? therefore they lived in voluntary poverty. It follows not: For though
all parted with their possessions, yet All parted not with All. The text
cleares it: They sold their possessions, and parted them as every one had need.
Certainly, they were so wise, so to help others, that they might not need
themselves. Look we on the 34. verse of the 4 Chapter: Neither was there any
among them that lacked. I conclude hence, that the liberality of the rich
supplied the wants of the poor; they lacked not: And the wants of the poor
did not exhaust, or suck dry, the liberality of the rich: there was no lack.
It is a madness, (could an heathen say) to destroy thy liberality, by
liliberality. We may bring the wise man's similitude hither, though it may be
in a more proper place where it is: Drink the waters of thine own Cisterne,
let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the streets:
let them be only thine own, and not strangers with thee. I pray you take the
reddition in my own meaning. Let the streams of thy liberality run about
the streets, like the gutters after a sudden flood of rain; it is a hard
time: Nay, rather like a hie tide, let them run into houses too: there are
many dry souls, water them: but keep the fountain within thine own doors.
Look to that; let it be thine, thine only.

Thus Reader (for I still speak to two, whereof one is my Child; so thou must
be, else I can give thee no instruction) I have rubbed over those knotts, which
lay in my way, as strongly as I could: And I profess unto thee, that it was my
chiefest work to enquire into these Scriptures, from which corruption might
guild over this voluntary poverty; and I find them to be those Scriptures
which I have named unto thee, and only them, as far as I could find;
whereunto Piscator upon Matthew, gave me much light; so did Calvin; the one is
large in it, the other more brief; both excellent helps: Yet let my tears
entreat this thing of thee, that thou would read the text diligently,
comparing scripture with scripture, and thou shall find, that scripture answers
it self, then it is soundly answered. It is a notable help, and it is made as
common unto thee, as the book of nature; neither can be out of thine eye, let
thy eye carry them to thy heart; if through thy neglect, both do not help to
teach thee; to the aggravating thy punishment, both will help to condemn thee.

Now go on with me, but consider first whether this voluntary poverty,
notwithstanding Bellurmines art in guilding, be any thing else, then splendidum
peccatum, a poison gilded over, like Apples of Sodom, which seem fair to
the eye, but if you handle them, they moulder to nothing. Therefore I conclude
against my Son, yet to inform him; that we have no such counsel, no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. But because we live in an Iron age, wherein
we have Naballs churlishly keeping, as if they said; souls, ye may take your
rest, though the fire be round about, which should tell the buyer, he should
not rejoice, and the seller he should not mourn: Because I say, we have such,
yea and prodigalls too, who spend that in a day, which might serve them, and
the poor with them a month together: we will cut a middle way betwixt these
two, and thou shall see, that they, who do not take for doctrines the precepts
of men, go as it were by a thre^^, neither churlishly keeping all, till like a
butlers box they are broken; nor foolishly casting away all, that they may
seem some body. Call these Jacobs; or the Israel of God: The Lord (say they)
has had mercy on us, and therefore woe have these and these things; lands,
houses, possessions, we may call them what we will, so we call them not their
trensure: that makes a main difference, for that is cast away; their affections
are taken off* the Moon is under their feet: so then they can readily part
with them, that so far as they can help, there be no lack; but yet wisely
considering circumstances, where, when, to whom, and what they give: they are
not Solomon's fools, they know the way to the City: he that walks uprightly,
walks safely, says Job: they go by their warrant, for they are stewards. And
this they have not by any extraordinary way, but by ordinary. Is it possible
that he who is in trust with much, and has the bowels of mercy too, should
detain it for want of his masters order. See here mournes the widow, there
cries the fatherless, this back is naked, that belly pinched; look yonder
steward, there are many families in caves and rocks; the sword of the enemy
drove them, they are not in want, and that willingly: now they will draw forth
their souls, they must be merciful, as their heavenly father is merciful:
much is forgiven, they will love much. Have they much? They see the waters,
they cast their bread; they give the portion to seven, and also to eight. The
rich woman minds her husband of that man of God, who treads forth the
Corn, and perhaps his mouth muzled; he shall have his table, his stool, his
conveniences. Have they but little; the two mites shall go; their extreme
poverty shall abound unto a rich liberality. Can a poor man be liberal? an
heathen said, yes: the Scripture puts it out of question, he can, he is. The
poor widow that thinks there is but one way, is fetching some water for the
prophet, and she must bring a morsel of bread, as hard as it is; she shall not
die, nor shall her Child, though her want be greater then that of the Apostles,
nor shall she beg: he that brings into a strait, can bring back again. If
thou draw forth thy soul to the hungry, etc. then shall thy light shine in
obscurity, end thy darkness as the noone day, Isaiah. 58. Israel knows it;
and as they have an eye to the precept, so have they to the recompense of
reward: They know, there is that scatters and yet increases, and there is
that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty: The liberal
soul shall be made fatt, and he that waters, shall be watered again.
Proverbs. 11. These stewards do not question their masters sufficiency; they
will distribute and give to the poor, they will be merciful, and they will
lend; with such sacrifices God is well pleased: Then they know there must be
salt, they must measure their affairs by judgment, and as becomes the
wisdom of the Saints. They know that charity must have an eye within doors,
all must not go forth. They know full well, that he who bids them part with
their coat, gives them leave to keep one for themselves; he that charge them
to help others, does give them that wisdom as not to leave themselves
helpless: He that has given them wherewithal to show mercy to others, gives
them that care as that they do not come to crave mercy from others. Since
their master has entrusted them as stewards in his house, to give every one
their portion, they will carefully do it, knowing withal that the same master
allows them meat, and drink, and cloth, I mean a Jacobs competency.

Let the children stand aside a little, it may be your Hermit is not one of
that number, and therefore he dares not keep his goods: we will suppose him
but as a servant in the house, waiting upon the children; yet when the children
have done, he may sit down if it please him, it is his good masters bargain,
and it shall be his shame; if when his Master allows him it, he will refuse
it, or sit down naked. Mark Child, that thou may not admire this voluntary
beggary; I say the Lord his Master gave that Hermit (whom now thou admirest,
because he has thrown away his goods) a right unto the creatures, at least as
a servant in the house, and he should have been well advised, not only how
he used them and kept them; for there was not all the danger; but how he parted
with them too, there lies as much. I have given you the hear^ of the field,
says the Lord: Mount Seir I have given to the children of Esau for a
possession; let his brother Jacobs posterity take heed they meddle not with a
foot of it; what they have, they must have for their money: If Esau will part
with it for nothing, or give away all in hope his merciful brother will
relieve him, he may; but let him look to it. See thou then my Child, this
Hermit, call him by what name thou will; has he cast away his goods? Let him
look to it, they were his masters, who gave him them to use, and he must come
to his account: Servant what have thou gained? I have cast them away Sir: they
were combersome; I cast them at my heels, so drowning them that they might not
drown me. The Holy Father is the better, his fire burns the clearer; so i^
the Holy Mother: the one will faint me; the other will help me with her
prayers. Give a man this (as the Proverb is) and throw him into the midst of
the sea; he shall not sink, unless his own weight press him down. Have
thou not perceived by what has been said, that these are lying words; and
that in these sacrifices there is no salt? But his goods are sacrificed: does
he now think he has denied himself, because he has denied himself these,
and they are gone: Why Child, his sins may be as closse as ever they were, his
goods were neither his right hand, nor his right eye I warrant thee: If so,
they had not been so easily parted with. Alas, a little money is easily turned
over board, when the Philosopher keeps his treasure, that which is nearer then
his skirt or skin: so does that Hermit too, it is a venture else, but I judge
no man's heart: only I would have thee to know, and make use of it too; that
there is great difference betwixt the emptying of a purse, and the emptying of
the heart: The one will empty whether thou will or no; the other will not be
emptied do what thou can. The one has money in it, thou may keep it if
thou will, at least if thou can, it is not a straw matter: the other has a
treasure in it; thou must not keep it, thy soul lies upon it. Empty the one
this day, as the case may be, thou can not fill it to morrow; let a man empty
the other as well as he may, it will fill of itself without hands. I conclude
hence, that though the emptying of the purse to ones hands, may help to the
emptying of the heart; yet therefore the work is not done, perhaps in no
forwardness: For the purse may be emptied, yet the heart may be full; but when
the heart is emptied, the purse will not be kept full. We proceed, look yet
better upon this Hermit; I will tell thee what thou may discover by thine
eye, thou see the cell or hole he lies buried in. I tell thee, he may as
well deny himself that, nay the earth he stands on, the air he breathes in,
the light he sees with; surely he might, as well as that liberty he might
enjoy, yea and is bound to improve too, or those other necessaries, which like
a proud servant he would not take, when his rich Master offered them. But thou
my Child, fly these things, and learn the wisdom of the Saints: they eat
their bread with joy, and drink their drink with a merry heart, for God
accepts their work. How should they pinch, where the Lord has not pinched?
how should they scant themselves, where the Lord has not scanted? Are then the
creatures before thee and me? Through our Master^ bounty, and rich liberality
they are so; we may eat of the fat, and we may drink the sweet, and cloth our
selves with the wool: so the use of them is ours (our Masters pleasure is so)
are we but as servants, and shall not abide in the house for ever: the abuse of
them whether in not sanctifying them by the word and prayer, or not sending
portions unto them, for whom nothing is provided; or in not using our liberty,
so as we give no occasion to the flesh; or in what kind soever, is ours, and is
set upon our score, and without repentance shall in the end make for our great
convincement. I have done these and these things for thee, wherefore have thou
despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Here is a
convincement indeed, let us look to it; if Gods daily renewed mercies lead us
not to repentance, causing us to renew our obedience, they will in the day of
our reckoning make us speechless, if they be not as loadstones to draw our
iron hearts unto God; they will prove in the great day of the Lord, as a heavy
weight to crush us in pieces. This deserves our care, let us look to it; lest
our meat and drink make us unclean, and our own clothes filthy. Thus my
Child, I think thou know now how to judge of voluntary beggary: It is
Bellarmines word, the Monks are proud of it. I have done with that, but not
with the beggar. He must be examined upon two things; first for that he does
not; A Beggars life is a lazy life: then for what he does; he committs
himself to Gods providence. But here is a strait; I am to examine a man I
cannot speak with, therefore we cannot take satisfaction from on another: yet I
will propose my questions; and till I am resolved in them, I shall think that
the beggar lives as a thief, because he works not with his hands: and
besides, when I look upon a louse, it will put me in mind of a fat Friar; and
the similitude, which wants no feet, lies in this; the louse, a sluggish thing
takes no pains, but lives on the sweat of another body. First then I question
not his order, whether an Augustine, Capucin, Franciscan, or Dominican; I
question the place he lies in, whether a monastery, or a cell; I think a
grave rather: and he lies buried in it alive: For Seneca says, that he never
passed by one Vatia, who lived Friar-like, but he would say, Vatia hic situs
est, Vatia lies buried here: That I may English situs so, Ovid warrants it;
Hic situs est Phaeton.


SON. I know be would never answer you at an unlawful weapon, taken forth of
an unlawful Armorie, so might you kill him indeed: you prove nothing. What
are Seneca or Ovid to us, worse then Apochripha.


MOTHER. As much as your doctrines taught by the precept of man, are to us; you
will foist them upon us, why may not we foist these upon you. It is well I know
your mind; what ever I shall find from any of yours, tending to faith and
godliness, and is not grounded upon that, which only is of divine authority; I
will account of it as a light thing. In the mean time, I esteem Seneca and
Ovid, before the constitutions of Popes, Cardinals, Monks or Friars; though in
the one, the Deity is given to Jupiter as familiarly as Holiness to the Pope:
we expect no more from a Heathen, we do from Christians. Well now, the man
will yet be found alive; yet we will question it further. Life is an active
thing, specially in man, in whose little world, nature has put every member in
office, which is faithfully executed for the good of the whole; to teach man,
that he must be in some office too, and he must faithfully discharge it, for
the good of himself, and others. Now if I find this man out of action, for
ought I know, he may be found dead yet. I propose then unto him another
question, so anciently asked, and resolved that it is almost out of use; some
shame to answer to it, others scorn it, and others cannot; yet every man is
bound to answer to it; and every honest man can, though perhaps he have not a
fit word to express himself: It is Pharaohs question to Joseph's brethren. Sir
what occupation are you off? I cannot imagine how he should answer to this;
for it is granted by Bellarmine, he is a beggar, and though I have heard in way
of contempt of the trade of begging; yet certainly a beggar has no more a
trade, then a louse has, which is wholly employed in feeding it self, and
hurting others. I question him further; Sir, do you enjoy the blessing of God
on them that fear him, which they consider as a fruit of Gods love, and as a
reward of their obedience to the commademenr of labor and travel to be
undergone in this world by the Children of men, to humble them thereby, being
borne to labor, as the sparks fly upward? What is that? They shall eat the
labor of their hands, that is of their diligence. The more I ask, the more
unresolved. My Child indeed says, his mind is employed. If according to Gods
ordinance for the good of himself and others, we grant it a calling. But to
this my Child says no more, but that he prays hard and long; which is an
exercise of the general calling, but very assistant to the particular, the
only thing in question: nor am I any way satisfied with his long prayers; It
is a suspicious thing; I have heard of widows houses have been devoured under
pretense of long prayers. And though I judge no man so far; yet I am sure
there were fatt Friars once; for they had the fat and cream of a land flowing
with milk and honey. I know better how they lost it, then how they got it. I
could question him yet further, as an heathen questioned a poor man, who after
the burning of his little cottage, collected a good sum of money: Did he not
set his house on fire himself? Does not this man find more ease, and partake
of more fatness then before? This is the last doubt; because I know many have
left thousands, choosing rather to be in want and that willingly. But the maine
doubt remains: When he kept his goods, he should have lived in a calling, so
should he after he parted with them. I cannot possibly find he does. And so
much for that he does not. I come to the second thing; that which he does: his
whole estate is cast away, and he committs himself to the providence of God,
says thy letter. And does he so; I question his warrant. It is a truth; the
providence of God is a large and sure inheritance to his chosen; It showed
Abraham a Ram, where and when he little expected it. It provided Samsons
drink, and Eliiabs meat, by such a means, as they little looked for; A dry
bone yielded the one, a Raven brought the other. But mark, this is only when
ordinary means fail. God will be seen but only in the Mount. I must not, I
dare not part with my sheep, in expectation to meet with one in the Bush; nor
with my bread, in hope that a Raven will bring me more: I must not let my
plough stand still, I mean my endeavor in what calling soever, because God
can spread a table in a wilderness: I know he can, but I must not reason from
his power to his will. The Lord did spread a table. Where? In a wilderness: he
sent neither Quails nor Manna in Canaan, there the Plough might go. God will
not feed me from heaven, when I may take up my meat from the earth: He works
not extraordinarily in a fruitful land. Now put these together, what he does
not, and what he does; and learn this from me: Ever suspect that man's prayer,
whose hand is idle. An Heathen man has a lesson, and me think it comes double
to a Christian. God is to be called upon by the hand. I desire the end: how
knows he that? Why volo et tota mente volo. My mind is intent upon the means;
I endeavor my utmost, as if there were no providence: And yet I rest upon a
providence, as if my endeavor were nothing. A Christian may find much use from
it, both in his general and particular calling. Asa set his battle in array,
and cried 2 Chronicles. 14. It is as observable likewise what Ioab did and said 1 Chronicles. 19. Whether he was a good man or no I define not, sure he was a good
general. The sluggard would have his meat; it is true, for he lusts; but
then the Raven must bring it him: the Raven comes not, for the sluggard has
naught: But the soul of the diligent shall be made fatt. As it is a fearful
thing to commit ones self to Gods mercy, Lord, Lord; and yet fit still the
while: so is it dangerous to commit ones self to Gods providence, and
endeavor nothing. I never heard of any man's will, but it bequeathed his soul
to God; let the living man be careful to prove his will in his life time by
double diligence; as by two sure witnesses: For certainly, as the sluggard has
lost his meat, so will he venture his legacy. I am now lapping up that which
was last said, as closse together as I can; and let the Child hearken, even
every one who is a child in understanding.

Thou must trust God with the blessing; he trusts thee with the means: if thou
art not a wise steweard in the one, thou do foolishly expect the other.

Again, when thou see thy way, walk in it, and go down unto Gods
providence by means, as by stepps and stairs; so may thou lay thy self
down upon it, as upon a bed of Camamile safely.

Again, do thou perceive no way? art thou in a wilderness, and can
discern no path? in a strait, and see no means? yet grope not for them in
the dark by any means; but reach forth thy hand unto the Lord willingly as
Abraham did; he obeyed and went out, not knowing whither. The Lord can lead
thee, whose property it is to show his mercy then greatest, when nearest to be
utterly despaired off: to do the greatest things by contraries. To deal with
men as he did with Paul's passengers, to break the ship on which they bottom
themselves, and yet to bring them to land. Thou had questioned the Churches
being before Luther in another letter; thou art answered: but because thou art
never likely to see it, mark this one thing more, which I shall now tell thee,
touching Gods providence in answer to that rotten question. God has and does
do great things by Ashur, he lays wast, and cuts down not a few: But the
Lord will never do a great thing for Ashur. What is that? The Lord will never
make his Arm bare for Ashur; he will never show himself in the Mount to
Ashur: he will never strike off his charet wheels, and yet bring him safe to
shore, when they go heavily, he sinkes like a stone. This giving an issue,
this opening the waters, this paving a path in the wilderness, is Abraham's
prerogative royal: I mean the Churches portion for ever. Ancient days can
speak this, the following shall declare it. Consider this, thou look beyond
Luther. It cleares our eyes too. Jacob is small, his hands hang down; Jacobs
ship is almost broke: he will sink sure. No, this does but unbottome him; see
him rouling himself upon Gods providence, and there resting, till the Lord
make bare his Arm in all the peoples sight; so carrying him to the place,
where he would be, as upon the wings of an Eagle. Thus Abraham as dying lives
by faith, whose property it is to rest on God most, when it sees least; to
rely on God above means, against means.

Now but one word to thee Reader, before I leave the Churches treasure, Gods
providence. Thou art yet in no strait: That is a wonder. Does the fire claspe
the house, and is thy chamber in safety? does it not smell of the smoke? then
God is exceeding patient toward thee, as appears this day; yet can thou
not discern the wind, and which way it bears the flame? If thou think not,
thou may be in a strait shortly, thou considerest nothing: and if thou
considerest it; thou will be never the sooner io it, but the further from it.
In the mean time thou have heard with thy ears, and Jobs messengers have told
thee, that there is one at this day, in a strait, and sees no means, (thou
may be sure it is the Church) in a wilderness, and can discern no path.
What do we, man, for her, what shall we do for our selves? what? We know not
what to do; our eyes are only to thee O Lord: then it went well with
Iehosophat. I have done with this man's casting away his goods, and then
himself upon the Churches treasure: We must judge nothing before the time, he
that judges is the Lord, who will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness. 1 Cor. 4.

I have yet more to say unto my child to bring him out of liking with this man's
bodily exercise, will worship, his assumed, not commanded services, not only
shows and shadows, but such as hold the heart contented, without the truth,
for what can Please the heart better, then some things of his own choosing:
which shall not be so sharp (I warrant thee) but that he may keep upon the
lees, and detain his old sent still, O my child, let but thy heart once go a
whoring this way, it is strange, how it will dote upon these things as a harlot
upon her lovers, no cost shall be thought too much, rivers of oil shall go,
no travel too long, a thousand miles on pilgrimage if you will. No pains too
hard, no penance too paienfull, the the heart will as easily turn in unto
these things, as the Israelits were persuaded to return into Egypt, or Sisera
persued by Barak, entreated to return into Iaels tent. Alas child any tent
will serve the turn for a time, to take a little milk in, and so to bring it
a sleep, when like a wearied child, it is willing to rest. Or like a persued
Sisera, it would feign be at quiet. A Cloister may serve the turn; a Scelb, a
Crucifix, a stripe a pilgrimage, a little holy water, a diridge, an Ave-Marie,
let the heart but have a Saint one its little, or a pardon about its neck, and
what can hurt him, O child? why do thou gaze one these things? what is this?
But for thee to make lies thy refuge, and under falsehood to seek to hide thy
self, for what are these? Or any of these, or ought else, of these assumed
services, but like the Harlots wiping her mouth, or Pilats washing his hands?
Good child fall not a sleep here, or if thou have in these Iaels Tents taken of
the milk and it is pleasant unto thee, yet for thy soul^ sake, keep thy eyes
waking. For behold a stronger then Barak pursues thee. Judgment will he also
lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep
away the refuge of lies, and the water shall overflow these hiding places, and
thou shall not stand when the overflowing scourge shall pass over, thou will
be trodden down by it, for the bed is shorter, then that a man can stretch
himself on it, and the cover narrower then that he can wrap himself in it.
Good Child sleep not. How willingly would a poor mother keep her child
waking; when if he sleep, his sleep would prove and iron sleep, he will never
wake again. How shall I endure the death of my Son? O hark unto thy mother
child? that would feign keep thee waking, that so discovering thy danger, thou
may get forth of thy Iaels Tent, and take sanctuary at the rocks, the
mighty God of this Salvation, I tell you child a thousand stripes on thy body,
cannot deface the print of one sin, that is write with a pen of a Diamond. As
many knocke^ one thy breasts; will not soften thy hard heart, which is as an
adamant. All your holy water not sprinkled, but powr^d till the challice be
dry, will not wash away one sin. Is is as the spot of a Leopard or as ^rimson
of deep dy^ in the wool and in the cloth. The Harlots wiping her mouth will
not serve her, nor Pilats washing his hands, nor Elishas staff, a man may be
at great coast, he may part with rivers of oil, and yet his countenance look
never a whit more cheerful in the day of the Lord. He may kneel till the
strong men are weary, yet may the heart continue still stiff. He may go one
pilgrimage to this Saint, and the other relic, yea and bare foot till he
pinch his feet, and prick them too, yet may he be never the nearer heaven,
his heart may remain untouched still; nay it is certain child, that nothing
is a greater enemy to true mortification then the counterfeits, nothing holds a
man off more from the power, then love with the form, nothing more prevalent
then these Iaels Tents to rock thy heart in security, and to keep it in it is
own hardness, till a dart strikes through the liver, and a nail the temples,
the Harlot will never cleanse the heart, if she think^ to mae all clean by
wiping her lips, Pilat shall stand gulitie of innocent blod for ever, because
he thinks he is clear of it, now that he has washed his hands, the blood
sticks nearer then so; the Prophet will never be sent for, if his staff will
serve the turn; but when a man looks one his sins, as those that put to
death the Lord of glory, or as that spear which perced his sides, and is so
pricked at the heart, and receives the sentence of death within himself; this
man now looks upon the true crucifix, his sins are always before him. What is
this man doing now? He troubles not himself with empty questions, and vain
genealogies, wherein thou did foolishly busy thy self some months before
thou transgressedst the bounds; namely whether Peter was at Rome, or the Pope
be his successor. Peter might be at Rome, and Rome never the better, but much
the worse, for then another Apostle was there, whose doctrine Rome follows
not. This man has other work in hand, he goes upon certainties; Peter is in
heaven, there is no question in that. How came he thither? Peter confessed with
his mouth: on that the Church was built: Peter believed with his heart, thereby
he was tied unto it, as fast as the branch unto the vine. Now mark this man's
inquiry: Can I confess with my mouth the Lord Jesus? Can I believe with my
heart, that God raised him from the dead? Romans 10. 10. Then I shall be saved:
but soft, he is upon an hard task, this is not a work of a day or two: If he
get faith, he must know how he got it: This man is upon this business still;
And what difficulties does he meet with by the way! amongst which this is not
the least, that Iael stands at the entry of her tent, and the Harlott at her
door, beckning to this babe in Christ, come in to me, come in to me: these
be false Christ's, and there be many of them within and without: But he hears a
voice behind him saying, walk in the way, turn not aside: we will suppose
this man now troubled and bowed down greatly. I would ask your Priests, what
would ye do to him? will ye put on him all your Saules Armor? Alas, it is but
combersorne: he must march on in that strength, wherein David came against
Goliath; not by might, but by my spirit, says the Lord. Zech. 4. Will ye give
him some of your balm, your holy water, your oil, your daubinges? you are
physicians of no vallue; All his money is spent upon trifles already, and yet
the bloody issue remains. Will your Pope now freely give him his pardon,
since all his money is spent? Alas, he knows he shall go forth from thence
ashamed, and with his hands upon his head; the Lord will reject those
confidences. Ier. 2. 36. 37. What would this man have? I marvel what seeks
he after? A ransom sure: a pardon. And if he get it, he must have it without
money or money worth; the must be brought to a kind of beggary in himself, to
a kind of nothing. What should a sound man do with a Physician? An whole man
with plaster? An uncondemned man a pardon? He is now emptied indeed of his
treasure, of one of his greatest enemies, himself; he leans unto nothing
within him, nor to any earthly thing without him. Now compare the penance of
your Capucino, Franciscan, or Dominican, who will not part with his hole, for
as much land as the little bird flies over; nay he hopes that his
contendednesse in so little a place on earth, shall procure him a large mantion
in heaven. I say compare his voluntary religion, his humbleness of mind, his
not sparing the body, all his bodily exercise, Coloss. 2. 18. 23. with this
man's penance, if I may call it so, and it will be no more, like unto it, then
the Harlots wipinge the mouth, is to the clensiing the heart, th^n Pilats
washing his hands, to the purging his conscience: I say no more like it, then
Elishaes staff is to Elisha himself, then Solomon's needle work, to the
little Lilly: I mean then art unto nature. There is but imitation in the one,
art is but natures ape; there is life in the other, all the power in the world
cannot produce it. And observe it, the effects of that man's penance, and this
man's sorrow, are as different; the one seeks after trifles, and bables, such as
never pleased any but children and fools, empty things, lies and vanities, for
as the wound is, such is the remedy: the heart was never touched. The other
labors after the one thing which is necessary, which that he may obtain, he
goes down by stepps of the flocks into the garden of spices, and there he
feeds on green and clean pasture, regarding no more the stepps of Popes and
Cardinals, Friars and Monks, then the crawling of a louse, or the skipp of a
flea: he hangs upon the mouth of his beloved, and observes what they say who
testify of him: he waits upon God in his ordinance, and he has long
patience: nothing shall content him, till his mouth be filled as with marrow
and fatnes; till the Lord has reached forth his hand of mercy unto him, and
thereby enabled him to reach back his to the Lord, whereby he receives blood
to justify him, and water to sanctify him, for the hand of faith does not only
receive, but also purges the heart from all dead works; it does not only
take, but it does also work by love: behold now the joy and peace of this man,
at what ease does he now lie? If we look upon him, we would set up a
Tabernacle by him, nay certainly we should continue with him for ever. He finds
his bed large enough for his wearied body to rest upon; the plaster great
enough to the wound, the covering large enough to wrap himself in, and now
hear him what he says; Lord unto me thou will ordain peace, for thou have
wrought all my works Isai. 26. 12. Thou have commanded deliverance for Jacob:
In thee I will boast all the day long. The righteous shall hear of it, and
shall wait upon thee for this thing: For I declare to the world, that they who
observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies. Jonah. 2. They shall sink
upon them as a man upon quick-sand: The sarrowes of them who offer unto other
Gods shall be multiplied, their offerings I will not offer, nor make mention of
their names within my lips; but I will remember thee only and thy name, thou
art the portion of my inheritance, and of my cup, thou maintainest my let, the
lives have fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage: I
will bless thee O Lord, who have given me this counsel, for now my heart is
glad, my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope, for thou have not
left my soul in Hell; thou have showen me the path of life, in thy presence is
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Thou have heard in this one, the Church speaking; I have brought her in upon
another occasion, and upon more deliberation, clearing her often ecclipsed light,
as far beyond Luther, as the rising of the Sun is from his fall; and thence
fetching his race, as the Sun in his strength, though many times hid under a
cloud. And this she proves out of the Scripture, where is no other spirit, then
what speaks in the hearts of her children; first from what the Lord has done
for her, and then what she has teturned to the Lord. Secondly, from what her
enemies in all ages have done against her, and then what she has done for
them. Thirdly. from those many deliverances, past, present, (though they be
slain all the day long) and to come. Wherein the Lord has, does and will,
make bare his Arm. Thou have only the first here but briefly, and in another
form of words, as be fits the present; but have thou not discerned what a
building this is. I would ravish thy thoughts; if any shall try to pluck a
stone from this building, it shall be unto him a burdensome stone, If any shall
march against it, the horse shall be smitt with astonishment, and his Rider
with madness. If any shall attempt to burn it; it shall be unto them as a fiery
torch in a sheaffe. If to devour it, it shall be unto them as a cup of
trembling, the Lord has said this Zach. 12. He has, he will, he does make it
good. Come away come away, it is much to be under the shadow of it, cast off
all those dead works, which thou do eye too much, and learn what the Lord
requyres at thy hands, surely not thowsands of Rames, nor ten thousand rivers
of oil, nor the son of thy body, for the sin of thy soul, but to fear
the Lord and to serve him in sincerity and truth. Josh. 24. 14. not mentioning
the names of other gods, nor bowing thy self unto them. Josh. 23. 6. but to
break off thy sins by repentance^, amd that there be an healing of thine
error, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God;
approving thy self as the child of God, not by these assumed services, which
will not hold weight, when righteousness is put to the scale, but as the Saints
do by pureness, by knowledge* by long sufferings by kindness, by the holy Ghost,
by love unfeigned, by the word of truth by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness, one the right hand and one the left. Oh my bowels do yearne upon
my child, my heart is enlarged? Thou art not kept strait in me, but I am kept
strait in thee. Thou may plainly conclude, by what is said, see how
dearly my mother loves: yea and the Lord knows too, who is truth it self,
that my desire of thy return has no less love in it, then it has safety
too, for I wish above all things that thou may prosper: as thy soul may
prosper. Once more; if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercy: fulfill my joy
and come away.

And that thou may make have, for a Mothers affection thinks the shortest
time long, I will quit thy argument, which thou thoughtest so fit for my
capacity, and indeed it was so, with another as fit for thine, for thou art but
a child yet, and know nothing as thou ought to do: And I know it shall
fall as right as thine did, but then with a different effect. Thine did but
foil the form of godliness that was amongst us, the power was not touched,
the truth remains the truth still, and will be justified of her children: mine
shall take away the truth and power you seem to have, and shall tell thee
plainly there is none indeed, harken while this argument smits your holy
Mothet this once, I will not smite her the second time, for I shall labor to
drive the nail to the head, and fasten her to the ground with it, that she
rise not again, and all this in a dear affection to thee, that so I may get
thee out of her Tent, and free my self from the fear, and thy self from the
danger, of having that other nail in thy Temples. Nearken then while the wiles
and deceits of this Harlot are discovered unto thee, these are plain by what
has been said by her name and by her practice.

I shall not parallel this holy mother, with hers in the 3 Proverbs; it would
prove her an Harlot, but it would be taken in scorn; neither will I tell you
how she has filled forth the Cup of her fornications; that would prove as
much, but some would deny it. Nor will search into the chamber of her Imagery;
I cannot see into that; I will take her own Argument, and if I can by that
prove her to be cruel in commanding the Child to be divided; I will by help
of that Scripture turn it like a weapon against her, and sheath it in her
bowels, for that Scripture makes cruelty the inseparable mark of an Harlott;
and when that is done, the holy Mother is killed; the Harlot is reserved to a
longer day, her punishment sleeps not.

The holy Mothers Argument against the Church, has been drawn from the
block, fire, sword, persecution, interdiction, and the like: there is cruelty I
think. The Children of the Church have answered this Argument, with tears,
prayers, martyrdom: there is patience I think. I have two paths to track,
they lie near together: the one i^ dyed with blood; the other be dewed with
tears: both lead us through the streets, before Israel and before the Sun,
and meet at the stake; there is cruelty, there is patience. We track the holy
Mother first; we can not miss her; which way soever she goes, her footstepps
drop blood. Look upon that little book of Martyr^, Heb. 11. What bloody
footsteps are there? But yt you will say was shed by Ethnic Rome. Its true.
But Christian Rome has justified her sister: For ask the later times, and
they shall teach thee, that Christian Rome has risen up a cruel generation in
her sisters stead, so filling up that measure of blood, which must be visited
upon her: Ask I say and they will tell thee, not only what Christian Rome has
done in the City of Orange, or of that in Roane, or that in Deipe; but they
will tell thee of that horrible massacre in Paris, where this mothers
instruments went forth like a destroying Angel, and within the space of three
days or little more, cruelly murdered above ten thousand, and all this after
a marriage feast. Act. et Mon. 1948. Could here be truth? could this be a true
Mother? A Devil she was, for like a bear robbed of her whelps, she went
about seeking whom she might destroy. I assure thee, she has killed the Mother
upon the Child, witne^ that lamentable Tragedy acted in Garnsey, where the
infant bursting from the Mothers womb, in the midst of the flame, and taken
from her, was by instruments sacrificed again to the flame, there to receive
its baptism, Acts. Mon. 1764. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and
their rage, for it was cruel; into their secret let not my Sons soul come,
nor let thy glory be joined with their assemblies; for in their wrath they have
slain millions, and the instruments of death were in their habitations. Will thou look nearer into thine own Country, then see our Marian days, I know my
Child's eyes will stand with tears; what prisons empty? what racking? what
tearing? what whipping? what scourging* what burning? whar bone fires were made
of the bones of the Saints? Was this a Mother? Certainly, that very sword,
which did not divide the Mother from the Child, was a sure means to divide the
Mother from the Harlot. You have heard them pleading in that text* let us hear
them pleading again. Nor will we put down the^^ names; their words shall
difference them to the meanest capacity: for this name Mother is the sweetest
name under the Sun; and as she is such are her words. Oh let the Child live:
he is stubborn, he will not worship, that which Longs wife has made, and the
holy Priest has consecrated, he calls it Bread; because it appears so to the
eye, not considering how miraculously God can work: nor will he bend unto
that the workman has made as a devout representation; he calls that no better
then a block; but he shall to the block forit, I will bow him or break him. A
hard Argument; yet let the Child live: For he can take God to record upon his
soul, that he does not this in a stubbornness, but for pure conscience sake:
he does acknowledge an unlimited power in God; and it is his crutch, his pillar
to hold him up, when the nations take counsel against the Lord, and his
anointed ones: he knows God can turn bread into flesh; he does it daily, and
the commonnesse abates the sense of that power. But now in that his eye and
taste tells him, the Accidents remain; he eats it as true bread with the teeth
of his body; and yet cheweth the living Bread, Christ and his benefitts with
the faith of his heart; and so does truly eat the flesh, and drink the blood
of the son of man; and yet as benefitts a sacrament, spiritually: my words
says Christ, are spirit and trath. He does in that ordinance truly enjoy his
welbeloved; his welbeloved looking upon him, and he upon his welbeloved; and
yet as through a Lattice. And for that representation he knows it is inferior
to the workman; he must worship the Lord his God, and him only. He is a
stubborn Child. It is not proved: but grant he be: If that be all, yet do not
blow his body up into the air, he cannot mend in the passage. Do not turn
his body into a coal, he cannot mend then. When once the breath is out, all
passages are stopped, there is no coming in, there is no going forth. Now speak
unto him, he can hear you; now give him his book, he can read it: evidence
his stubbornness to him from a true and infallible testimony which cannot err.
Look to your witnesses, when they pass upon life and death: for when you have
kindled the flame about his ears, you have defaced that sacred Image stamped
upon him, which made him little inferior to the Angels. Consider of it, a
heathen could say, demorte hominis nulla est cunctatio longa: ye cannot
consider too much nor can ye consult too long, when in giving up your sentence,
ye give away a man's life too. You have heard the pleading: and for ought was
proved against the child; he might have lived to this day; but there was an
Argument produced from the Stake, which he could not answer but by suffering.
So blood was spilt: by whose Law? (for they said we have a Law,) the holy
mothers. A holy Harlot, curssed be her rage, for it was feirce; like the rage
of him, who cast the man into the fire and into the water: (we know who it
was): or like that possessed man, who was so feirce that none might pass that
way. Come a little nearer (child) yet perhaps thou thou may discern thy own
preservation though then in thy cradle; have thou not heard of our fifth of
November? I know thou have. I must now take a little leave, I assure thee, I
thought that after that very day the name of a Papist would presently have
rotted, and that the stink and stentch of it would have gone over all the
earth, and surely it did and does so, and it is unsavory in the nostrils of the
very heathen, and would be so unto all, but that these Iaels Tents afford so
much sweet milk, where with to bring the heart a sleep in security. But my
child, thou do remember this day, do thou not? thou do, why then thou
stand amazed at the beastly cruelty of the mother and of her children, and
at the exceeding love, and super-aboundant mercy (words are too scantie) at the
admirable kindness of our God. Tell me for thou shall be judge, was not our Land
at that time compacted as into a compendious body, which was to sit in
Parliament, as the representation of the whole Land, and now had it but one
neck? had not the whore and her instruments watching their opportunity and
finding it, laid this neck as upon the block, that they might strike it off at
a blow; A blow indeed, whose rage would have reched up to heaven, which would
have sent up the bodies of men, like the sparkels of a smiths forge, and have
made as many divisions of each, as there are sparcles.


SON. Hold mother, for you are out. Believe Doct. Carier and your child, and
take it upon our words who will not lie; we never heard the work of that
dismal day commended, if so we had never been Papists.


MOTHER. I think so too, for the Lord awaked like a Giant refresht with wine,
brake the snare that it might not be told in Gath, that the body of a state by
means of a sulphutious blast was lifted up into the air, like the body of a
Lark soaring upon her wings: therefore were your mouths filled with shame in
stead of laughter. Foolish boy! do thou not know, non placent scelera nisi
peracta? The throwing of wildfire into a state is not commended, before it
takes and lays wast; then it is a meritorious work: Nay, it has been
compared to the work of our Redemption. I have an Author for that: stop
Reader, thou must help us with thy prayers. From this holy Mother O Lord
deliver us. A good man is merciful to his Beast, but the bowels of this
Mother are cruel. We do tell this to our Children, that they may tell it to
generations to come; and they stand affrighted at it, like a little Child, when
you tell it of John of bare Arms. And we do pay our vows in all the peoples
sight: nay, because the whole fabric of nature, and the creatures in it, had
suffered in that blow; we say, let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord; who stayed the blow like Abraham's hand, so snatching us and them as
brands out of the fire: let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. If
thou will be out of this number; yet detest this Mothers cruelty, nor let thy
soul come into her secret; she will bid thee dig down a wall, that so thou
may prepare instruments of death. I have done tracking this woman whom I have
called Mother, that she may so hear of her cruelty, as that the name of nature
might brand her as an Harlot.

Now I track the Church and her Children; and behold all her ways are peace:
she goes plainly and quietly not like a boisterous wind, but with a soft
voice, she sinks into the heart, well knowing the temper of it: her weapons are
meekness, gentleness, long suffering; if at any time, or by any means,
(except fire and sword, that's the whores mark, truth abhors it) she may win the
people to her. Observe further, is this truth opposed, as indeed she is too
much? that's truths destiny, not her fault; is she tossed, and tumbled, and
hurried? see her temper, and thou will admire her, and for ever detest the
Beast; how does she follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, patience,
and meekness? Is she at length brought to the slaughter? she is so. That
shall make her light break out as the noone day, she knows it well; see her
temper still, and behold in it the patience of the Saints. Thou have seen a
sheep brought to the slaughter; so is truth. Thou have seen a lamb before the
shearer; so stands truth: Christ has given her a lesson, even his own
example, she has learnt it; she opens not her mouth. I would not thou
should leave truths temper yet; for I hope by feeling her pulse, thou will
assure thy self she is of a sound constitution, and plainly discover the
contrary. She is so far from fire, and sword or any such cruelty, that she
follows peace with all men, as far as is possible; she is no striker with
the fist, no smiter with the tongue; (there is a smiting with the tongue) but
it is bound to the peace, and good behavior. I will show thee her Children as
like the Mother as may be; observe their carriage: Being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted we suffer it; being defamed we entreat. 1 Cor. 4. This is a
strange Retaliation, and never to be found but from the Children of truth, who
must not render evil for evil, but contrariwise bless, knowing that they are
thereunto called being heirs of blessing. 1 Pet. 3. 9. We will single out one of
her Children, who made Saul's heart melt. David had the skirt of Saul's robe in
his hand, his heart smot him for that too. He cried out to Saul. What gesture
used he? He might stand upon his points then; the wilderness of Engedi, at
least the advantage he had of Saul made them equal, did it not? By no means.
Saul was the Lords Anointed still, and David's Master too; and if he casts his
eye upon David, off goes the ha^t: David stoopt with his face to the earth, and
bowed himself: there was his gesture. What was David's voice* what titles gave
he to him that hunted him like Partridge? one would think they should be such
as choler and rage had laid upmost: But you shall hear David was better
taught; my Lord, the King, the Lords Anointed, my Father. What is the matter
of David's words? Wherefore does my Lord hear men's words, (saying) David
seeks thy hurt: behold my Father, see yea see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand, I might have had thy head as easily. But I would thou could see, how
my heart has smit me for cutting off the lap of the coat of the Lords
anointed. Hear yet further my Lord Saul: I am much displeased with thy
chamberlain Abner, whom thou have made keeper of thy head; and were I judge in
Israel, he might perhaps loose his own head, he is worthy to die; but at the
least he should out of his office, he is too sleepy for that charge. Why so? he
has not kept his master the Lords anointed. How does that appear? Abner may
see here, and my Lord Saul may hearken, though Abner be a valiant man, and who
like him in Israel, yet is he not fit to be the keeper of the head of the
Lords anointed; that must have a surer watch then so: I tell thee Abner, thy
masters head was in great danger this night, and thou layest by him sleeping;
for now see where the Kings spear is, and the cruse of water, are they not in
my hands? they were this night at thy Masters bolster; and was not thy Masters
head upon it? Certainly Abner, and let my Lord Saul hear, had but a Philistim
come in, or but half a Iesuited Israelite, thy Master, though the Lords
anointed had been smitten to the earth at once, there had not needed a second
blow; and his head had gone with the pot and spear. But a David came into your
camp this night, a poor persecuted flea indeed, one of truths children, and
God forbid that he should stretch forth the hand against the Lords anointed, or
suffer it to be done. Why he was no more able to hurt, then a dead dog could
bite; and therefore art thou O Lord my King, and thou also Abner alive at this
time, and your eyes may behold both the spear and pott, that was so nigh thy
Masters Pillovv; and my Master Saul may hear too; and now I hope both my Lord
and Abner from this very day will be able to discern truth and innocence, from
wickedness which ever proceeds from the wicked man, and be able to point at
it too with the finger, (saying) there it is; and behold Child, Saul does it,
he knows the voice of David, and it melts him into tears, and see what he
says, thou art more righteous then I, thou have rewarded me good, when I
rewarded thee evil: and now my Child, rhou have seen truths guize, and her
childrens carriage, how meek! how harmless! Thou may likewise discern the
Beasts mark, and from whence wickedness does proceed, I know no motive in the
world, except the secret working of Gods Spirit, more prevalent to cause thee
to come away, unless thou have not a Saul's discerning.

But because I know thou art blind folded and have no light, but what comes in
by chaunes and crevises, I will contract what has been said concerning these
two Mothers into an Emblem one or two, which thou may perceive by the least
glimmering. Then I will turn thee to two places of Scriptures, from which thou
shall make thine own collection. The first Emblem shall be of the holy
Mother, and a Mother shall be it; An Hecuba in travel with a fire brand, and
forth it comes rushing into the Bush of the Church. Or a Iezabell plotting the
death of poor Naboth, because he will not part with the Vinyard, the
inheritance of his Fathers. She must not keep it; for all her painting, down
she must be cast like a millstone. The Dogs did eat the flesh of Iezabel. Take
the Emblem of her eldest sons, and sons shall be it; Samsons three hundred
foxes, running about the field with firebrands at their tails: see what hurt
they do; the shock^ are burnt. Or for variety sake, look upon the Gadarens
heard of swine, but not running into the lake, though an evil spirit be in
them; The day of recompense for Sions controversy is not yet; yet the enemy is
not brought to the valley of Iehosophat, to be judged there: we must look on
them running into the vineyard, that must be more w^st: we leave them rooting
there. But here is the comfort; Is it wast, is Sharon a wilderness: now I will
up says the Lord, I will give to Israel the opening of the month in the midst
of them, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Ezech. 29. 21. Take the
Emblem of she true. Mother, and that is made to our hands, you heard her
begging of the Child's life. Take the Emblem of her Children; David cursed and
pelted at by Shimes, and praying the while. Steven stoning, and even then
saying, Lord lay not this ot their charge. We have done with the Emblemes, we
turn to the Scriptures; the first is 1 Kings. 19. 11. There came a great
strong wind, but the Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in
the fire: There came a still and soft voice, there the Lord was. Make thy
collection now: here are two, both would be Mothers, both would speak in the
evidence of the same spirits which of these comes like a wind renting as it
goes; like an earthquake, opening graves as it goes; like a fire, scorching as
it goes: or in a still and soft voice, instructing, persuading, blessing,
praying as it goes? with whom the soft voice is there the Lord is. Answer this
unto him who understands thy thoughts long before. I have done with that
Scripture: we find the other 2 Samuel 7. compared with 1 Chronicles. 22. 8. where is
something will hold us from our purpose a little for the Readers sake. We find
David sitting in his house, and in peace, yet not confined to his own
particular interest, and looking no further: one eye is on his house, the other
on the Arc; and he sees no correspondency: And yet he that has David's
observation may observe a greater disproportion betwixt his conveniences and
the Arks now; then was betwixt David's and the Arkes then: he sitts in his house
of hewed stone, he hears no complaining in the streets; Gods footstepps drop
fatness toward him; there are his conveniences. What are the Arkes? The enemy
has raised a mighty storm, and the Arc has scarce curtains to keep it off.
I know well on the glory there i^ a defense, but I speak of that covering the
outward eye may discern. Certainly if the consideration of David be this man's
precept, the practice of David will be his pattern, whose mind was presently
on work, how he might build an house for the Arc too. Yet Nathan must stay
his hand, that must not be put to the work. We came purposely hither, to
enquire the reason of that, but I desire the Reader would mark one thing by
the way. Though it were taken out of the power of David's hand to build an house
for the Arc; yet the Lord, tells him* thou did well in that it was in thy
heart 2 Chro. 6. 8. A man's hand may be kept from the Arc; every one cannot
visibly work the security of it, nor bring it within Cedars. Nay though the
Arc shake, every hand is not worthy to hold it up. A man must look to his
warrant specially, when he goes about the business of the Arc. But mark this;
they shall prosper that love thee* We wish you prosperity in the name of the
Lord; O it is a gracious thing even when the hand, can do nothing. But M^roz
with the inhabitants were curs^ bitterly. Judge, 5. 23. And the men, of S^c^oth
were taught (that i^ the word) by briers and th^r^^^ Judge. 8. 16. That was a
sore teaching, but who can help it. They that will not be taught by
instruction, must be taught by pain. 2. Esd. 9. 12. It is Apocryph^ thou may
keep it in thy Bible, when it ^out of thy Creed, and let it teach thee; when
thou look upon thy house of Ceder, I mean thy many, many conveniences; many
positrue, many privatiue, to have the Arc in thy heart; for this is to
remember the Chare^^ of Israel and the horse men thereof, that is the Church:
The glory of Israel; that is the Gospel: The Paul's in prison; and she Iaseps
in affliction for this glory (for thy sake are we killed all the day long:)
now what thou do for these or any of these, they ^^e so like, thou can not
distinguish them) thou do it to Christ, and thou show mercy to thy owe
soul. For these will pray that thy mercy may be returned to thee and thine in
the tempestivitie of time. The Lord ^^ew mercy to Onesiphorus in that day. Nor
is that all, the Lord show mercy to the whole house of Onesiphorus. Now to my
arrand, which should have been done before, but that I intend the instruction
of two. We enquire of this text, why David might not build an house for the
Arc? and it answers, because David had shed much blood. It was the blood of
Philistians indeed; yet that was blood. Solomon must do it, who was a King of
peace, who had shed none. There was a mystery in this, more clear now.

That material house made with hands, was a typpe of a spiritual made without
hands, who has for her protection, him, who is the God of peace; and is married
(though the solemnity be not yet,) to him who i^ the author of peace; and her
children are the the children of peace. Therefore, as neither hammer nor axe,
nor tool of Iron was heard in that: 1. King. 6. 7. so, nor in this;
Righteousness and Truth do kiss each other. Peace is followed with all men,
as far as is possible, so that holiness be not left behind, Follow peace and
holiness: Heb. 12. But suppose this peacable body cannot be at peace and keep
holiness too, yet she must not fly at the throat; holiness is rather plucked
out than infused that way. She will not out with the sword with Peter, and cut
off the ^are, much less with his supposed Successor, the head: she finds no
warrant for that, no, not where she finds two swords. The sword must be
sheathed, for all that touch it unwarrantably, must perish by it. Neither axe,
nor tool of iron must be heard in it. Now let us consider: The Lord has his
Temple, and living stones are daily laid upon it. Here are two would have a
hand in it; and they would be accounted builders, that need not be ashamed. By
which of these two has it been built? by whose hands is it daily raised?
Consider the matter before thou judge, and look upon it well by that light,
this Scripture yields thee. Where is the axe, where is the tool of iron heard?
who has come out against the body, as the Priests and Elders against the head
with swords and staves? where was the mattock heard? who prepared a Cellar well
furnished with Barrells, and all filled up to the brim with deadly wine? by
whom is all this blood shed? not by dropps but by buckets; not by streams but
by rivers? of Philistines thou will say, (for so thou art taught) it will never
be granted; It is the blood of the Saints, which is tunned up, as their tears
are bottled. But we take yt which cannot be denied; here is blod: That was blod
which was spilt in Paris, Holland, Germany, Italy,) there she came near home)
all places Christian; nay I may say an heathenish too. A poor Heathen
professed he would not come to heaven, if the Spaniards were there, this holy
Mothers instruments. A heavy speech if you mark it: The poor wretch felt a
fulness of pain, he never heard of thy fullnes of joy: pity the speech, and
abhor cruelty; thou shall never win a Christian that way, much less an
heathen. Hear out the Iudious words; he lay tortured, so that he died by
peece-meale; so many joints, so many deaths: surely said he, the God of these
Christians is cruel: thus their cruelty made the name of God to be blasphemed.
See Reader, An Heathen by the light of nature, a candle in respect of thy
Sun, could tell who was their God by their work. There is much use in it;
but it must needs teach thee this, that thou can not resemble God in any
thing more, then in showing mercy: nor can thou more lively transform thy
self into the image of Satan, then in showing thy self cruel. A cruel man,
he serves a cruel master. Consider again that mercy is an attractive thing;
and therefore if ^uer thou have to do with heathens, let thy compassion drop
toward them, it may lead them to the fountain: let the little stream of thy
compassion ^^n toward them, it may (for ought thou know) carry them to the
ocean. Is there so much compassion in these men, we will serve their God, he is
a merciful God sure.

Still this blood i^ before us; we will now determine the question, who shed
it? and we find out the murderer by two witnesses: the first comes double, we
find the swords in the slayers hands drunk with the blood of the slain. Who is
that who comes forth with as many swords, as she has hands? whose mouth is
that, which where there were but two sword^, challenges them both? there is
one witness. And the blood does evidence too, crying against this holy Mother;
shed in England, in France, etc. we will go no further, we wade in it already,
and it rises like the waters: yet will she have a hand in the building this
house* Judge Child, what warrant there can be for this; and consider it
according to that sincerity wherein thou would be found, when thou ^^t to
stand before the great Judge; at which time Belshazzars knees shall smite each
other, and he shall weary the mountain to fall upon him. I add one thing,
which may tell, my hear has gone with my pen; It is this; that I am persuaded
in my soul, that there may be a candle lighted from these Scriptures, which all
the world cannot put out: And though there be a mystery of iniquity; yet has
this blood washed off the seeming beauty of this well-favoured Harlot; and the
fire she has kindled, has marred the painting of this Iezabell, unto any ones
eye, that has the least glimmering. My conclusion unto this shall be a short
reasoning, and then a gentle persuasion. Thou art drinking of this holy Mothers
cup: do thou know what poison is in it? I reason with thee, as Iot^an^ with
the men of Sechem; wherein if thou understandst, thou shall perceive, thou have
not dealt kindly, no^ truly, nor faithfully; with thy parents, with the Church,
with thine own soul.

Hearken to thy Mother, Child, that the Lord may hearken unto thee. Have thou
dealt kindly with thy dead Father, with thy dying Mother: with thy Father, that
toiled for thee; with thy Mother, that groand for thee? with thy parents, that
thought all too little for the Child; come husband, ye^ wife, let us take care,
that the Child may have his education; he will return it one day; when we are
old, he will be our staff to lean upon: A staff indeed, which peirceth not
the hand, but the heart; an Egyptian staff of reed. Have thou dealt kindly
with thy parents, have thou?

Harken to me, that the Lord may harken unto thee* Have thou dealt truly with
the Church? Thou wast ^^ thy blood: she took thee in her arms, (...) blessed
thee, praying; that he, who came after, would power clean waters vp^^ thee* so
^sing thee with fire and the Holy Ghost; then she held thee in her arms and
^ipped or sprinkled thee, which is one, and after the Primitive Institution:
she used no spittle or the like, for she keeps the pattern: then she laid
thee to her breasts and suckled thee, so feeding thee with milk, till thou
could bear strong meat. Now thou risest up as a gain saying child, against
the mother and her, house: have thou dealt truly, with this Mother have thou*

Harken unto me, that the Lord may, harken unto thee. Have thou dealt
faithfully with thy own soul? Thou have left the fatnes of the Olive, the
sweetness of the Figtree, the wine of the Vine* and thou have* put thy trust
under the shadow of the Bramble. It is true, of all the trees of the Forest,
non so ready to boast of protection, as is the Bramble. It is strange what a
shadow it seems to cast, like that we read off in the 4 of Daniell, the Cedars
may come under it, nay must, they will not be safe else: but it is a
dreame-Doest thou not know whether the Bramble must go? Can it stand against
the fire? Can it keep off the he^^ at noone? I^na^ was exceeding glad of his
go^^d; but did it sheilter him, when the (...) one the head of (...) fainting
time will come, child, and ^he strongest man this day living shall find it so,
a vehement wind; the Sun at noone, will beat upon thy head, and then it will
be too late to seek for a sheilte^: we must think of this fainting time,
while it is to day. Now there is a tree, whose l^^ves (...) heal the
nations, under which there is a sure shadow: the bramble not so. The olive
(...) has much fatness^^ the bramble not so. The f^ggtr^^ much sweetness^: the
bramble not so. The Vine cheareth man's heart: the bramble not so. It is
prepared for the fire, the end is burning; so is the its that trust under her
shadow, as thou shall hear anon. Have thou dealt faithfully with thy own
soul* Then do thou re^^^ce^^ the Bramble, and let the Bramble rejoice in
th^e* But if not, then yet let thy soul hearken unto thy Mother, that the Lord
may hearken unto thee.

If the Lord has left thee to the counsail^ of thy own heart, which he may
do, as not bound to the creature, a rebellious creature* and this is to be
acknowledged, let him accept an offering; even the ^alv^^ of thy lips, that he
who i^ the tr^, would lead th^^ into all truth. See thy face toward heaven, and
resign thy self to God, to be guided in the way thither, a^ David did, who
know the way, better th^^ thou or I; with ^^y whole hear have I sought th^^, O
let me not w^^der from thy commandments. But if they be the children of men
who have entised thee, and beguiled thy poor soul, which will likewise be
acknowledged; I will not pronounce the Lords curse against them, for I have not
David's spirit* but the Lord be merciful to the blind leaders of the blind, and
remember them not after their dealing; for they have driven thee out this day
from the abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, so sake the rock, even
the only rock of thy salvation, and go serve other gods. I am now at the
bottom of thy letter, that shall conclude my Answer. Thou seemedst to persuade
thy self, thou art another Joseph sent before, to provide for thy Mother and
her Children, and were it so, and that now I have heard from thee; let her who
has the heart of a Mother, etc* is acquainted with the yearnings of the
bovvells, say, whether she thinks not; (although novvagon is come) that I
would presently take my staff, and trudge away, yea and not feel the weary
stepps, though my legs be old: this thought would still be better then wine
to refresh me, I shall see my Son before I die. But alas, the case is
different; how does a beguiled heart deceive thee? your Egypt has proved an
iron furnace to our Israel, and at the best a staff of reed, I dare not
venture my self so; no nor yet thy brother neither; though thou like a good
Judah wilt undertake for thy brother Beniamen: thy Mother will not trust thee
to be thy brothers keeper, unless thou could keep thy self better; why
should I be robbed of both my Children? Alas Child, I well know, your Egypt
is full of enchantments; ask a Mother now, and she will tell thee, whether she
will venture a Child as boys venture pi^s; and points, hazard two that they
may find one, she will not do it; a Child is dearer then so. Again, why
should I send my Child over to you for bread? Why our staff is not yet broken;
it is Gods goodness, it is not; if it should be, which our unthankfulness
threatens, what have we to do with the broken reed of Egypt, that would
deceive us: we have yet store of bread in our fathers house, rebellious
children though we are; but through our fathers patience we have it, and the
children are fat and well liking upon it; but if we were thrust out of door, as
we have well deserved it; yet we could not eat your Gibeonitish bread, which
has nothing to show its antiquity, but that it is dry and moldy; nor could we
go to eat among the swine, Husks, such empty things: we do daily pray, Lord
give us evermore of this bread: But if the Lord be deaf toward us, as he may
justly be, he bath called to us, and we have not hearkened; how could we expect
that Baall could hear us? I trust we should never seek to Eckron, we know we
have a God in Israel, and we hope we shall not go from the living to the
dead. To speak yet more plainly, we have Moses and the Prophets, and thy are
read amongst us even to this day, and it is wonderful in our eyes, and the
Saints see wonders in it; if we do not believe them, neither should we believe,
though some of us were sent unto your dead, or some of your dead were sent unto
us. But to cut of all hope of coming over unto you, and yet to confirm this
hope of thy return unto us, I tell thee besides, that Christ has set a sword
to stop the way unto thee, which in some cases must divide between Mother and
Child, brother and sister: there is a kind of gulf betwixt us, yet passable on
thy part, that strengthens my hope; a se^ betwixt us, no less full of blood;
then that other is of water: For is it not plain unto thee, what havoc the
whore has made of the Churches, what threatenings she has breathed forth, what
rivers of blood she has shed, how she has killed, and scourged, and
persecuted the Saints and Martyrs of the Lord Jesus; that may come upon her all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of all the Prophetts, Apostles, and Martyrs, that have been slain.
O Child what a sea is here! Certainly, he that has any light will not venture
here, and he that has no^e walks in darkness, and knows not where he shall
fall, and plunge himself. Then there is no coming for us to thee, thou may
to us; and how am I straightened till thou come* as long as thou art there,
thou art liable to her plagues; and how great will they be! Why thou see
plainly, that in her is found the blood of Prophetts, and of Saints, and of all
that are slain upon the earth; and the ^^p she has filled to others; must be
filled to her double; how great will her plagues be? Come forth from her my
Child, my sweet Child come forth, for living there, thou must partake of her
sins, and then must thou receive of her plagues* and how can thou stand in
that everlasting burning? Thou art now in danger indeed, thou art now in
hazard, and how am I straightened? the sentence is passed upon the great
whore, the execution hasteneth, and though it be deferred, it is at the doors;
for can the souls under the Altar cry aloud and not be heard? O come forth of
her, why do thou linger man? will thou first know that Egypt is destroyed?
come away even before the day break, come away even before the dovv be
leavened; and if thou vvilt in the other sense, before the whole lump be
sovvred; there is no lingering, for Gods sake, and for thy souls sake come
away, why do thou linger? my dear Child consider, other sins speak, blood
cries; and here is not Ab^lls blood alone, he was but one, here i^ the voice
of bloods, even all which were slain for the word of God, and the testimony
which they held: what a thundering voice is here! Certainly the vvidovve^ cry
to the unjust judge, that he would avenge her of her adversaries, was not so
loud, and yet see though he lies still for a while, up says he I will arise,
and aveng this troublesome bavvling widow; I love my rest well, but behold
there is no remedy, I see she is resolved to weary me; I will up that I may
be quiet; for though I regard neither God nor man, yet have I a great respect
unto my own rest, and I will up and right her. Now Child I have done with
thee, my words have an end; and how loath am I to leave thee, or to cease
entreating thee: how do my bowels yearne? how am I straightened? but the Lord
has heard my controversy, and who knows whether he may not look on the
affliction of his Servant, and bring thee again; if not I am before him, let
him do with me what seems good in his eyes. But yet before I leave thee, one
thing I beg of thee; and since the Son will have the old Mother crouch and
bend to him; why see a Mother will not stand upon her points, she will do any
thing to have her Son again; I do beg one thing of thee, and I beg it on my
knees; it is this, that thou would rouse up thy self, for there is a great
matter in hand. What is that? Why the great God of heaven and earth is at this
instant speaking to thee, and so slow is man of hearing, that it is possible
for God to speak once and again, and yet man may not perceive it: alas, what
is man's speaking now? Yet since thou have notice of it, for thy souls sake
rouse up thy self; it is the Lord which brings home the example of the unjust
judge unto thee; in his own words rouse up thy self, the Lord speaks unto
thee; and he that speaks bear the care, that thou may have an hearing care.
Hear what the unjust Judge says, and shall not God avenge his own Elect,
which cry day and night unto him, though he hear them long, I tell you he will
avenge them speedily, Luke 18. There remains now but a little season, until
their fellow servants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they
were shall be fulfilled: Revel. 6. This the bloody whore will dispatch as soon
as she may, she is about it, and thus she treasureth up wrath against the day
of wrath, and fillith up the measure of her judgment, which shall be given to
her double. O come away from her my dear Child, come hastily, linger not;
throvv thy dovv upon thy shoulders theris no time to leaven it, and ^^udge
away, and the Lord which can persuade Iaphet to dvvell in the Tents of Shem,
and if Loath will prolong his time in so imminent a danger, cnast in mercy to
him, cause him to come out of Sodom, before the brimestone and the fire shall
fall, extend thy mercy unto thy servant seek him out who is gone astray, and
cause him to return to thee, who art the Shepherd and Bishop of his soul, so
shall I ever praise thy name, who have given me my Son again, in whom I may
have comfort here, and through thy mercy, joy with him hereafter.


FINIS.
Prove. 6. 5. Deliver thy self as a Bird from the hand of the hunter, and as a
Bird from the hand of the fowler.
Prover. 19. 26. He that destroys his father, or chaseth away his mother, is
a lewd and shameful Child.
I know Reader, you have found many faults; sometimes words misplaced,
sometimes letters, most times stopps. I wish it better, but it would not be,
for want of d^e attendance as the Press: and for that the Copy was part
printed, part written, the Composer was mistaken, putting i^ six lines (page
136. lin. 6. From Hearken to the end of the period) which should have been
out* A word or two also there is which corruptes the sense. Page 54. lin. 29.
read subsistances. Page 103. lin. 6. read understanding. Page 140 lin 3. read
befitts. Other literal faults there are many: a^ page 118. i for y in a Greek
word. Page 130. t for s in a Latin. Sed quid exempta juvat spinis de pluribus
una. Let me have thy love, and greater faults then these will be covered.


